Digitized  by  Google 


THE  LIBRARY 


192  P94 


f05 


urn 


SIX  BOOKS  OF  PROCLUS,  ... 

ON  THE  THEOLOGY  OF  PLATO, 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GREEK  » 

TO  WHICH 

A  SEVENTH  BOOK  IS  ADDED, 

IN  ORDER  TO  SUPPLY  THE  DEFICIENCY  OP  ANOTHER  BOOK  ON  THIS  SUBJECT, 


WHICH  «  «  «R!TTEV  BY  VKOCIA'S,  ULT  MSCE  KMT. 

i 

ALSO,  A  TRANSLATION   FROM  THE   CREEK  OF 

PROCLUS'  ELEMENTS  OF  THEOLOGY. 


A  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  TREATISE  OF  PROCLUS, 

£>n  protMDcncc  ano  jTate; 

A  TRANSLATION  OF  EXTRACTS  FROM  HIS  TREATISE,  ENTITLED, 

TEN  DOUBTS  CONCERNING  PROVIDENCE; 

AND 

A  TRANSLATION  OF  EXTRACTS  FROM  HIS  TREATISE 
ON  THE  SUBSISTENCE  OF  EVIL; 

As  preserved  in  the  Bibliotheca  Gr.  of  Fabricius. 


BY  THOMAS  TAYLOR. 

A>£  «rr»v,  «m,  run  tij  tyyiKa 

Tlierc  are,  there  are,  though  laugh  the  w  offer  roar, 
Jove  and  the  God*,  who  mortal  ills  survey. 

axnif  nvt  Jmi  to  Wit,  xau  xujmi  rsXXix.  Corinlh.  1.  Cap,  8.  v.  i. 

At  there  be  Gods  many,  and  Lord*  : 


TWO  VOLUMES. 
VOL  I. 

LONDON : 
PRINTED  FOR  THE  AUTHOR, 
By  A.  J.  I'afpy,  Tooket  Court,  Chancery  Lane. 
AND  SOLD  BY  MESSRS.  LAW  AND  Co.;  LONGMAN  AND  Co.;  BALDWIN  AND  Co.; 

AND  ALL  OTHER  BOOKSELLERS. 

1816. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Q'7 


Digitized  by  Google 


TO 

I 

WILLIAM  MEREDITH,  ESQUIRE, 

WHO  WITH  A  FIRMNESS  AND  MUNIFICENCE, 
UNPARALLELED  IN  MODERN  TIMES, 
HAS  PATRONIZED 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  PLATO  AND  ARISTOTLE, 

AND  ITS  ENGLISH  PROMULGATOR ; 

AS  AN  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  OF  NO  COMMON  ESTEEM  FOR  HIS  CHARACTER, 
AND  A  TRIBUTE  OF  THE  WARMEST  GRATITUDE  FOR  HIS  PATRONAGE, 
THIS  WORK  IS  DEDICATED 

BY    THE  TRANSLATOR, 

THOMAS  TAYLOR. 


i 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


I  rejoice  iu  the  opportunity  which  U  afforded  me  of  presenting  the  truly  philosophic  reader,  in 
the  present  work,  with  a  treasure  of  Grecian  theology ;  of  a  theology,  which  was  first  mystically 
and  symbolically  promulgated  by  Orpheus,  afterwards  disseminated  enigmatically  through  images 
by  Pythagoras,  and  in  the  last  place  scientifically  unfolded  by  Plato  and  his  genuine  disciples.  The 
peculiarity  indeed,  of  this  theology  is,  that  it  is  no  less  scientific  than  sublime  j  and  (bat  by  a  geo- 
metrical scries  of  reasoning  originating  from  the  moat  self-evident  trutlw,  it  developes  all  the  deified 
progressions  from  the  ineffable  principle  of  things,  and  accurately  exhibit*  to  our  view  all  the  links 
of  that  golden  chain  of  which  deity  is  the  one  extreme,  and  body  the  other. 

That  also  which  >.  most  admirable  and  laudable  in  this  theology  is,  that  it  produces  in  the  mind 
properly  prepared  for  iu  reception  the  most  pure,  holy,  venerable,  and  exalted  conceptions  of  the 
great  cause  of  all.  For  it  celebrates  this  immense  principle  as  something  superior  even  to  being 
itself;  as  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things,  of  which  it  is  nevertheless  ineffably  the  source,  and  does 
not  therefore  think  fit  to  connumerate  it  with  any  triad,  or  order  of  beings.  Indeed,  it  even  apologises 
for  attempting  to  give  an  appropriate  name  to  this  principle,  which  is  in  reality  in  enable,  and 
ascribes  the  attempt  to  the  imbecility  of  human  nature,  which  striving  intently  to  behold  it,  gives 
the  appellation  of  the  most  simple  of  its  conceptions  to  that  which  is  beyond  ail  knowledge  and  all 
conception.  Hence  it  denominates  it  the  one,  and  the  good,-  by  the  former  of  these  names  indica- 
ting its  transcendent  simplicity,  and  by  the  latter  its  subsistence  as  the  object  of  desire  to  all  beings. 
For  all  things  desire  good.  At  the  same  time  however,  it  asserts  that  these  appellations  are  in  reality 
nothing  more  than  the  parturitions  of  the  soul  which  standing  as  it  were  in  the  vestibules  of  the 
Prod.  Vol.  I.  6 


INTRODUCTION. 


adytum  of  deity,  announce  nothing  pertaining  to  the  ineffable,  but  only  indicate  her  spontaneous 
tendencies  towards  it,  and  belong  rather  to  the  immediate  offspring  of  the  first  God,  than  to  the  first 

iuelf. 

Hence,  as  the  result  of  this  most  venerable  conception  of  the  supreme,  when  it  ventures  not 
only  to  denominate  the  ineffable,  but  also  to  assert  something  of  its  relation  to  other  things,  it  con- 
sider* this  as  pre-eminently  its  peculiarity,  that  it  is  the  principle  of  principles ;  it  being  necessary 
that  the  characteristic  property  of  principle,  after  the  same  manner  as  other  things,  should  not  begin 
from  multitude,  but  should  be  collected  into  one  monad  as  a  summit,  and  which  is  the  principle  of 
all  principles.  Conformably  to  this,  Proclus,  in  the  second  book  of  this  work'  says,  with  match- 
leas  magnificence  of  dictiou  :"  Let  us  as  it  were  celebrate  the  first  God,  not  as  establishing  the 
earth  and  the  heavens,  nor  as  giving  subsistence  to  souls,  and  the  generation  of  all  animals  j  for  be 
produced  these  indeed,  but  among  the  last  of  things  ;  but  prior  to  these,  let  us  celebrate  him  as 
unfolding  into  light  the  whole  intelligible  and  intellectual  genus  of  Gods,  together  with  all  the 

supermundane  and  mundane  divinities  as  the  God  of  all  Gods,  the  unity  of  all  unities, 

and  beyond  the  first  adyta,1 — as  more  inefieble  than  all  silence,  and  more  unknown  than  all 
essence,— as  holy  among  the  holies,  and  concealed  in  the  intelligible  Gods." 

The  scientific  reasoning  from  which  this  dogma  is  deduced  is  the  followiug  :  As  the  principle  of 
all  things  is  the  one,  it  is  necessary  that  the  progression  of  beings  should  be  continued,  and  that  no 
vacuum  should  intervene  either  in  incorporeal  or  corporeal  natures.  It  is  also  necessary  that  every 
thing  which  has  a  natural  progression  should  proceed  through  similitude.  In  consequence  of  this, 
it  is  likewise  necessary  that  every  producing  principle  should  generate  a  number  of  the  same  order 
with  itself,  vut.  nature,  a  natural  number;  toul,  one  that  is  psychical  (i.  c.  belonging  to  soul);  and 
uittUtti,  an  intellectual  number.  For  if  whatever  possesses  a  power  of  generating,  generates  simi- 
lars prior  to  dissimilar*,  every  cause  must  deliver  its  own  form  and  characteristic  peculiarity  to  its 
progeny  ;  and  before  it  generates  that  which  gives  subsistence  to  progressions  far  distant  and 
separate  from  its  nature,  it  must  constitute  things  proximate  to  itself  according  to  essence,  and  con- 
joined with  it  through  similitude.  It  is  therefore  necessary  from  these  premise,,  since  there  is  one 
unity  the  principle  of  the  universe,  that  this  unity  should  produce  from  itself,  prior  to  every  thing 
else,  a  multitude  of  natures  characterized  by  unity,  and  a  number  the  most  of  all  things  allied  to 
its  cause ;  and  these  natures  are  no  other  than  the  Gods. 

According  to  this  theology  tlierefore,  from  the  immense  principle  of  principles,  in  which  all 
'  P.  190.  .  *  L  e.  The  highest  order  of  intelUgibks. 


INTRODUCTION.  li 

thing?  causally  subsist,  absorbed  in  supcreaseotial  light,  and  involved  in  unfathomable  depths,  a 
beauteous  progeny  of  principles  proceed,  aU  largely  partaking  of  the  ineffable,  all  stamped  with  the 
occult  characters  of  deity,  all  possessing  an  overflowing  fulness  of  good.  From  these  dazzling  sum* 
mils,  these  ineffable  blossoms,  these  divine  propagations,  being,  life,  intellect,  soul,  uature,  ami  body 
depend ;  monads  suspended  from  uniliet,  deified  natures  proceeding  from  deities.  Each  of  these 
monads  too,  is  the  leader  of  a  series  which  extends  from  itself  to  the  last  of  thing*,  and  which  while 
it  proceeds  from,  at  the  same  time  abides  in,  and  returns  to  its  leader.  And  all  these  principles 
aVid  all  their  progeny  are  finally  centered  and  rooted  by  their  summits  in  the  first  great  all-compre- 
hending one.  Thus  all  beings  proceed  from,  and  are  comprehended  in  the  first  being;  aU  intel- 
lects emanate  from  one  first  intellect ;  all  souls  from  one  first  soul ;  all  natures  blossom  from  one 
first  nature  ;  and  all  bodies  proceed  from  the  vital  and  luminous  body  of  the  world.  And  lastly,  all 
these  great  monads  are  comprehended  in  the  first  one,  from  which  both  they  and  all  their  depending 
•cries  are  unfolded  into  light.  Hence  this  first  one  is  truly  the  unity  of  unities,  the  monad  of 
monads,  the  principle  of  principles,  the  God  of  Gods,  one  and  all  things,  and  yet  one  prior  to  all. 

No  objections  of  any  weight,  no  arguments  but  such  as  are  sophistical,  can  be  urged  against  this 
most  sublime  theory  which  is  so  congenial  to  the  unperverted  conceptions  of  the  human  mind,  that 
it  can  only  be  treated  with  ridicule  and  contempt  in  degraded,  barren,  and  barbarous  ages.  Igno- 
rance and  priestcraft,  however,  have  hitherto  conspired  to  defame  those  inestimable  works,'  in 
which  this  and  many  other  grand  and  important  dogmas  can  alone  be  found ;  and  the  theology  of 
the  Greeks  has  been  attacked  with  all  the  insane  fury  of  ecclesiastical  ?eal,  and  all  the  jmbecd  flashes 
of  mistaken  wit,  by  men  whose  conceptions  on  the  subject,  tike  those  of  a  man  between  sleeping 
and  waking,  have  been  turbid  and  wild,  phantattic  and  confuted,  prtpotterotu  aud  tain. 

Indeed,  that  after  the  great  incomprehensible  cause  of  all,  a  divine  multitude  subsists,  co-operating 
with  this  cause  in  the  production  and  government  of  the  universe,  has  always  been,  and  is  still  admitted 
by  all  nations,  and  all  religions,  however  much  they  may  differ  in  thoir  opinions  respecting  the  nature 
of  the  subordinate  deities,  and  die  veneration  which  is  to  be  paid  to  them  by  man ;  and  however 
barbarous  the  conceptions  of  some  nations  ou  this  subject  may  be  when  compared  with  those  of 
others.  Hence,  says  the  elegant  Maxim  us  Tyrius,  "  You  will  see  one  according  taw  and  assertion 
in  all  the  earth,  that  there  is  one  God,  the  king  and  father  of  all  things,  and  many  Gods,  sons  of  God, 
ruling  together  with  him.  This  the  Greek  says,  and  the  Barbarian  says,  the  inhabitant  of  the  Continent, 

'  Via.  the  present  and  other  works  of  Protlus,  together  with  those  of  Plolious,  Porphyry,  Jambluihus, 
Syruaus,  Ammonius,  Damascrus,01ympu>dorus,  and  Simplicms. 


Digitized  by  Google 


■ 


I  K  TnODUCTIO  N. 


and  he  who  dwells  near  the  sea,  the  wise  and  the  unwise.  And  if  you  proceed  as  far  as  to  the  utmost 
shores  of  the  ocean,  there  also  there  arc  Gods,  rising  very  near  to  some,  and  setting  very  near  to 
others." '  This  dogma,  too,  is  so  far  from  being  opposed  by  either  the  Old  or  New  Testament,  that 
it  is  admitted  by  both,  though  it  forbids  the  religious  veneration  of  the  inferior  deities,  and  enjoins 
the  worship  of  one  God  alone,  whose  portion  is  Jacob,  and  Israel  the  line  of  his  inheritance.  The 
following  testimonies  will,  I  doubt  not,  convince  the  liberal  reader  of  the  truth  of  (In,  assertion. 

In  tl»e  first  place  it  appears  from  the  3fid  chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  v.  8.  in  the  Septuagint 
version,  that  "  the  divition  of  the  nations  teas  made  according  to  the  number  of  the  angels  of 
Cod,"  and  not  according  to  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel,  as  the  present  Hebrew  text 
asserts.  This  reading  was  adopted  by  the  most  celebrated  fathers  of  the  Christian  church,  such  as, 
among  tlie  Greeks,  Origen,  Basil,  and  Chrysostom,  and  among  the  Latins,  Jerom  aud  Gregory. 
That  litis  too,  is  the  genuine  reading,  is  evident  from  the  4th  chapter  of  the  same  book  and  the  I9tb 
verse,  in  which  it  is  said,  "  Awl  lest  thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  heaven,  and  wbeu  thou  sent  the 
sun  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  even  all  the  host  of  heaven,  sbouldsl  be  driven  to  worship  them, 
and  serve  them,  which  the  Lord  %  God  hath  divided  unto  all  nations  under  the  whole  heaven." 
Here  it  is  said  that  the  stars  are  divided  to  all  the  natioas,  which  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the 
nations  were  divided  according  to  the  number  of  the  stars ;  the  Jewish  legislator  at  the  same  time, 
considering  his  own  nation  as  an  exception,  and  as  being  under  the  government  of  the  God  of  Israel 
alone.  For  iu  the  following  verse  it  is  added,  "  But  the  Lord  liath  taken  you  (i.  e.  the  Jews),  and 
brought  you  forth  out  of  the  iron  furnace,  even  out  of  Egypt,  to  be  unto  him  a  people  of  inheri- 
tance, as  ye  are  to  this  day."  By  the  angels  of  God  therefore  (in  Deuteron.  32.  v.  8.)  ihe  stars  arc 
signified  ;  and  these  in  the  same  book  (chapter  17-  v.  3.)  arc  cxprr-stly  called  Gods;  "  And  hath 
gone  and  served  other  Gods,  and  worshipped  them,  either  the  tun  or  moon,  or  any  of  the  host  of 
heaven,  which  I  have  not  commanded.'"  I u  the  3d  chapter  also,  and  llic  l24lh  verse,  it  is  implied 
in  tlie  question  which  is  there  asked,  that  the  God  of  the  Jews  is  superior  to  all  the  celestial  and 
terrestrial  Gods  :  "  For  what  God  is  there  in  heaven,  or  in  earth,  that  cau  do  according  to  thy 
works,  and  according  to  thy  might  r"  As  the  attention  of  the  Jews  was  solely  confined  to  the 
worship  of  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  they  but  little  regarded  the  powers  whom  they 
conceived  to  be  subordinate  to  this  God,  and  considering  all  of  them  as  merely  the  messengers  of 
their  God,  they  gave  them  the  general  appellation  of  angel* ;  though  as  we  shall  shortly  prove  from 

t 

t  mt  n»i»it  f*«  «*<rx"*s  *vx9V  t****!  ™f  *« Dissert.  1.  Edit.  rriae. 


IHTRODUCTIOH. 


the  testimony  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  they  were  not  consistent  in  confounding  angth  properly  so 
died  with  Gods. 

But  that  tiie  stars  are  not  called  Gods  by  the  Jewish  legislator  as  things  inanimate  like  statues 
fashioned  of  wood  or  stone,  is  evident  from  what  is  said  in  the  book  of  Job,  and  the  Psalms : 
"  Behold  even  the  moon  and  it  shineth  not,  yea  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  his  sight.  How  much 
less  man  that  is  a  worm,  and  the  son  of  man  which  is  a  worm  ?"  (Job.  xxv.  v.  5.  and  6.)  And, 
"  Wheu  I  consider  thy  heavens,  the  work  of  thy  fingers,  the  moon  and  the  stars  which  thou  hast 
ordained  ;  what  is  man  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him,  and  the  son  of  man  that  thou  visitest  him." 
(Psalm  viii.  v.  3.  and  4.)  It  is  evident  therefore  front  these  passages,  that  the  heavens  and  the  stars 
are  more  excellent  than  man;  but  nothing  inanimate  can  be  more  excellent  than  that  which  ia 
animated.  To  which  may  be  added,  that  in  the  following  verse  David  says,  that  God  has  made 
man  a  little  lower  than  the  angels.  But  the  stars,  as  we  have  shown,  were  considered  by  Moses  as 
angels  and  Gods ;  and  consequently,  they  are  animated  beings,  and  superior  to  man. 

Farther  still,  in  the  Septuagint  version  of  verse  the  4th  of  the  19th  Psalm,  God  is  said  to  have 
placed  hit  tabernacle  in  the  tun,  («  rce  nhm  rf/rs  to  o-xtevtapet  awrou)  which  is  doubtless  the  genuine 
readiug,  and  not  that  of  the  vulgar  translation,  "  In  them  (i.  e.  the  heavens)  hath  he  set  a  tabermV 
cle  for  the  sun."  For  this  is  saying  nothing  more  of  the  suu  than  what  may  be  said  of  any  of 
the  other  slurs,  and  produces  in  us  no  exalted  conception  of  the  artificer  of  the  universe.  But  to  say 
that  God  dwells  in  the  sun,  gives  us  a  magnificent  idea  both  of  that  glorious  luminary,  and  the  deity 
who  dwells  enshrined,  as  it  were,  in  dazzling  splendor.  To  which  we  may  add  in  confirmation  of^ 
this  version  of  the  Septuagint,  that  in  Psalm  xi.  v.  4.  it  is  said,  "  The  Lord's  throne  Is  in  heaten." 
And  again  in  Isaiah  Ixvi.  v.  l.  «  Thus  with  the  Ix>rd,  the  heaven  is  my  throne,  and  the  earth  is  my 
footstool."  If  therefore  the  heavens  are  the  throne,  and  the  sun  the  tabernacle  of  deity,  they  must 
evidently  be  deified.  For  nothing  can  come  into  immediate  contact  with  divinity  without  being 
divine.  Hence,  says  Siroplicius,'  "  That  it  is  connascent  with  the  human  soul  to  think  the  celes- 
tial bodies  are  divine,  is  especially  evident  from  (hose,  (the  Jews)  who  look  to  these  bodies  through 
preconception*  about  divine  natures.  For  tbey  also  say  that  the  heavens  are  the  habitation  of  God, 
and  the  throne  of  God,  and  are  alone  sufficient  to  reveal  the  glory  and  excellence  of  God  to  those 
«tho  are  worthy  ;  than  which  assertions  what  can  be  more  venerable  ?" 

•  In  his  eommeBUry  on  the  second  book  of  Ari»UiuV«.  treaiKc  On  the  Hovn  v 


Digitized  by  Google 


IHTBODOCMOM. 


Indeed,  that  lb*  heavens  are  not  the  inanimate  throne  and  residence  of  deity,  is  also  evident  from 
the  assertion  in  the  19th  Psalm,  "  That  the  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God."  For  R.  Moses, 
a  very  learned  Jew,  says/  "  that  the  word  utphar,  to  declare  or  set  forth,  is  never  attributed  to 

is  no  other  than  that  of  those  blessed  intelligences,  who  govern  the  stars,  and  dispose  them  into  such 
letters  as  Cod  has  ordained ;  declaring  unto  us  men  by  means  of  this  writing,  what  events  we  are 
to  expect.  And  hence,  this  same  writing  is  called  by  all  the  ancients  cktlab  kamtlachim,  that  is  to 
say,  the  writing  of  the  angeli." 

The  Gods  therefore,  which  were  distributed  to  all  the  nations  but  the  Jews,  were  the  sun  and 
moon,  and  the  other  celestial  bodies,  yet  not  so  far  as  they  are  bodies,  but  so  far  as  they  are  ani- 
mated beings.  Hence  the  Hebrew  prophets  never  leprobate  and  prohibit  the  worship  of  the  stars 
as  things  which  neither  see,  nor  hear,  nor  understand,  as  they  do  the  worship  of  statues.  Thus  in 
Deuteron.  iv.  and  28.  "  And  there  ye  shall  serve  Gods  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood  and  stone, 
which  neither  see  nor  hear,  nor  eat,  nor  smell."  And  the  Psalmist,  "  They  have  a  mouth  but 
apeak  not,  &c.«  These,  and  wany  other  things  of  the  like  kind  arc  said  by  the  prophet,  of  the 
Jews  against  the  worship  of  images  and  statues,  but  never  of  the  sun  and  moon,  and  the  other 
stars.  But  when  they  blame  the  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  they  assign  as  the  cause 
(hat  the  people  of  Israel  are  not  attributed  to  them  as  other  nations  are,  in  consequence  of 
being  the  inheritance  of  the  God  that  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  out  of  the  house 
of  bondage.  This  is  evident  from  the  before  cited  passage  in  the  4th  chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  in 
which  it  is  said  that  the  stars  are  divided  unto  ail  nations  under  the  whole  heaven  but  the  Jews. 

Indeed,  as  the  emperor  Julian*  justly  observes,  "  unless  a  certain  ethnarchic  God  presides  over 
every  nation,  and  under  this  God  there  is  an  angel,  a  daemon,  and  a  peculiar  genus  of  souls,  sub- 
arises, — unless  this  is  admitted,  let  it  be  shown  by  any  other  how  this  difference  is  produced.  For 
it  is  not  sufficient  to  say,  "  God  said,  and  it  was  done,"  but  it  is  requisite  that  the  natures  of 
things  which  are  produced  should  accord  with  the  mandates  of  divinity.  But  I  will  explain  more 
clearly  what  I  mean.  God,  for  instance,  commanded  that  fire  should  tend  upward,  and  earthly 
masses  downward  ;  is  it  not  therefore  requisite,  in  order  that  the  mandate  of  God  may  be  aceom- 


«  See  Gaflarcl-s  Unheard-*!  CuriosiUes,  p.  391.  »  A  pud  Cyril. 


IITTiOBUCtroH.  XT 

plished,  that  die  formed  should  be  light,  and  the  latter  heavy  t  Thus  also  in  a  similar  manner  in 
other  things,  tllus  too,  m'  divine  concerns.  But  the  reasori  of  (his  is,  because  the  human  race  is  frail 
and  corruptible.  Hence  also,  the  works  oP  man  are  corruptible  and  mutable,  and  subject  to  all-various 
revolutions,  But  God  being  eternal,  it  is  also  fit  that  his  mandates  should  be  eternal.  And  being 
such,  they  are  either  the  natures  of  things,  or  conformable  to  the  natures  of  things.  For  how  can 
nature  contend  with  the  mandate  of  divinity  }  How  can  it  fall  off  from  this  concord  ?  If,  there- 
fore, as  he  ordered  that  there  should  be  a  confusion  of  tongues,  and  that  they  should  not  accord 
i  other,  so  likewise  he  ordered  that  the  political  concerns  of  nations  should  be  dis- 
l;  he  has  not  only  effected  this  by  his  mandate,  but  has  rendered  us  naturally  adapted  to  this 
dissonance.  For  to  effect  this,  it  would  he  requisite,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  natures  of  those 
should  be  different,  whose  political  concerns  among  nations  are  to  be  different.  This,  indeed,  is 
seen  in  bodies,  li  an>  one  directs  his  attention  to  the  Germans  and  Scythians,  ami  considers  how 
much  the  bodies  of  these  differ  from  those  of  the  Lybi&ru  and  Ethiopians.    Is  this  therefore,  a 

respect  to  the  celestial  bodies  f " 

Julian  adds,  "  Moses,  however,  though  he  knew  the  truth  of  this,  concealed  it ;  nor  doea  he 
ascribe  the  confusion  of  tongues  to  God  alone.  For  he  says,  that  not  only  God  descended,  nor  one 
alone  with  him,  but  many,  though  he  does  not  say  who  they  were.  But  it  is  very  evident,  that  he 
conceived  those  who  descended  with  God  to  be  similar  to  him.  If,  therefore,  not  the  Lord  only, 
but  those  who  were  with  him  contributed  to  this  confusion  of  tongues,  they  may  justly  be 

lh R  C  ft  U  8  ^  -  S  of  llllA  ' 


In  short,  that  the  heavens  and  the  celestial  bodies  are  animated  by  certain  divine  souls,  was  not 
only  the  opinion  of  the  ancient  poets  and  philosophers,  but  also  of  the  mo?l  celebrated  fathers  of 
the  church,  and  the  most  learned  and  acute  of  the  schoolmen.  Thus  for  instance,  this  is  asserted 
by  Jerom  in  his  exposition  of  the  6th  verse  of  the  first  chapter  of  Ecclesiastes.  And  by  Origen  in 
his  book  On  Principles,  who  says  that  the  heavenly  bodies  must  be  animated,  because  they  are  said 
to  receive  the  mandates  of  God,  which  is  only  consentaneous  to  a  rational  nature.  This  too  is 
inserted  by  Eusebius  in  his  Theological  Solutions,  and  by  Augustine  in  bis  Enchiridion.  Among 
the  schoolmen  too,  this  was  the  opinion  of  Albert  us  Magnus  in  his  book  De  quatuor  Coteqiuwis  ; 
of  Thomas  Aquinas  in  his  treatise  De  Spiritualibus  Creaturis;  and  of  Johannes  Scotus  Super 
Sccundo  Sententiarum.  To  these  likewise  may  be  added,  the  most  learned  Cardinal  Nicolaos 
i  indeed  strenuously  contends  for  the  truth  of  this  < 


Digitized  by.Google 


IKTXODCCTIOH. 

( the  celestial  bodies  with  outward  worship  (dulia  cultu)  and  to  implore 
says,  that  he  has  no  other  objection  to  thin 
:  be  the  occasion  of  idolatry.  Hence,  though  it  may  seem  ridiculous  to  most  of 
the  present  time,  that  divine  souls  should  be  placed  in  the  stars,  and  preside  over  regions  and  cities, 
tribes  and  people,  nations  and  tougues,  yet  it  did  not  appear  so  to  the  more  intelligent  Christians 
of  former  times. 


I  had  almost  forgotten  however  tlie  wisest  of  the  ancient  Christians,  but  as  he  was  the  best  of 
them,  I  have  done  well  hi  reserving  liioi  to  the  last ;  and  this  u  no  other  than  the  Platonic  bishop 
Syncsiuf .   This  cither  of  the  church  therefore,  in  his  third  hymn,  sings  as  follows : 

Si,  irartg  xwpaw, 


OUT  Ml I  it 'Ml, 

ciMcyc;  amur. 
<r«  juv  01  »0«JOI 

«  Si  Juxruutysi, 
ovs  rtgi  kXiim» 

x°t™"- 

*««•«  s-f  fuA*?i 
ynta.  fuuMgaw. 

•I  Tff  I  HOVjUV, 

•i  Kara  »r/uv, 
•i  t*  mfymt 


afLQiPaTips, 
0)  iraja  uKurtVf 


< 


INTRODUCTION.  ITU 
TS,  Tf  KO&|»v 


J*X«  T*  soXnnif, 

Ml 


vii.  "  Thee,  father  of  the  worlds,  father  of  the  •ones/  artificer  of  the  Gad*,  it  is  hot/  to  j 
Thee,  O  king,  the  intellectual  Gods  sing,  thee,  O  blessed  God,  the  Cotmagi,  those  fulgid  eyes,  and 
starry  intellect*,  celebrate,  rouDd  which  the  illustrious  body  [of  the  world]  dances.  All  the  race  of 
the  blessed  sing  thy  praise,  those  that  are  about,  and  those  that  are  in  the  world,  the  tonic  Gods, 
and  aluo  the  szorTic,*  who  govern  the  parts  of  the  world,  wise  itinerants,  stationed  about  the  illus- 
trious pilots  [of  the  universe,]  and  which  the  angelic  series  pours  forth.    Thee  too,  the  renowned 

by  occult  paths  pervades  the 


In  another  part  also  of  the  same  hymn,  he  informs  us  that  he  adored  the  powers  that 
preside  over  Thrace  snd  Chakedou. 


'  What  these  ire  will  be  shortly  eiplained,  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  Apostle  PauL 
*Syne*ius  does  not  here  speak  conformably  tothe  Chaldean  theelogists,  from  whom  he  has  derived  these  ap- 
pellations. For  the  i<n*M  and  the  •fmst,  are  according  to  tbem  Goda,  the  farmer  being  the  divinities  af  the  stars, 

and  the  latter  forming  that  order  of  Gods  which  is  called  by  Proehis  in  the  sixth  book  of  this  week  amxvnfi  &• 
Urated.  Both  these  orders  therefore,  are  superior  to  the  angelic  series.  Thisunseiai 

Jews,  hut  to  all  the  fathers  of  the  church,  and  all  th.Christjan  divines  tLt^succeede  i  J  ' 

Ptoc.  Vol.  I. 


Digitized  by  Google 


•  INTRODUCTION. 
»i  r  curntifar 

i.  e.  "  I  have  supplicated  the  ministrant  Gods  that  possess  the  Thracian  soil,  and  also  those  that, 
in  an  opposite  direction,  govern  the  Chalcedonian  land." 

And  in  the  hurt  place  he  says  (in  Hymn  I.) 

tXrya  fur,  <»AA* 

eur*{,  uf  w  iram) 

xvn;  oupovw  ihttvtf 
to  J*  »Acr  t»vrs  ftAwrw, 

•  8|  XOI  geiroiTi  fl"«rp«* 
^ttMSD  tUfff* 

The  substance  of  which  is,  "  lhat  incorruptible  intellect  which  is  wholly  an  emanation  of  divinity, 
is  totally  diffused  through  the  whole  world,  convolves  the  heavens,  and  preserves  the  universe  with 
which  it  is  present  distributed  in  various  forms.  That  one  part  of  this  intellect  is  distributed 
among  the  stars,  and  becomes,  as  it  were,  their  charioteer  ;  but  another  part  among  the  angelic 
choirs ;  and  another  part  is  bound  in  a  terrestrial  form." 

I  confess  I  am  wholly  at  a  loss  to  conceive  what  could  induce  the  moderns  to  controvert  the 
dogma,  that  the  stars  and  the  whole  world  arc  animated,  as  it  is  an  opinion  of  infinite  antiquity,  and 
is  frieadly  to  the  most  unperverted,  spontaneous,  and  accurate  conceptions  of  the  human  mind. 
Indeed,  the  rejection  of  it  appears  to  me  to  be  just  as  absurd  as  it  would  be  in  a  maggot,  if  it 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION.  SIX 

were  capable  of  syllogizing,  to  infer  that  man  is  a  machine  impelled  by  some  external  force 
he  walk*,  because  it  never  saw  any  animated  reptile  so  large. 


The  sagacious  Kepler,  for  so  he  is  called  even  by  the  roost  modem  writers,'  appears  to  have  had 
a  conception  of  this  great  truth ;  but  as  he  was  more  an  astronomer  than  a  philosopher,  he  saw  this 
truth  only  partially,  and  be  rather  embraced  it  as  subservient  to  his  own  astronomical  opinions,  than 
as  forming  an  essential  part  of  the  true  theory  of  the  universe.  Bat  from  what  1  have  seen  of  the 
writings  of  Kepler,  I  have  no  doubt,  if  he  had  lived  in  the  time  of  the  Greeks,  or  if  he  hud  made 
the  stody  of  the  works  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  the  business  of  his  life,  be  would  have  become  an 
adept  in,  and  an  illustrious  and  zealous  champiou  of  their  philosophy.  Kepler  then  Cm  Hanno- 
Mundi,  lib.  4,  p.  158)  says,  "  That  he  docs  not  oppose  the  dogma,  that  there  is  a  soul  of  the 
he  shall  say  nothing  about  it  kt  that  book.  He  adds,  that  if  there  is  such 
a  soul,  it  must  reside  in  the  centre  of  the  world,  which,  according  to  him,  is  the  sun,  and 
from  theoce  by  the  communication  of  the  rays  of  light,  which  are  in  the  place  of  spirits  in 
an  animated  body,  is  propagated  into  all  the  amplitude  of  the  world."*  In  the  following  passages 
also  be  confidently  asserts  that  the  earth  has  a  soul.  For  he  says,  "  That  the  globe  of  the  earth  is 
a  body  such  as  is  that  of  some  animal ;  and  that  what  its  own  soul  is  to  an  animal,  that  the  sublunary 
nature  which  he  investigates  will  be  to  the  earth.'"  He  adds,  "  That  he  sees  for  the  most  part 
every  thing  which  proceeding  from  the  body  of  an  animal  testifies  that  there  it  a  soul  in  it, 
proceeds  also  from  the  body  of  the  earth.  For  as  the  animated  body  produces  in  the  super- 
ficies of  the  skin  hairs,  thus  also  the  earth  produces  [on  its  surface]  plants  and  trees  ;  and  as  in  the 

and  marine  monsters  are  produced.  As  the  animated  body  likewise  produces  tears,  mucus,  and  the 
recrement  of  the  can,  and  sometimes  gam  from  the  pustules  of  the  face,  thus  also  the  earth  pro- 

■  Dr.  Or* gory,  in  the  TOth  proposition  of.lbe  fint  book  af  hi<  Element*  of  Aitronomy,  aayi  of  Kepler,  "  Tint  hi, 
archetypal  ratio,  geometrical  conciamtin,  and  harmonic  proportions,  »bow  »urh  a  fore*  of  geniui  at  u  not  to  be  found 
iaaay  of  the  writari  of  physical  attfoaeasy  before  him.  So  that  Jeremiah  Hovtoz,  a  very  competent  jodgc  of  tbeae  mat- 
tan,  though  a  littla  avarw  to  Kapler,  in  the  beginning  af  his  aatrotwarical  atadiea,  after  baring  in  rail  tried  other., 

jnUtftdman  aSewaU  mri»U  staisrt  I  mm,  aUl  kirn  great,  aumt,  «■  ew»  -wuiJumf  »r<  ; \vu* k£*U  to  b.  r«W 
aW  tAe  ■rAoie  (riie  4  pHUHphm.  Him  aJ««  I*  tat  6«r*  nag  a/.-f/tm  ,Um,  tkc  pkiwpAer,  read;  Mag  aortal 
«/  tUf,  thai  *<•*•  hat  Keller  hwaUthawa." 

I  qaate  this  passage, aat  from  UV  ju.toeai  of  the  encomium  it  contaias;  for  it  is  eatraragant,  and  by  no  menu  true, 

Kepler. 

1  "  El  primum  qnidem  de  anima  lotiiin  unireni  eUi  non  rcpngno,  nihil  tamen  hoc  libro  IV.  dicam.  ViJrtui  emoi  (ai 
cat  tali*  aliqua)  in  ccntro  mondi,  quod  mihl  »ol  eat,  retidere,  indeque  in  omnem  eju  araplitudiucm  cammercio  radioruiu 
iocia,  qai  lint  toco  aptriuiuin  in  corpora  animali  propagati." 

'  •'  DaealoM  t«r«  riohm  rale  eonm  eriL  ooala  ~i  aJiron  -oWi, ,  — t—  eat  aua  aaraaa,  hoc  erit  tclluri 


Digitized  by  Google 


XX  INTRODUCTION. 

duces  amber  and  bitumen.  At  the  bladder  too  produces  urine,  thus  likewise  mountain*  pour  forth 
rivers.  And  as  the  body  produces  excrement  of  a  sulphureous  odour,  and  crepitus  which  may  als* 
be  inflamed,  so  the  earth  produces  sulphur,  subterranean  fires,  thunder,  and  lightning.  And  as  in 
the  veins  of  an  animal  blood  is  generated,  and  together  with  it  sweat  which  is  ejected  out  of  the 
body,  so  in  the  veins  of  the  earth,  metals,  and  fossils,  and  a  rainy  vapour  are  generated.-  ■  And  in 
cap.  7,  p- 162,  after  having  shown  that  there  is  in  the  earth  Ibe  tense  of  touching,  that  it  respire*},  tad 
is  subject  in  certain  parts  to  languors,  mid  internal  vicissitudes  of  the  viscera,  and  that  subterranean 
heat  proceeds  from  the  soul  of  the  earth,  he  adds,  "  That  a  certain  image  of  the  zodiac  is  resplend- 
ent in  this  soul,  and  therefore  of  the  whole  nrinament,  and  is  the  bond  of  the  sympathy  of  things 


Bishop  Berkeley  also  was  by  no  weans  hostile  to  this  opinion,  that  the  world  it  one  great 
,  as  is  evident  from  the  following  extract  from  his  Siris,  (p.  131). 


"  Blind  fate  and  blind  chance  are  at  bottom  much  the  same  thine, 
than  the  other-  Such  is  the  mutual  relation,  connect** 
world,  that  they  seem,  4*  it  were,  animated  and  held  together  by  one  soul :  and  such  is  their  harmony, 
order,  and  regular  course,  as  shows  the  soul  to  be  governed  and  directed  by  a  mind.  It  was  an  opinion 
of  remote  antiquity  that  the  world  was  an  animal.  If  we  may  trust  the  llermaic  writings,  die 
Egyptians  thought  ail  thing's  did  partake  of  life.  This  opinion  was  also  10  general  and  current 
:  Greeks,  that  Plutarch  asserts  aD  others  held  the  world  to  be  an  animal,  and  governed  by 


nil  bodies  within  itself,  could  not  be  touched  or  sensibly  affected  from  without ;  yet  it  is  plain  they 
attributed  to  it  an  inward  -sense  and  fueling,  as  well  as  appetites  and  aversions  ;  and  that  from  all 
the  various  tones,  actions,  and  passions  of  the  universe,  they  supposed  one  symphony,  one  animal 
act  and  life  to  result. 

"  Ianiblichus  declares  the  world  to  be  one  animal,  in  which  the  parts,  however  distant  each  from 
other,  are  nevertheless  related  and  connected  by  one  common  nature.    And  be  tenches,  what  is 

'  "  Vidrtiam  plereqne  omnia,  qu*  ex  corpore  animantie  proveaieatia,  testaator  animaiA  in  Hlo  ine*jr,  proyeoirr 
riiin  n  teJiuri*  corpora.  Ut  ecira  corpus  in  ruin  tuperticie  pilom,  sic  terra  plaalae  arboresqoc  prolVrt;  iaqoc  lis  ibi 
pedtenfi,  hie  crocs,  cicada*,  variaqae  insect*  et  owoatra  marina  nascontiir :  et  at  corpus lacbryraas,  blaansm,  anritim<iu« 
r.fremrnta,  est  iibi  et  gunni  cx  faciei  paalolia,  tic  telle*  electron, bitamro:  Dtqua  vesica  ariaaai,  sie  enonlra  flumma 
et  at  carpus  axcTeasentam  aalpharei  •dorU,  crepitaiqae,  qui  etiaio  iefiamman  potinot,  tic  terra  tolpbar,  ignes 


•  "  Retacet  igitarlaa 
t7o>f»Uua;  reran  estlcstia 


Digitized  by  Google 


I  KTtOOVCTION.  ixi 

• 

also  a  roc ei red  iMm  of  «he  Pythagoreans  and  Platonic*,  (bat  there  is  no  chasm  in  nature,  bat  a 
chain  or  >cal«  of  beings  rising  bj  gentle  uninterrupted  gradations  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest, 
each  nature  being  informed  and  perfected  by  the  participation  of  a  higher.  Aa  air  becomei 
igneous,  ao  the  purest  fire  becomes  animal,  and  the  animal  soul  become*  intellectual,  which  is  to  be 
understood,  not  of  la*  change  of  «m  nature  iato  another,  but  of  the  connection  of  differ eot  natures, 
each  lower  nature  being,  according  to  those  philosophers,  aa  it  were,  a  receptacle  or  object  for  the 
next  above  tt  to  reside  and  act  m. 

u  It  is  also  the  doctrine  of  Platonic  philosophers,  that  intellect  is  the  very  life  of  living  things, 
die  first  principle  and  esemplar  of  all,  from  whence,  by  different  degrees,  are  derived  the  inferior 
classes  of  life ;  fir*  the  rational,  then  Ike  sensitive,  after  that  the  vegetable,  but  so  a*  m  the  rational 
animal  there  is  still  somewhat  intellectual,  again  in  the  sensitive  there  is  somewhat  rational,  and  in 
the  vegetable  somewhat  sensitive,  and  lastly  in  mixed  bodies,  as  metals  aud  mineral*,  somewhat  of 
vegetation.  By 'which  means  the  whole  is  thought  to  be  more  perfectly  connected.  Which  doe- 
trine  implies  that  all  the  faculties,  instincts,  and  motions  of  inferior  beings,  in  their  several 

"  Both  Stoics  and  Platonics  held  the  world  to  be  alive,  though  sometimes  it  be  mentioned  as  a 
sentient  animal,  sometimes  as  a  plant  or  vegetable.  Hut  in  this,  notwithstanding  what  has  been 
surmised  by  some  learned  men,  there  stem)  to  be  no  atheism.  For  to  long  a*  the  world  it  sup- 
posed to  be  quickened  by  elementary  fire  or  spirit,  which  it  itself  animated  by  son/,  and  directed 
by  understanding,  it  follows  that  all  pmrtt  thereof  originally  depend  upon,  and  may  be  reduced 
unto,  the  tame  indivisible  stem  or  principle,  to  wit,  a  tupreme  mind;  which  it  the  concurrent 
doctrine  of  Pulkaporeans  Platonics  and  Stoici  " 

*^n^n*n  *  _J  9     *>  S  }  •  u" 

Compare  now  the  Newtonian  with  this  theory,  that  the  heavenly  bodies  are  vitalized  bv  their 
informing  souls,  that  their  orderly  morion  is  the  result  of  this  vitality,  and  that  the  planets  move 
harmonically  round  the  sun,  not  as  if  urged  by  a  centripetal  force,  but  from  an  animated  tendency 
to  the  principle  and  fountain  of  their  right,  and  from  a  desire  of  partaking  as  largely  as  possible  of 
his  influence  and  power,  in  the  former  theory  all  the  celestial  morions  are  the  effect  of  violence, 
in  the  latter  they  are  all  natural.  Hie  former  is  attended  with  insuperable  difficulties,  the  biter, 
when  the  principle  on  which  it  is  founded  is  admitted,  with  none.  And  the  former  is  unscientific 
and  merely  hypothetical ;  but  the  latter  is  the  progeny  of  the  most  accurate  science,  and  is  founded 


Digitized  by  Google 


1  XTKODfCTION. 


I  have  said  diat  I  should  prove  from  the  testimony  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  that  the  Jews  were  not 
consistent  in  confounding  angels  properly  so  called  with  Gods.  And  this  appears  to  me  to  be  evident , 
in  the  first  place  from  the  following  passage  in  Hebrews  ii.  v.S.mvru  nwpjn  asmjf/rssvcu  rtoftuma; 
?"!,"«»  ••"'i  **f  «  f"I  «  ♦«uwft»«r  to  fStoropom  ytynmsu.  This  in  the  English  version  is  erro- 
neously rendered;  "  Tliroogh  faith  we  understand,  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of 
God,  so  that  things  which  are  seen,  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear."  I  say  this  is  erro- 
neously translated,  because  in  the  first  place,  the  world*  is  evidently  a  forced  interpretation  of 
«(»v«{ ;  and  even  admitting  it  is  not,  leaves  the  passage  very  ambiguous,  from  the  uncertainty  to 
what  worlds  Paul  alludes.  If  we  adopt  agei,  which  is  the  general  sense  of  the  word  in  the  New 
Testament,  we  shall  indeed  avoid  a  forced  and  ambiguous  interpretation,  but  we  shall  rentier  the 
meaning  of  the  Apostle  trifling  in  the  extreme.  For  as  he  his  elsewhere  said,  «  that  all  things 
were  framed  by  the  word  of  God,"  what  particular  faith  does  it  require  to  believe,  that  by  the 
same  word  he  framed  the  ages  ? 

In  the  second  place,  from  the  definition  of  faith,  given  in  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter,  that  it  is 
«  the  evidence  of  things  not  teen,"  it  is  clear,  that  Paul  is  speaking  in  this  passage  of  something 
invisible.  Since  then  eumac  is  neither  worlds  nor  ages,  what  shall  we  say  it  is  ?  I  answer,  the 
(tones  of  the  Valentinians.  And  agreeably  to  this,  the  whole  passage  should  be  translated  as 
follows :  "  13v  faith  we  understand,  that  the  stones  were  framed  bv  the  word  of  God,  in  order  that 
things  which  are  seen,  might  be  generated  from  such  as  do  not  appear  (i.  e.  from  things  invisible)." 
Every  one  who  is  much  conversant  with  Greek  authors,  must  certainly  be  convinced  that  «;  t» 
means  m  order  that ;  and  Bishop  Pearson  translates  as  I  have  done  the  latter  part  of  this  verse. 

Now  we  learn  from  the  second  book  of  In-nxus  against  the  heretics,  that  according  to  the 
Valentinians,  all  created  things  are  the  images  of  the  (tones,  resident  m  the  pleroma,  or  fulness  of 
deity.  And  does  it  not  clearly  follow  from  the  above  version,  that  according  to.  Paul  too,  the 
icoues  arc  the  exemplars  of  visible  or  created  things  i  To  which  we  may  add,  that  this  sense  of 
the  passage  clearly  accords  with  the  assertion  that  "  faith  is  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  For 
here  the  things  which  do  not  appear  are  the  aones;  these,  according  to  the  Valentinians,  subsisting 
in  deity.  So  that  from  our  version,  Paul  might  say  with  great  propriety,  that  "  we  understand  by 
faith,  that  the  (tones  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God,  in  order  that  things  which  are  seen,  might  be 
generated  from  such  as  do  not  appear,"  for  this  naturally  follows  from  his  definition  of  faith. 

1  farther  add,  that  among  these  tones  of  the  Valentinians  were  wuj,  fU»s,  cr/ys,  «A,«.-«, 


INTRODUCTION.  XXlii 

i.  e.  intellect,  a  profundity,  rilence,  truth,  and  witdon,  which  as  Gale  well  observe*  in  his  note*  ou 
lamblichua  de  Mysteriis,  &c.  prove  their  dogmas  to  be  of  Chaldak  origin.  For  these  words  per- 
petually occur  in  the  fragments  of  the  Chaldaic  oracles.  And  the  middle  of  die  Chaldean  intelli- 
gible triad  is  denominated  «*»  «eon,'  i.  e.  eternity,  aud  is  also  perfectly  conformable  to  the 
theology  of  Plato,  at  is  very  satisfactorily  shown  by  Proclus  in  the  third  book  of  the  following 
work.  According  to  the  Chaldeans  therefore,  the  a-ones  are  Gods  ;  and  considered  as  the  exem- 
plars of  the  risible  universe,  they  are  analogous  to  the  ideas  of  Plato,  which  also  are  Gods,  as  is 
evident  from  the  Parmenides  of  that  philosopher.1  According  to  Paul  too,  as  die  teones  are  the 
i  of  the  visible  world,  they  must  be  beings  of  a  much  higher  order  than  angels,  and  con- 
be  Gods ;  productive  power  being  one  of  the  great  characteristics  of  a 


Again,  m  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesiaiis,  chap.  i.  v.  21.  Paul  says  that  God  has  exalted  Christ 
«  for  »»»/»«»  every  principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion,"  mftan  s-arq;  agW  **» 
i  Suwumsw  «"  wgtvnrrtf.  And  in  the  6th  chapter  and  12th  verse  be  conjoins  with  princi- 
powera,  the  rulers  of  the  world,  i.  e.  the  seven  planets,  «-po(  to;  ufxaf,  tqo;  t«$  #fow- 
'jet  t*{  xtsaftQxqttTogai.    Augustut'  c  oof  esses  that  he  is  ignorant  what  the  difference  is 
between  those  four  words,  (principality,  power,  might,  and  dominion,)  in  which  the  Aposde  Paul 
seems  to  comprehend  all  the  celestial  society.    "  Quid  inter  se  distent  quatuor  Ula  vocabula, 
quibua  univcraam  ipsam  caelestem  societatem  videtur  Apostolus  esse  complexus,  dicant  qui  poasunt, 

Trallianos)  speaks  of  the  angelic  orders,  the  diversities  of  archangels  and  armies,  the  differences  of 
the  orders  characterised  by  might  and  dominion,  of  thrones  and  powers,  the  magnificence  of  the 
etonet*  and  the  transcendency  of  Cherubim  and  Seraphim,"  tuu  yoy  ryes  eu  xaS'  o,  ri  &tS§fuu,  xai 
Uirau.ai  vofir  r»  treufana,  xjxi  toj  ayytKtn.au  T«{"5>  »«  t«j  rauv  agyayytA**  not  OTftmsv  rfoMwyo;, 

■  Proelos  begins  the  ilxth  book  of  die  following  werk  with  o  Wring  that  he  hat  celebrated  in  the  preceding  book  the 
bebdanadlc  «m  at  the  intellect  sal  Godj,  The  <tetut  therefore-,  thouth  the  cause  of  then  rxiits  in  the  intelligible,  pro. 
perly  belong  to  the  Intellectual  order  j  and  Ike  Deainrgiu  or  artificer  of  the  universe  tabmts  at  the  extremlly  of  that 
order.  Bat  the  deminrgni  according  to  Orpbew,  prior  to  lbs nuVrication  of  the  world  absorbed  in  himself  Pbanet  the 
exemplar  of  the  nriTene.  Hence  he  became  fell  of  Idea*  of  which  the  form,  la  theseasible  anWene  are  the  images.  And 
as  all  katellectaal  natarn  are  ia  each,  it  is  evident  Ibal  tlurngt  wtiek  art  m  ic«r«  g  mental  fnm  tkc 
conlunnably  to  the  »«*<-Ttiun  of  Ptnl. 

1  I  refer  the  reader  who  is  dreiroas  of  being  folly  conviaeed  of  this  to  the  notei  accompanying  my  t 
dialogue,  in  vol.  3  of  any  Plato. 
5  Ad  Leerentium,  c.  ifi. 

•HoreweseotUe-eae.areackaowledf.dby  trenssos  to  be  beings  of  so . 


Digitized  by  Google 


>»>  IMTIODDCTIOW. 


The  opinion  of  Grotius'  therefore,  is  highly  probable,  that  the  Jews  obtained  the  names  of 
Powers,  Dominations,  and  Principalities,  from  their  Babylonic  captivity;  ami  Gale  in  his  notes  on 
Iamblichos*  says,  that  certain  passages  of  Zoroaster  and  Ostanes  cited  by  the  author  of  Arithm. 
Theolog.  confirm  this  opinion  of  Grotius-  Indeed,  the  appellation  of  aftpu  principle*,  which  are 
the  first  of  the  four  powers  mentioned  by  Paul,  was  given  by  the  < 
called  by  the  Grecian  uWogists  supermundane  and  assimilative,  the  nature  of  i 
by  Produs  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  following  work ;  and  Prod  us  in  the  fourth  book  of  bis  MS. 
Commentary  On  the  Parmenides  of  Plato  shows  that  the  order  of  Gods  denominated  roersc  nmt 
»o»f4f,  intelligible  and  at  the  tome  time  intellectual,  is  according  to  the  Chaldean  oracles'  princi- 
pally characterized  by  domination.  In  proof  of  this,  the  two  following  oracles  are  cited  by  him, 
the  first,  concerning  the  empyrean,  and  the  , 


EiMfi  hvknwr;  wrrgof  mini&t  /buAi. 

i.  e.  "  All  things  yield  ministrant  to  the  intellectual  prcsters  of  intellectual  fire,  through  (he  per- 
wiU  of  the  father."  And 


i.  e.  "  But  likewise  such  as  are  m  subjection  to  the  material  Synoches.'* 

Farther  still,  Paul  m  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  chap.  viii.  v.  38,  says,  "  For  1  am 
that  neither  death  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things 
to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  wparate  us  from  the  love 
of  God,  &c."  From  this  arrangement  therefore,  it  is  evident  that  principalities  and  powers  are 
not  the  same  with  angels ;  and  as  according  to  Paul  they  are  beings  *o  exalted,  that  in  his  Epistle 

•  Ad  Cap.  IB.  sftattfcaL 
>  D«  My»t.  ».  «*6. 

:  .Hm  my  Collection  of  tbt*«  Or»de»  in  th«  old  Montldy  Mag»»D*. 

«  The  SyuKlK.  fo™  tht  secoed  triad  of  Uw  mUUir.,bW,  aad  at  UM  sum  USM  iataOectusI  trdei  of  God.. 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


Co  the  Epb«i»ft.,he  could  not  find  nn>  thing  more  magnificent  lu  say  of  Christ,  than  that  he 
is  raised  even  above  them,  it  follows  that  ihey  must  be  Gods,  since  they  are  superior  to  the  angelic 
order.  It  is  remarkable  too,  that  he  courtages  height  and  depth  (vfout  »**  fia6a;)  with  | 
ties  and  powers  ;  and        is  one  of  the  *o««  a«  curdiug  to  the  Valentinians. 


In  the  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  likewise,  chap.  viii.  v.  j.  Pmil  t  xprrs*ly  assert*  that  tier* 
is  a  divine  multitude.  For  be  says,  «  Though  there  be  that  arc  called  (  W»,  whether  in  heaven  or 
in  earth,  fas  there  l>e  Gods  many  uud  Lord,  many  ;)"  i„  the  pu.cuthcsi,  of  which  verse,  it  i»  incon- 
trovertibly  evident  that  he  adn.its  the  existence  of  a  plurality  of  Gods,  though  as  weU  as  the 
heathens  he  believed  that  .  ue  Coa  only  m  supreme  and  the  father  of  all  things.  Nor  am  I  singu- 
lar in  asserting  that  this  wa,  admitted  by  Paul.  For  the  Pwido-Dionysius  the  Arcopagile  in  the 
second  oliapterof  his  treatise  O.,  the  Divi::e  Name*  observe!  concerning  what  is  here  said  by  Paul 
a*  follows  :  «  Again,  from  the  deife  ev^y  of  God,  by  which  «vry  thing  according  to  its  »bili:y 
become,  dciform,  many  Gods  are  generate □  :  in  consequence  of  which  there  appears  and  ia  said  to 
be  a  separation  and  multiplication  of  ihe  one  [spireme]  God.  Nc\eilhelc?s,  God  himself,  who  is 
the  chief  deity,  and  is  supereiiehlially  die  suprcm-,  is  >till  one  G  mI,  remaining  impartible  w  the 
Gods  distributed  from  him,  united  to  iiimsdf,  unmiugleH  witli  th*  many,  and  void  of  multitude." 
And  he  afterwards  adds,  "  mat  litis  was  in  a  transcendent  manner  understood  by  Paul,  who  was 
the  leader  both  of  him  and  hli  preceptor,  to  divine  illumination,"  in  the  above  cited  verse.  And, 
«  that  in  divine  natures,  unions  vanquish  and  precede  separations,  and  yet  nevertheless  tbey  are' 
united,  after  the  separation  wliich  does  not  in  proceeding  depart  fioru  the  one,  and  is  unical."1  Pad 
therefore,  according  to  this  Dionysiu*,  considered  the  Gods,  conformably  to  Plato  and  the  best  of 
his  disciples,  as  deiform  processions  from  the  one,  and  which  at  the  same  time  that  they  have  a  dis- 
tinct subsistence  from,  are  profoundly  united  to  their  great  producing  cause.  Dionysius  also 
employs  tlie  very  same  expression  which  Proclus  continually  uses  when  speaking  of  the  separation 
of  the  Gods  from  iheir  source  ;  for  he  says  -bat  the  divine  multitude  rsv  „„,  i.  e.  doe, 

not  depart  from,  but  abides  in  the  on.  Hence  Proclus  in  the  fifth  book  of  his  MS  Commentary 
Oo  the  Parmenides  of  Plato,  speaking  of  tlie  divine  unities  says,  "  Whichever  among  these  you 
assume,  it  is  the  same  with  ihe  others,  because  all  of  them  are  in  each  other,  and  are  rooted  in  tht 

•  IUU.  rn  ,(  um  rw  M»  Jw  r.w„.,f  *,„  fu.  urn. «,  Tw  ^  , 

rr>;  —  «x^«r.:.       „vt.  „.,,*,.e  „»,„{ ,  ,„>K  %fua  „,  „„  „t  T„  4llM  ,  ' 


»t.      rx,  K..  r-f  nr.  tw.         ..  „.„,;        l„^rmn  «..,„,,„  w  ,r«T.a.:.„,  v..  «...  w„,  ,,t., 

S«i-».        *U7.  .V  TW  „H  ...»^T,r„  „.  *«,.#,». 

Proc-  Vol.  I.  rf 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ufi  miKODUCTlOlt. 

Mr.  For  u  1mm  by  their  •ummiu  (i.  a.  tbeir  rooU)  we  fixed  in  lb*  earth,  and  through  the*  are 
earthly,  after  the  wine  manner  al*o  divine  nature*  are  rooted  by  their  aumaiu  m  the  one,  and  each 
of  then  ia  a  unity  aad  one,  through  uncoofuaed  union  with  the  one  ittdf."  H*  ya*  m,  rwrm  km- 
fiji,  tv  camp  rmi  aXXtuc  Aop£«n«,  turn  wturai  hi  n  «AAaAjuf  ttrt,  xcu  m^orreu  rueru  Kmtang 
yaq  ra  hvlpa  Taif  Montn  K»gw$«jf  mSgvrrai  Tp  yy,  xcu  i«ti  yima  x«t"  txuraf,  Toy  sutov  Tpoiroy  imu  t»  ftia 
nu<  Mimr*  ««f*n]Ttv  iM^itwM  t»  r»i,  mi  m««ym>  «vrwy  rv«f  «m,  am  r»,  Si«  ran       t»  **  awtiyxuro* 


Thia  Dioayaiui,  who  certainly  lived  posterior  to  Proclus,  became  he  continually  borrow*  from 
kia  worki,  barbaroutly  confounding  that  scientific  arrangement  of  theae  deiform  pioceesions 
from  I  he  -one,  which  is  so  admirably  unfolded  by  Proctus  in  the  following  work,  classes 
i\vem  a*  follows,  like  first  order,  according  to  him,  conaist*  of  Seraphim,  Cherubim,  and 
Thrones.  The  second  of  the  divine  essence*  characterized  by  dominion,  might,  and  power. 
Ami  tba  third  of  Principalities,  Archangels,  end  Angels.  Hence  he  haa  transferred  the  character- 
ise* of  the  iotclIigibU  triad  of  Goda  to  Seraphim,  Cherubim,  and  Thrones.  For  symmetry, 
train,  aad  beastly,  which  characterize  this  triad,  are  raid  by  Plato  in  the  Phikbua  to  subsist 
ia  the  veetibule  of  the  good ;  (eri  u*»  tcij  t<w  mytAov  m  *Sig  wjotupoif  ttttrrotm)  and  Dionyskis  says1 
•f  bis  first  order  that  "it  it  as  it  were  arranged  in  the  vestibule*  of  deify."  Goodness,  wisdom, 
aad  beauty  also,  are  ebowo  by  Proclu*  in  the  third  book  of  the  following  work  to  belong  to  the 
intelligible  triad;  goodness  to  it*  summit,  wisdom  to  the  middle  of  it,  and  6t««ry  to  its  extremity. 
And  Diowyaiua  aays,  that  according  to  the  Hebrews,  the  word  Cherubim  signifies  a  multitude  of 
knowledge,  or  an  efution  of  witdom,  ta*  it  X'r^^r*  ymermt,  a  yvvn  n^tmf.  The 

characteristics  of  the  Gods  called  wirrai  sum  rwaai  intelligible  and  at  the  tame  time  intellectual, 
and  of  the  Gods  that  arc  otisoi  intellectual  alone,  be  appear*  to  buvc  transferred  to  hi*  middle  triad 
which  is  characterized  by  dominion,  might,  and  power.  Aad  be  has  adapted  hi*  third  triad  consist- 
ing of  Principalities,  Jrchaitgels,  and  Angelt,  to  the  supermundane,  liberated,  and  mundane 
orders  of  Gods.  For  the  supermundane  Goda  are  called  by  Proclus  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  fol- 
lowing work  «»x<u  Principalities,  or  rulert,  which  is  the  word  employed  by  Dionjsius  and  Paul. 
Aud  the  mundane  God*  are  said  by  Proclu*  (in  Parmenid.)  to  be  the  sources  of  a  winged  life,  and 
angels  are  celebrated  by  Dionysius  as  having  Brings.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  Dtonysius  has  accom- 
modated the  peculiarities  of  the  different  orders  of  God*  to  the  nine  orders  which  be  denominates 
celestial  powers  ;  and  his  arrangement  has  been  adopted  by  all  succeeding  Christian  theologiata. 

m>  fin  vty&ZwMH  yt>«^«f  Jt»/«t«t,      turn?  nmn  um.,wMMf»  *•»  rv  »|«rx«»'.   D«  CoUatt.  Mitrarch. 

c.ip.  7. 


Digitized  by  Google 


IrfTBODtfCTlOH.  Xivii 


■ 


Vestiges  therefor*  of  the  theology  of  Plato  nay  be  seen  both  i.  the  Jewish  u 
tad  in  a  similar  manner,  a  resemblance  m  the  religions  of  all  other  nations  to  it  might  be  easily 
pointed  out,  and  it*  universality  be  clearly  demonstrated.  Omitting  however,  •  discussion  of  this 
kind  for  the  preterit,  I  (hall  farther  observe  respecting  this  theology,  that  the  deification  of  dead 
men,  and  the  worshipping  men  at  Gods  form  no  part  of  it  when  it  ia  eooaidered  according  to  it* 
getrume  purity.  Numerous  instances  of  the  truth  of  thu  might  be  adduced,  but  I  shall  mennon  for 
thu  purpose,  as  unexceptionable  witnesses,  the  writings  of  Plato,  the  Golden  Pythagoric  wees/ 
and  the  treatise  of  Plutarch  On  Isis  and  Osixi*.  All  the  works  of  Plato  indeed,  evmce  the  truth 
of  this  position,  but  this  is  particularly  manifest  from  his  Laws.  The  Gulden  verses  order,  that  the 
immortal  Gods  be  honoured  first  as  (hey  are  disposed  by  law  ;  afterwards  the  illastrious  Heroes), 
under  which  appellation,  the  author  of  the  verses  comprehends  also  angels  and  daemon*  property  v 
to  called  :  and  in  the  last  place  the  terrestrial  damons,  i.  e.  such  good  men  as  transcend  in  virtue  the 
But  to  honour  the  Gods  as  they  are  disposed  by  taw,  is,  as  Hieroele*  observe*, 
i  they  are  arranged  by  their  fabricator  and  father  j  and  this  ia  to  honour  them  a* 
beings  superior  to  man.  Hence,  to  honour  inert,  however  excellent  they  may  be,  as  Gods,  is  not  to 
honour  the  Gods  according  to  the  rank  in  which  they  are  placed  by  their  Creator,  for  it  is  con- 
founding the  divine  with  the  human  nature,  and  is  thus  acting  directly  contrary  to  the  Pythagorie 

•  "  Diogenes  Laertius  says  of  Pythagoras,  Tkat  he  charged  kit  ditcipUt  net  to  grot  equal  drgreu  of  honour  I*  Ms 
iiodt  and  heroes.  Herodotus  (in  Euterpe)  says  of  the  Greeks,  Thai  they  worthtpptd  Ucrtvlu  two  meyt,  mimjs 
imnurtal  dcxty  and  to  they  HfriSrtJ  to  Mik  :  ami  another  at  a  Hero,  and  to  they  celebrated  hit  memory.  Isoerata* 

(Enoom.  Helen.)  distinguishes  between  the  honours  of  heroes  and  Gods,  when  he  speaks  of  Menelaus 
and  Helena.  But  the  distinction  is  no  where  more  fully  expressed  than  in  the  Greek  inscription  upon 
she  statue  of  RegUla,  wife  to  Herodes  Atticu*.  as  Salmasiua  thinks,  which  was  set  up  in  his  temple 
at  Triopium,  and  taken  from  tha  statue  itself  by  Sirroondus;  where  it  is  said,  That  tka  had  ntUhar  tka 
konour  of  a  mortal,  nor  ytt  that  which  vat  proper  to  the  Goth :  n>i  turn  •»»*•<;,  m*~f       *«•»'»  It  usilll  by 

the  inscription  of  Herodes,  and  by  the  testament  of  Epicteta  extant  in  Greek  in  the  Collection  of  Inscription*, 
that  it  was  in  the  power  of  particular  families  to  keep  festival  days  in  honour  of  seme  of  their  own  family,  and  ra 
give  ktroiaU  konourt  to  th.-m.  In  that  noble  inscription  at  Venice,  we  find  three  days  appointed  every  year  to 
be  kept,  and  a  confraternity  established  for  that  purpose  with  the  laws  of  it.  The  first  day  to  bo  observed  in 
honour  of  die  Mutes,  and  sacrifices  to  be  ofJcred  to  them  as  dritiej.  The  second  and  third  days  in  honour  of  the 
Scroti  <>f  the  family ;  between  which  honour  and  tkat  of  deities,  the/  shewed  the  difference  by  th?  distance  of 
time  between  them,  and  tho  preference  given  to  the  other.  But  wherein  soever  the  differmca  lay,  that  there  w 
n  mttincliun  acknowledged  among  them  spears  by  this  passage  of  Valerius  in  his  excellent  oration  extant  in 
i>iouyaius  llalicainass.  Antiq  Roiu.  lit>.  11.  p.  694.  I  call,  says  Ua,the  Godt  toaUxtt,mhou  tem/>letand oitareamr 
■amUy  hat,  uurthipped  a  ilk  conmnn  tocrifcet;  and  next  after  them,  J  eoil  tka  Ganii  of  our  natation,  to  whom 
.  e  give  lHT.r{  f^ij,  the  tetond  honenrt  nest  to  the  Gods,  as  Celsus  calls  those  w^  tka  duo 

honmri  that  belong  to  the  lower  damom.  From  which  we  take  notice,  that  the  Heathens  did  not  confound  all 
'"'greet  of'  divina  wonkip,  giving  to  the  lowest  object  the  same  which  they  supposed  to  be  due  to  the  calnttai 
deities,  or  the  supreme  Gad.  So  tnat  if  the  distinction  of  divine  worship  will  excuse  from  Idolatry,  the  Heathens 
were  not  to  blame  for  iL"  See  StilttngHeefs  answer  to  a  book  entitled  Catholic*  bo  Idolater*,  p.  510,8 18,&c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


xnv'di  INTRODUCTION. 

precept.  Plutarch  too  in  his  above-mentioned  treatise  most  forcibly  and  clearly  shows  the  impiety 
of  worshipping  men  as  Gods,  as  is  evident  from  die  following  extract : 

"  Those  therefore,  wbo  tliink  that  things  of  this  kind  [i.  e.  fabulous  stories  of  the  Gods  as  if  they 
were  men]  are  but  so  many  commemorations  of  the  actions  and  disasters  of  kings  and  tyrants,  who 
through  transcendency  in  virtue  or  power,  inscribed  die  title  of  divinity  on  their  renown,  and  after- 
wards fell  into  great  calamities  and  misfortunes,  these  employ  the  most  easy  method  indeed  of 
eluding  the  story,  and  not  badly  transfer  things  of  evil  report,  from  the  Gods  to  men ;  and  they 
are  assisted  in  so  doing  by  the  narrations  themselves.  For  the  Egyptians  relate,  that  Hermes  was 
as  to  his  body,  with  one  arm  longer  than  the  other;  that  Typhon  was  in  his  complexion  red;  but 
Orus  white,  and  Osiris  black,  as  if  they  had  been  by  uature  men.  Farther  still,  lliey  also  call 
Otiria  a  commander,  and  Canopus  a  pilot,  from  whom  they  say  the  star  of  that  name  was  denomi- 
nated. The  ship  likewise,  which  the  Greeks  call  Argo,  being  the  image  of  die  ark  of  Osiris,  and 
which  therefore  in  honour  of  it  is  become  a  constellation,  they  make  to  ride  not  far  from  Orion  and 
the  Dog  ;  of  which  they  consider  the  one  as  sacred  to  Orus,  but  the  other  to  Isis. 

"  I  fear,  however,  that  this  [according  to  the  proverb]  would  be  to  move  things  immoveable,  and 
to  declare  war,  not  ouly,  as  Simouides  says,  against  a  great  length  of  time,  but  also  against  many 
nations  and  families  of  mankind  wbo  are  under  the  influence  of  divine  inspiration  through  piety  to 
these  Gods;  and  would  not  in  any  respect  fall  short  of  transferring  from  heaven  to  earth,  such  grta! 
and  venerable  names,  and  of  thereby  shaking  and  dissolving  that  worship  and  belief,  which  has  been 
implanted  in  almost  all  men  from  their  very  birth,  would  be  opening  great  doors  to  the  tribe  o# 
atheists,  who  convert  divine  into  human  concerns;  and  would  likewise  afford  a  large  license  to  the 
impostures  of  Eucuicrus  of  Messina,  who  devised  certain  memoirs  of  an  incredible  and  fictitious 
'  mythology,*  and  thereby  spread  every  kind  of  atheism  through  the  globe,  by  inscribing  all  the 
received  God»,  tvithout  any  discrimination,  by  the  names  of  generals,  naval-captain*,  and  kingt, 
who  lived  iu  remote  perituh  of  time.  He  further  adds,  that  they  arc  recorded  in  golden  characters, 
in  a  certain  country  called  Panchoa,  at  which  neither  any  llarburian  or  Grecian  ever  arrived, 
except  Euemcnis  alone,  who,  as  it  beems,  sailed  to  the  Pnnchuaus  and  Tiiphyllians,  that  neither 
have,  nor  ever  bad  a  being.  Ami  though  the  gnat  actions  of  Semiramis  are  celebrated  by  the 
Assyrians,  and  those  of  Scs-jstris  in  Egypt ;  and  though  the  Phrygians  even  to  the  present  time,  call 

'  B  .Hi  Arnobius  therefore-  and  Mimrci-.:*  Felix  wtrc  very-  unfortunate  in  .;i:e:;-g  this  impov.or  to  prove  that 
ir.e4.i<rti»Af  the  ancients  i*d  formerly  lean  men.  Vid.  Artw/b.  lib.  -t.  .V>r:;«i  Cem«,  «  .Mlnxii  Fc«:«;» 
O.-is-i.i,  J>.  3j0.  8vo.  r*i'W'-,  KH'j. 


INTRODUCTION. 


tltoir  ancient  king*,  whom  some  call  Masdes,  was  a  brave  and  powerful  man  ;  and  farther  atill, 
though  Cyrus  among  the  Persians,  and  Alexander  atnon^  the  Macedonians,  proceeded  in  their  vic- 
tories, almost  at  far  as  to  the  boundaries  of  the  earth,  yet  they  ouly  retain  the  name  of  good  king*, 
and  arc  remembered  as  such,  [and  not  as  God*.] 

"  But  if  certain  persons,  inflated  by  ostentation,  as  Plato  soys,  having  their  soul  at  one  and  the 
same  lime  inflamed  with  youth  and  ignorance,  have  insolently  assumed  the  appellulion  of  Gods,  and 
had  temples  erected  in  their  honour,  yet  this  opinion  of  them  flourished  but  for  a  short  time,  and 
afterwards  they  were  charged  with  vanity  and  arrogance,  in  conjunction  with  impiety  and  lawless 
con  luct  j  and  thus, 

Like  smoke  they  flew  away  with  swift-pae'd  fate. 

And  being  dragged  from  temples  and  altars  like  fugitive  slave*,  they  have  now  nothing  left 
them,  but  their  monuments  and  tombs.  Hence  Arttigonus  the  elder  said  to  one  llermodotus,  who 
had  celebrated  him  in  his  poems  us  the  offspring  of  the  sun  ami  a  God,  'he  who  empties  my 
close-stool-pan  knows  no  such  thing  of  me.'  Very  properly  also,  did  I.)  sip  pus  the  sculptor  blame 
Apelles  the  painter,  for  drawing  the  picture  of  Alexander  with  a  lliunder-bolt  in  his  hand,  whereas 
he  had  represented  him  with  a  spear,  the  glory  of  which,  as  being  true  and  proper,  no  time  would 
take  away." 

In  another  part  of  the  same  work  also,  he  admirably  reprobates  the  impiety  of  making  the  Gods 
to  be  things  inanimate,  which  was  very  common  with  Latin  writers  of  the  Augustan  age,  and  of  the 
ages  that  accompanied  the  decliue  and  fall  of  the  Roman  empire.  But  what  he  says  on  this  sub- 
ject is  as  follows  : 

"  In  the  s-ccond  plac*.  which  is  of  still  greater  consc-nuence,  men  should  be  careful,  and  very 
much  afraid,  lest  before  they  are  aware,  they  tear  in  pieces  and  dissolve  divine  natures,  into  blast* 
of  wind,  streams  of  water,  semination*,  t  arings  of  land,  accidents  of  the  earth,  and  mutations  of 
the  season*,  us  those  do  «  ho  male  Bacchus  to  be  vt  ine,  ami  Vulcan  flame.  Cleanlhes  also  some- 
where says,  that  Persephoue  or  Proserpine  is  the  spirit  or  air  that  pasttt  through  ($tf«/*n»r)  the 
fruits  of  the  earth,  and  is  then  tlaitt,  (4cnv5firvc>'.)    Aud  a  certain  poet  says  of  reapers, 

Then  when  the  youth  the  limb*  of  Ceres  cut. 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


For  the*;  men  do  not  m  any  respect  differ  from  those  who  conceive  the  tail*,  the  cable*,  and  the 
anchor  of  a  ship,  to  be  the  pilot,  the  yarn  and  the  web  to  be  the  weaver,  and  the  bowl,1  or  the 
mead,  or  the  ptisan,  to  be  the  physician.  But  they  also  produce  dire  and  atheistical  opinions,  by 
•firing  the  names  of  Gods  to  natures  and  things  deprived  of  sense  and  Soul,  and  that  are  necessarily 
destroyed  by  men,  who  are  in  want  of  and  use  them.  For  it  is  not  portable  to  conceive  that  these 
things  are  Gods;  since,  neither  can  any  thing  be  a  God  to  men,  which  is  deprived  of  soul,  or  is 
subject  to  human  power.  From  these  things  however,  we  are  led  to  conceive  those  beings  to  be 
Gods,  who  both  use  them  and  impart  them  to  us,  and  snpply  them  perpetually  and  without  ceasing. 
Nor  do  we  conceive  that  the  Gods  who  bestow  these,  aie  different  in  different  countries,  nor  that 
some  of  them  are  peculiar  to  the  Barbarians,  but  others  to  the  Grecians,  nor  that  some  are 
southern,  and  others  northern ;  but  as  the  sun  and  moon,  the  heavens,  the  land,  end  the  $e«,  are 
common  to  all  men,  yet  are  differently  denominated  by  different  nations;  so  the  one  reason  that 

preside  over  all  nations,  have  different  appellations  and  honours  assigned  them  according  to  law  by 
different  countries.  Of  those  also  that  have  been  consecrated  to  their  service,  some  employ 
obscure,  but  others  clearer  symbols,  not  without  danger  thus  conducting  our  inteDectual  concep- 
tions to  the  apprehension  of  divine  natures.  For  some,  deviating  from  the  true  meaning  of  these 
symbols,  have  entirely  slipt  into  superstition  ;  and  others  again  flying  from  superstition  as  a  quag- 
mire, have  unaware  fallcu  upon  atheism  as  on  a  precipice.  Heucc,  in  order  to  avoid  these  danger*, 
it  is  especially  necessary  that  resuming  the  reasoning  of  Philosophy  as  our  guide  to  mystic  know- 
ledge, we  should  conceive  piously  of  every  thing  that  is  said  or  done  in  religion ;  lot  that,  as 
Theodorus  said,  while  he  extended  his  arguments  with  his  right  hand,  some  of  his  auditors  received 
them  with  their  left,  so  we  should  fall  into  dangerous  errors,  by  receiving  what  the  laws  have  vvr'l 
instituted  about  sacrifices  and  festivals  in  a  manner  different  from  their  original  intention." 

The  Emperor  Julian,  as  well  as  Plutarch  appears  to  have  been  perfectly  aware  of  this  confusion 
in  the  religion  of  the  Heathens  arising  from  the  dedication  of  men,  and  in  the  fragments  of  his 
treatise  against  the  Christians,  preserved  by  Cyril,  he  speaks  of  it  as  follows  :  "  If  any  one.  wishes 
to  consider  the  truth  respecting  you  [Christians,]  he  will  find  that  your  impiety  is  composed  of  the 
Judaic  audacity,  and  the  indolence  and  cuii/mion  of  the  Ileathtnt.  For  deriving  from  both,  not 
that  which  is  most  beautiful,  but  the  worst,  you  have  fabricated  a  web  of  evils.  Willi  tl.. 
Hebrew*  ndeed,  there  are  accurate  and  venerable  laws  pertaining  to  religion,  ami  inuuiiieral.lv 
precepts  which  require  a  in-jst  holy  life  and  deliberate  choice.  But  ulnvn  the  Jewish  legislator 
forbids  the  serving  all  the  Gods,  and  eisjoius  the  worship  of  one  alone,  whose  portion  is  Jacob,  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


IKT  ft«»«C*IOH.  Uli 

Israel  ttwlim  of  k»  nafc*ritsmce,  end  not  only  say*  tkos,  but  also  omits  to  odd,  I  think,  yea 
not  revise  the  Cod.,  the  detestable  wickedness  and  Mdacity  of  those  in  after  times,  wiping  to  take 
•way  all  religious  reverence  from  (be  mukitude,  (bought  that  not  to  worship  should  be  followed  by 
blaspheming  the  Gods.  Thia  you  hare  alone  tl>e»ce  derived  ;  bat  there  ia  no  srtnihivtde  in  any 
ihiug  else  between  you  bik!  them.  Hence,  from  the  innovation  of  the  Hebrews,  you  bare  seized 
blasphemy  toward*  the  venerable  Goda;  but  from  our  religion  you  hare  coat  tuidt  reverence  to 
tvx'rtf  nature  more  excellent  thou  man,  and  the  iov€  of  paternal  tHetttsstes - 

"  So  great  au  apprehension  indeed,  rays  Dr.  Stillingfleet,'  had  the  Heathen?  of  ihe  Mceaarty  of 
appropriate  acts  of  divine  worihip,  that  some  of  them  have  chosen  to  die,  rather  than  to  give  them 
to  what  they  did  not  believe  to  be  God.  We  have  a  remarkable  rtorv  to  this  purpose  in  Arrian 
and  Curtius*  concerning  CaUiathenes.  Alexander  arriving  at  that  degree  of  vanity,  as  to  desire 
to  have  divine  worship  given  him,  and  the  matter  being  started  out  of  design  among  the  courtiers, 
either  by  Anaxarchua,  aa  Arrian,  or  Cleo  the  Sicilian,  as  Curtius  says ;  and  the  way  of  doing  it 
proposed,  viz.  by  incense  and  prostration;  CaOUtheaea  vehemently  opposed  it,  at  that  which 
would  confound' the  difference  of  human  and  divine  worship,  which  had  been  preserved  inviolable 
among  them.  The  worship  of  the  Gods  had  been  kept  up  in  temples,  with  altars,  and  images,  and 
sacrifices,  and  hymns,  and  prostrations,  and  such  like ;  but  it  it  by  no  meant  fitting,  says  he,  for 
U4  to  confound  thete  things,  either  by  lifting  up  nun  to  the  honours  of  the  Gods,  or  depressing  the 
Gods  to  the  honours  of  men.  For  neither  would  Alexander  suffer  any  man  to  usurp  his  royal  dig- 
nity by  the  votes  of  men ;  how  much  more  justly  may  the  Gods  disdain  for  any  man  to  take  their 
houonra  to  himself.  And  it  appears  by  Plutarch,1  that  the  Greeka  thought  it  a  mean  and  base 
thing  for  any  of  them,  when  sent  on  an  embassy  to  the  kings  of  Persia,  to  prostrate  themselves 
before  them,  because  this  was  only  allowed  among  them  in  divine  adoration.  Therefore,  says  he, 
when  Pelopidas  and  Ismenias  were  sent  to  Arlax erics,  Pelopidas  did  nothing  unworthy,  but 
Ismeniaa  let  fall  bis  ring  to  the  ground,  and  stooping  for  that  was  nought  to  make  his  adoration ; 
which  was  altogether  as  good  a  shift  as  Use  Jesuits  advising  the  crucifix  to  be  held  in  the  Mandarin*' 
hands  while  they  made  their  adoration*  in  the  Heathen  temples  in  China. 

"  Conon*  also  refused  to  make  his  adoration,  ns  n  disgrace  to  his  city;  and  Isocrates'  accuses 

'  Answer  to  Catholics  no  Idolaters  Lond.  1876.  p.  tit. 
1  Arrian.de  Exped.  Alex.  I.  4.  et  Curt.  lib.  8. 

•  Viu  Aruxen.  /Elian.  Var.  hist.  lib.  1.  c.  tl. 

♦  Justin,  lib.  6. 
>  Paaegyr. 


: 


Digitized  by  Google 


IXTROBUCTIO  M. 

the  Persians  for  doing  it*  because  hertin  they  shewed,  that  they  despised  the  Gods  rather  than  men, 
by  prostituting  their  honours  to  their  princes.  Herodotus*  mentions  Sperchius  and  Brdis,  who 
could  not  with  the  greatest  violence  bo  brought  to  give  adoration  to  Xerxes,  because  it  was  against 
the  lavs  of  their  country  to  give  divhie  honour  to  men.'  And  Valerius  Maximus*  says,  the  Jthe- 
.  mans  put  Timagorat  to  death  for  doing  it ;  so  strong  an  apprehension  had  possessed  them,  that 
.  the  manner  of  worship  which  the)  used  to  their  Gods,  should  be  preserved  sacred  and  inviolable." 
The  philosopher  Sallusl  also  in  his  treatise  On  the  (Jods  and  the  World  says,  "  It  is  not  unreasona- 
ble to  suppose  that  impiety  is  a  species  of  punishment,  and  that  those  who  bave  had  a  knowledge 
of  the  Gods,  and  yet  despised  ineni,  will  in  another  life  be  deprived  of  this  knowledge.  And  it  is 
requisite  to  make  the  punisliment  of  those  who  have  honoured  their  kings  as  Gods  to  consist  in 
being  expelled  from  the  Gods."' 

When  the  ineffable  transcendency  of  the  first  God,  whith  was  considered  as  the  grand  principle 
in  the  Heathen  theology,  by  iu  most  ancient  promulgators  Orpheus,  Pythagoras,  and  Plato,  was 
forgotten,  this  oblivion  was  doubtless  the  principal  cause  of  dead  men  being  deified  by  the  Pagans. 
Had  they  properly  directed  their  attention  to  this  tram  cendency  they  would  have  perceived  it  to  be 
so  immense  as  to  surpass  eternity,  infinity,  self-subsistence,  and  even  essence  itself,  and  that  these 
in  reality  belong  to  those  veiu-rable  natures  which  are  as  it  were  first  unfolded  into  light  from  the 
unfathomable  depihsof  that  truly  mystic  unknown,  about  which  all  kuowledgc  is  refunded  into 
ignorance.  For  as  Simplicius  justly  observes,  "  It  is  requisite  that  he  who  ascends  to  the  princi- 
ple of  things  should  investigate  whether  it  is  possible  there  cau  be  any  thing  better  than  the  sup- 
posed principle  :  and  if  something  more  excellent  is  found,  the  same  enquiry  should  again  be 
made  respecting  that,  till  we  arrive  at  the  highest  conceptions,  Uian  which  we  have  no  longer  any 
more  venerable.  Nor  should  we  stop  in  our  asceiit  till  we  find  this  to  be  the  case.  For  then-  is 
no  occasion  to  fear  that  our  progression  will  be  through  an  unsubstantial  void,  by  conceiving  some- 
thing about  the  first  principles  which  is  greater  and  more  transcendent  than  their  nature.  For  it  is 
not  possible  for  our  conceptions  to  take  such  a  mighty  leap  as  to  equal,  and  much  less  to  pass 
beyond  the  dignity  of  the  first  principles  of  things."  He  adds,  '«  This  therefore  is  oue  and  the  best 
extension  [of  the  soul]  to  [ihe  highest]  God,  and  is  as  much  as  possible  irreprel.enrille ;  viz.  to 
know  firmly,  lliat  by  ascribing  to  him  the  n,o.-t  venerable  excellencies  we  can  couceive,  and  the 
mmt  holy  and  primary  names  and  things,  we  ascribe  nothing  to  hi.n  which  is  suitable  to  bis  dignity. 


'  r.ib.T. 

'  l.:h.  6  Cap.  3. 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


xixiii 


It  is  sufficient  however,  to  procure  our  pardon  [for  the  attempt,]  that  we  can  attribute  to  him 
superior.'"  If  it  is  not  possible  therefore  to  form  any  idea,  equal  to  tbe  dignity  of  the 
:  progeny  of  the  ineffable,  i.  e.  of  the  first  principle*  of  things,  how  much  less  can  our 
conceptions  reach  that  thrice  unknown  darkuess,  in  the  reverential  language  of  the  Egyptians,1 
which  is  even  beyond  these?  Had  the  Heathens  therefore  considered  as  they  ought  this  trans- 
cendency of  the  supreme  God,  they  would  never  have  presumed  to  equalize  the  human  with  the 
divine  nature,  and  consequently  would  never  have  worshipped  men  aa'Gods.  Their  theology, 
however,  is  not  to  be  accused  as  the  cause  of  this  impiety,  but  their  forgetfolness  of  the  sub- 
of  its  dogmas,  and  tbe  confusion  with  which  this  oblivion  wa 


r 
i 


lu  the  last  place,  I  wish  to  adduce  a  few  respectable  testimonies  to  prove  that  statues  were  not 
considered  nor  worshipped  by  any  of  the  intelligent  Heathens  as  Gods,  but  as  the  resemblance*  of 
the  Gods,  as  auxiliaries  to  tbe  recollection  of  a  divine  nature,  and  tbe  means  of  procuring  its  assist- 
ance and  favour.  For  this  purpose,  I  shall  first  present  the  reader  with  what  the  philosopher 
Sallust  says  concerning  sacrifices  and  the  honours  which  were  paid  to  the  divinities,  in  his  golden 
treatise  On  the  Gods  and  the  World.  "  The  honours,  says  he,  which  we  pay  to  the  Gods  are  per- 
formed for  the  sake  of  our  advantage  ;  and  since  the  providence  of  the  Gods  is  every  where 
extended,  a  certain  habitude  or  fitness  is  all  that  is  requisite  in  order  to  receive  their  beneficent 
communications.  But  all  habitude  is  produced  through  imitation  and  simiUtude.  He 
imitate  the  heavens,  but  altars  die  earth  ;  statues  resemble  life,  and  on  this  account 
to  animals;  prayers  imitate  that  which  is  intellectual;  but  characters  superior  ineffable  power* ; 
herbs  and  stones  resemble  matter ;  and  animals  which  are  sacrificed  the  irrational  life  of  oar  souls. 
But  from  all  these  nothing  happens  to  the  Gods  beyond  what  they  already  possess ;  for  what  acces- 
sion can  be  made  to  a  divine  nature  ?    But  •  conjunction  with  our  souls  and  the  Gods  is  by  these 


"  I  think  however,  it  will  be  proper  to  add  a  few  things  concerning  sacrifices.    And  in  the  first 

■  Kat  xf  rn  l¥'  ni  "fX*!  »»fimmrm  ^v>'»,  »•  Ivwit  "w  *>  *f*m  m  s/mitunt  «fX'r  "f*  ,l,f**ft  ■»«•» 
fittir,  live  *'  "C  T*r  lmt*f  <x9atpn,  mv  ovxjti  rift»oT<paf  »x«fAn'nai  pi  mm  TV  rnmfinrtt,   Ovti  J*f  niMfiirm  /a* 

xm^JSaTwpuf,  ntu  ***  V9i^fi*tmrm  r»;  9fmc  *fxa(  T'M  •vfwr  nrnmnn;.  Ov  ynf  tmmnr  rqXuirjTH  *ii<\\jun  riiistu  rn{ 

•qurt(*{  mn[,  m;  n*mAnt*i  tj  «fi»  twt  tpmn  *(X""i  •*         «■•  wrif*Tsw  |u*  fafavrs  Vf  aftrrs,  ««•  *t 

Jvmtw  •«t<M(TT»f .  K».  wmnffAn  nyaitn  n  «)»»•«,  hi  ayiwnn,  «o.  «j«T»t-)w,  ui  m^uira,  w  ipjfun  »v*»  nmlnnf 
i.Jo..  £iJ5a.»t,  mi  i^t>n  ■wriSnw^n  «{uw  urn.,  it  vur  I*  wrfif-K,  n  pvtn  iXn.  nuixw  WfTi/w.  Siniplic.  in  Epiet. 
Enchir.  p.  307.  Lond.  1670.  8vo. 

1  Of  the  first  principle,  says  Dam&scius  (in  M.  S.  «f»  "fx4")  the  Egyptians  said  nothing,  but  celebrated  it  a* 
a  darkness  beyond  all  intellectual  conception,  a  thrice  unknown  darkness,  »^nt«/x"  mim—n;  nan;  v*f  «•#« 

SM|m>,  gn*rtv  «y»o»9r>f,  T»t{  ravrt**i4SfA«^ifT':. 

Proc.  Vol.  1.  e 


Digitized  by  Google 


IMtV 


INTRODUCTION. 


place,  fince  we  pones*  every  thing  from  the  Gods,  ami  it  U  but  just  to  offer  the  first  fruits  of  gifts 
to  the  givers  ;  hence,  of  our  possession*  we  offer  the  first  fruitit  through  consecrated  gifts  ;  of  our 
bodies  through  ornaments  ;  and  of  our  life  through  sacrifices.  Besides,  without  sacrifices,  prayers 
are  words  only  ;  but  accompanied  with  sacrifices  they  become  animated  words ;  the  words  indeed 
corroborating  life,  but  life  animating  the  words.  Add  too,  that  the  felicity  of  every  thing  is  its 
proper  perfection  ;  but  the  proper  perfection  of  every  thing  consists  in  a  conjunction  widi  its  cause. 
And  on  this  account  we  pray  that  we  may  be  conjoined  with  the  Gods.  Sbce  therefore  life  pri- 
marily subsists  in  the  Gods,  and  there  is  also  a  certain  human  life,  but  the  latter  desires  to  be 
united  to  the  former,  a  medrum  is  required  ;  for  natures  much  distant  from  each  other  cannot  be 
conjoined  without  a  medium.  And  it  is  necessary  that  the  medium  should  be  similar  to  the  con- 
necteri  natures.  Life  therefore  must  necessarily  be  the  medium  of  life ;  and  hence  men  of  the 
present  day  that  are  happy,  and  all  the  ancirnts,  have  sacrificed  animals.  And  this  indeed  not  rashly, 
but  in  a  manner  accommodated  to  every  God,  with  many  other  ceremonies  respecting  the  cultiva- 
tion of  divinity.'" 

In  the  next  place,  the  elegant  Maximum  Tyrius  admirably  observes  concerning  the  worship  of 
statues '  as  follows  :  "  It  appears  to  me  that  as  external  discourse  has  no  need,  in  order  to  its  com- 
position, of  certain  Phoenician,  or  Ionian,  or  Attic,  or  Assyrian,  or  Egyptian  characters,  but  human 
imbecility  devised  these  marls,  in  which  inserting  its  dulness,  it  recovers  from  them  its  memory ; 
in  like  manner  a  divine  nature  has  no  need  of  statues  or  altars ;  but  human  nature  being  very  imbe- 
cile, aud  as  uiucb  distant  from  divinity  as  earth  from  heaven,  devised  these  symbols,  in  which  it 
inserted  the  names  and  the  renown  of  the  Gods.  Those,  therefore,  whose  memory  is  robust,  and 
who  are  able,  by  directly  extending  their  soul  to  heaven,  to  meet  with  divinity,  have,  perhaps,*  uo 
need  of  statues.  This  race  is,  however,  rare  among  men,  and  in  a  whole  nation  you  will  not  find 
one  who  recollects  divinity,  and  who  is  not  in  want  of  this  kind  of  assistance,  which  resembles  that 
devised  by  writing  masters  for  hoys,  who  give  them  obscure  marks  as  copies ;  by  m  riling  over 

•  See  chap.  15  and  16,  of  my  translation  of  this  excellent  work. 

*  See  Vol.  t  of  my  translation  of  his  Dissertations,  Disserlat.  38,  the  title  of  which  i«,  "  Whether  statues 
should  be  d«dicatcd  to  the  Gods." 

»  The  philosopher  hidoru*  was  a  man  of  this  description,  as  we  are  informed  by  Damnum?  in  the  extracts 
front  his  life  preserved  by  Photius.   For  he  says  of  him  i       ™  .*•>*,,       ,i,  „•  ,vtw(  Tlw>. 

TW?i»T»Kf  trrmt ;  tjvn  Jiipw  aTr^yTf  Mat  Tot***"  tat  r*f  ti  »X>.ff  *  aytatrn;  t/tt  •  ifttf  j  xai  rtm  rturt  $a^i„,  tvaetr  u  mufw 
inf.-  i.»n»  imlsmm,  mi  m**<  y>  nit,  \.  e.  "  He  was  not  willing  to  adore  statues,  hut  approached  to 

the  God.  themselves,  w  ho  aie  inwardly  concealed  not  in  adyta,  but  in  the  occult  itscllj  whatever  it  may  be  of  alt- 
perfect  ignorance.  Uow  therefore  10  them  being  such  did  he  approach  ?  Through  vehement  love,  this  also 
being  occult.  And  what  else  indeed,  could  conduct  him  to  them  than  a  love  which  is  also  unknown  f  What 
my  meaning  i§  those  who  have  experienced  this  love  know ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  reveal  it  by  words  «"1 >* 
no  less  difficult  to  understand  what  it  is." 


Di 


INTRODUCTION. 


«hicb,  their  hand  being  guided  by  that  of  the  matter,  they  become,  through  memory,  accustomed 
to  the  art.  It  appear*  to  me  therefore,  that  legislator*  devised  these  statues  for  men,  as  if  fur  a 
certain  kind  of  boys,  as  tokens  of  the  honour  which  should  be  paid  to  divinity,  und  a  certain 
duction  as  it  were  and  path  to  rcaiiuiscctice. 


He  then  observes,  "  Unit  with  respect  to  the  Barbarian*,  all  of  them  in  like  manner  admit  the 
subsistence  of  divinity,  but  different  nations  among  these  adopt  different  symbols."  After  which  lie 
adds,  "  O  many  and  all-various  statue* !  of  which  some  are  fashioned  by  art,  and  other*  are 
embraced  through  indigcoce :  some  arc  honoured  through  utility,  ami  others  are  venerated  through 
the  astonishment  which  they  excite ;  some  arc  considered  as  divine  tlirough  their  magnitude,  and 
others  are  celebrated  for  their  beauty  !  There  is  not  indeed  any  nice  of  men,  neither  Barbarian  nor 
Grecian,  neither  maritime  nor  continental,  neither  living  a  iwstonil  life,  nor  dwelling  in  cities,  which 
can  endure  t<>  be  without  some  symbols  of  the  hononr  of  the  Gods.  How,  therefore,  dial!  any  one 
discuss  the  question  whether  it  is  proper  that  statues  of  the  Gods  should  be  fabricated  or  not  ?  For 
if  we  were  to  give  laws  to  other  men  recently  sprung  from  the  earth,  aud  dwelling  beyond  our 
boundaries  and  our  air,  or  who  were  fashioned  by  a  certain  Prometheus,  ignorant  of  life,  and  law, 
and  reason,  it  might  perhaps  demand  consideration,  whether  this  race  should  be  permitted  to  adore 
tlicse  spontaneous  statues  alone,  which  are  not  fashioned  from  ivory  or  gold,  aud  which  are  neither 


"  Of  statues  however,  there  is  neither  one  law,  nor  one  mode,  nor  one  art,  nor  one  matter.  For 
the  Greeks  think  it  Jit  to  honour  the  Gods  from  things  the  most  beautiful  in  the  earth,  from  a  pure 
matter,  the  human  form,  and  accurate  art :  and  their  opinion  is  not  irrational  who  fashion  statues  in 
the  human  resemblance.  For  if  the  human  soul  is  most  near  and  most  similar  to  divinity,  it  is  not 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  divinity  would  invest  that  which  is  most  similar  to  himself  with  a  most 
deformed  body,  but  rather  with  one  which  would  be  an  easy  vehicle  to  immortal  souls,  light,  and 
adapted  to  motion.  for  this  alone,  of  all  the  bodies  on  the  earth,  raises  its  summit  on  high,  is 
magnificent,  superb,  and  full  of  symmetry,  neither  astonishing  through  its  magnitude,  nor  terrible 
through  its  strength,  nor  moved  with  difficulty  through  its  weight,  nor  slippery  through  its  smooth- 
ness, nor  repercussivc  through  its  hardness,  nor  groveling  through  its  coldness,  nor  precipitate 
through  its  beat,  nor  inclined  to  swim  through  its  laxity,  nor  feeding  on  raw  flesh  through  its  fero- 
city, nor  on  grass  through  its  imbecility ;  but  is  harmomcally  composed  for  its  proper  works,  and 
is  dreadful  to  timid  animals,  but  mild  to  such  as  arc  brave.  It  ia  also  adapted  to  walk  by  nature, 
but  winged  by  reason,  capable  of  swimming  by  art,  feeds  on  com  and  fruits,  and  cultivates  the 
earth,  is  of  a  good  colour,  stands  firm,  has  a  pleasing  countenance,  and  a  graceful  beard.  In  the 
resemblance  of  such  a  body,  die  Greeks  think  fit  to  honour  the  Gods." 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTBOBUCTION. 


oaks  nor  cedars,  nor  rivers,  nor  bird*,  but  the  rising  sun,  (be  splendid  moon,  the  variegated  heaven, 
the  earth  itself  and  the  air,  all  fire  and  all  water ;  or  shall  we  constrain  these  men  also  to  the  nec ea- 
sily of  honouring  wood,  or  stones  or  images  ?    If,  however,  this  is  the  common  law  of  all  men,  let 

bola  a*  well  as  their  names. 

"  For  divinity  indeed,  the  father  and  fabricator  of  a)i  things,  is  more  ancient  than  the  sun  and  the 
heavens,  more  excellent  than  time  and  eternity,  and  every  flowing  nature,  and  is  a  legislator  with* 
out  law,  ineffable  by  voice,  and  invisible  by  the  eyes.    Not  being  able,  however,  to  comprehend  his 

silver,  to  plants  and  rivers,  to  the  summits  of  mountains,  and  to  streams  of  water ;  desiring  indeed 
to  understand  his  nature,  hut  tlu-ough  imbecility  calling  him  by  the  names  of  such  things  as  appear 
to  us  to  be  beautiful.  And  in  thus  acting,  we  are  affected  in  the  same  manner  as  lovers,  who  are 
delighted  with  surveying  the  images  of  the  objects  of  their  love,  and  with  recollecting  the  lyre,  the 
dart,  and  the  seat  of  these,  the  circus  in  which  they  ran,  and  every  thing  in  short,  whkh  excites  tho 
memory  of  the  beloved  object.  What  then  remains  for  me  to  investigate  and  determine  respecting 
statues  f  only  to  admit  the  subsistence  of  deity.  But  if  the  art  of  Phidias  excite*  the  Greeks  to  the 
recollection  of  divinity,  honour  to  animals  the  Egyptians,  a  river  others,  and  fire  others,  I  do  not 
condemn  the  dissonance  :  let  them  ouly  know,  let  them  only  love,  let  them  only  be  mindful  of  the 
object  they  adore." 

With  respect  to  the  worship  of  animals,  Plutarch  apologizes  for  it  in  the  following  excellent  man- 
ner in  hi,  treatise  On  Isis  and  Osiris. 

"  It  now  remains  that  we  should  speak  of  the  utility  of  these  animals  to  man,  and  of  their  sym- 
bolical meaning ;  some  of  them  partaking  of  one  of  these  only,  hut  many  of  them  of  both.  It  is 
e\idcnl  therefore  tlifit  tilt  El^yptiHns  worsliijir/jcti  tlic  ox^  tlic  she*?^]  sod  tlic  ic b DC Uikk 00  j  OD  3fcCC OUf) t 
of  their  use  and  benefit,  as  the  Letnnians  did  larks,  for  discovering  the  eggs  of  caterpillars  and 
breaking  them ;  and  the  Thessalians  storks,  because,  as  their  land  produced  abundance  of  ser- 
pents, the  storks  destroyed  all  of  tbem  as  soon  as  they  appeared.  Hence  also  ibey  enacted  a  law, 
that  whoever  killed  a  stork  should  be  banished.  But  the  Egyptians  honoured  the  asp,  the  weezle, 
and  the  beetle,  in  consequence  of  observing  in  them  certain  dark  resemblances  of  the  power  of  the 
Gods,  like  that  of  the  sun  in  drops  of  water.  For  at  present,  many  believe  and  assert  that  the 
weezle  engenders  by  the  ear,  and  brings  forth  by  the  mouth,  being  thus  an  image  of  the  generation 
of  reason,  [or  the  productive  principle  of  things.]    But  the  genus  of  beetles  has  no  female;  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


r 

■ 


INTRODUCTION. 


XII VII 


all  the  males  emit  their  sperm  into  a  spherical  piece  of  earth,  which  they  roll  about  thrusting  it 
backwards  with  their  hind  feet,  while  they  themselves  move  forward  ;  just  as  the  sun  appears  to 
revolve  in  a  direction  contrary  to  that  of  the  heavens,  in  coasequence  of  moving  from  west  to  east. 
They  also  assimilated  the  asp  to  a  star,  is  being  esempt  from  old  age,  and  performing  its  motions 
1  by  organs  with  agility  and  ease  Nor  was  the  crocodile  honoured  by  them  without  a 
> ;  but  is  said  to  have  been  considered  by  them  as  •  resemblance  of  divinity,  as  being 
the  only  animal  that  is  without  a  tongue.  For  the  divine  reason  is  unindigent  of  voice,  and  proceed- 
ing through  a  silent  path,  and  accompanied  with '  justice,  conducts  mortal  affairs  according  to  it. 
They  also  say  it  is  the  only  animal  living  in  water  mat  has  the  sight  of  its  eyes  covered  with  a  thin 
film  which  descends  from  his  forehead  so  thjt  he  sees  without  beinsr  seen  which 
r  with  the  first  God.  But  in  whatever  place  the  female  crocodile  may  lay  her 
eggs,  this  may  with  certainty  be  concluded  to  be  the  boundary  of  the  increase  of  the  Nile.  For 
not  being  able  to  lay  their  eggs  in  the  water,  and  fearing  to  lay  them  far  from  it,  they  have  such  an 
accurate  pre-sensation  of  futurity,  that  though  they  enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  river  in  its  access,  during 
the  time  of  their  laying  and  hatching,  yet  they  preserve  their  eggs  dry  and  untouched  by  the  water. 
Tbey  also  lay  sixty  eggs,  are  the  same  number  of  days  in  hatching  them,  and  those  that  are  the 
*em,  live  just  so  many  years ;  which  number  ia  the  first  of  the  measures 


"  Moreover,  of  those  animals  that  were  honoured  for  both  reasons,  we  have  before  spoken  of  the 
dog.  But  the  ibis,  killing  indeed  all  deadly  reptiles,  was  the  first  that  taught  men  the  use  of  medi- 
cal evacuation,  in  consequence  of  observing  that  she  is  after  this  manner  washed  and  purified  by 
herself.  Those  priests  also,  that  are  most  attentive  to  the  laws  of  sacred  rites,  when  they  coose- 
crate  water  for  lustration,  fetch  it  from  that  place  where  the  ibis  had  been  drinking ;  for  ahe  will 
neither  drink  nor  come  near  unwholesome  or  infected  water ;  b  t  with  the  distance  of  her  feet  from 
each  other,  and  her  bill  she  makes  an  equilateral  triangle.  Farther  still,  the  variety  and  mixture  of 
her  black  wings  about  die  white  represents  the  moon  when  she  is  gibbous. 


"  We  ought  not,  however,  to  wonder  if  the  Egyptians  love  such  slender  similitudes,  since  the 
Greeks  also,  both  in  their  pictures  and  statues,  employ  many  such  like  resemblances  of  the  Gods. 
Thus  in  Crete,  there  was  a  statue  of  Jupiter  without  ears.  For  it  is  fit  that  he  who  is  the  ruler 
and  lord  of  all  things,  should  bear  no  one.*    Phidias  also  placed  a  dragon  by  the  statue  of 

•  Instead  of  «»       I  read 

*  i.  e.  Should  be  perfectly  impartial. 


Digitized  by  Google 


xxxviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


Minerva,  and  a  snail  by  that  of  Venus  at  Elis,  to  show  that  virgins  require  a  guard,  and  that  keep* 
ing  at  home  and  silence  become  married  women.    But  the  trident  of  Neptune  is  a  symbol  of  the 
third  region  of  the  world,  which  the  sea  possesses,  having  an  arrangement  after  the  heavens  and  the 
air.    Hence  also,  they  thus  denominated  Amphitritc  and  the  Tritons.   The  Pythagoreans  likewise 
adorned  numbers  and  figures  with  the  appellations  of  the  Gods.    For  they  called  the  equilateral 
triangle  Minerva  Coryphagenes,  or  begotten  from  the  summit,  and  Tritogeneia,  because  it  is  divided 
by  three  perpendiculars  drawn  from  tbe  three  angles.    But  they  called  die  one  Apollo,  being  per- 
•uaded  to  this  by  the  obvious  meaning  of  the  word  Apollo  [which  signifies  a  privation  of  multi- 
tude]  and  bv  the  simplicity  of  the  monad.'     Hie  duad  they  denominated  strife  and  audacity  ;  and 
the  triad  justice.    For  since  injuring  and  being  injured  are  two  extremes  subsisting  according  to 
excess  and  defect,  justice  through  equality  has  a  situation  in  the  middle.    But  what  is  called  the 
tctractys,  being  the  number  36,  was,  as  is  reported,  their  greatest  oath,  and  was  denominated  the 
world.    For  this  number  is  formed  from  tbe  composition  of  the  four  first  even,  and  the  four  first 
odd  numbers,  collected  into  one  sum.1    If  therefore  the  most  approved  of  the  philosophers  did  not 
think  it  proper  to  neglect  or  despise  any  occult  signification  of  a  divine  nature  when"  they  perceived 
it  even  in  things  which  are  inanimate  and  incorporeal,  it  appears  to  me,  that  they  in  a  still  greater 
degree  venerated  those  peculiarities  depending  on  manners  which  they  saw  in  such  natures  as  had 
sense,  aud  were  endued  with  soul,  with  passion,  and  ethical  habits.  We  must  embrace  therefore,  not 
those  who  honor  these  kings,  but  those  who  reverence  divinity  through  these,  as  through  most  clear 
mirrors,  and  which  are  produced  by  nature,  in  a  becoming  manner,  conceiving  them  to  be  the  instru- 
ments or  the  art  of  the  God  by  whom  all  things  arc  perpetually  adorned.  But  we  ought  to  think  that  no 
inanimate  being  cau  be  more  excellent  than  one  that  is  animated,  nor  an  insensible  than  a  sensitive 
being,  not  even  though  some  one  should  collect  together  all  the  gold  and  emeralds  in  the  universe.  For 
tlie  divinity  is  not  ingeuerated  either  in  colours,  or  figures,  or  smoothness;  but  such  things  as  neither 
ever  did,  nor  are  naturally  adapted  to  participate  of  life,  have  an  allotment  more  ignoble  than  that  of 
dead  bodies.   But  the  nature  which  lives  and  sees,  and  has  the  principle  of  motion  from  itself,  and  a 
knowledge  of  tilings  appropriate  and  foreign  to  its  being,  has  certainly  derived  an  efflux  and  portion 
of  that  wisdom,  which,  as  Heraclitus  says,  considers  how  both  itself,  aud  the  universe  is  governed. 
Hence  the  divinity  is  not  worse  represented  in  these  animals,  than  in  the  workmanships  of  copper 
and  stone,  which  in  a  similar  manner  suffer  corruption  ami  decay,  hut  arc  naturally  deprived  of  all 
sense  and  consciousness.    This  then  I  consider  as  the  best  defence  that  cau  be  given  of  the  adora- 
tion of  animals  by  the  Egyptians. 

■  Instead  of  J'tm*™i  as  in  the  original,  which  is  nooscim,  it  is  necetsary  to  r*aJ,  as  in  the  above 

translation  ««>*t^ti  tic  pWo:. 

1  For»+4+6+8=l«0;  and  1+S+S+7=1«;  and  20+16=30. 


Digitized  by  Google 


I  INTRODUCTION. 


uiii 


With  respect  however  to  the  sacred  vestments,  those  of  Iais  are  of  various  hue*  ;  for  her  power 
is  about  matter,  which  becomes  and  receives  all  things,  as  light  and  darkness,  day  and  night,  fire 
and  water,  life  and  death,  beginning  and  end ;  but  those  of  Osiris  are  without  a  shade  and  have  no 
variety  of  colours,  but  have  one  only  which  is  simple  and  luciform.  Hence  when  the  latter  have 
been  once  used,  they  are  laid  aside  and  preserved ;  for  the  intelligible  is  invisible  and  intangible. 
But  the  vestments  of  Isis  are  used  frequently.  For  sensible  things  being  in  daily  use  and  at  hand, 
present  us  with  many  developements  and  views  of  their  different  mutations :  but  the  intellectual 
perception  of  that  which  is  intelligible,  genuine,  and  holy,  luminously  darting  through  the  soul  like 
a  coruscation,  is  attended  with  a  simultaneous  contact  and  vision  of  its  object.  Hence  Plato  and 
Aristotle  call  this  part  of  philosophy  epoplic  or  intuitive,  indicating  that  those  who  have  through 
the  exercise  of  the  reasoning  power,  soared  beyond  these  doxastic,  mingled  and  all- various  natures, 
raise  themselves  to  that  first,  simple,  and  immaterial  principle,  and  passing  into  contact  with  the 
pure  truth  which  subsists  about  it,  they  consider  themselves  as  having  at  length  obtained  the  end 
of  philosophy.'  And  that  which  the  present  devoted  and  veiled  priests  obscurely  manifest  with 
great  reverence  and  caution  is  that  this  God  is  the  ruler  and  prince  of  the  dead,  and  is  not  different 
from  that  divinity  who  is  called  by  the  Greeks  Hades  and  Pluto,  the  truth  of  which  assertion  not 
being  understood,  disturbs  the  multitude,  who  suspeet  that  the  truly  sacred  and  holy  Osiris  dwell* 
in  and  under  the  earth,  where  the  bodies  of  those  are  concealed  who  appear  to  have  obtained  an 
end  of  their  being.  But  he  indeed  himself  is  at  the  remotest  distance  from  the  earth,  unstained, 
unpolluted,  and  pure  from  every  essence  that  receives  corruption  and  death.  The  souls  of  men 
however,  being  here  encompassed  with  bodies  and  passiuu*,  cannot  participate  of  divinity  except 
as  of  an  obscure  dream  by  intellectual  contact  through  philosophy.  But  when  they  are  liberated 
from  the  body,  and  pans  into  the  invisible,  impassive,  and  pure  region,  this  God  is  then  their  leader 
and  king,  from  whom  they  depend,  insatiably  beholding  him,  and  desiring  to  survey  that  beauty 
which  cannot  be  expressed  or  uttered  by  men ;  and  which  lsis,  as  the  ancient  discourse  evinces, 
always  loving,  pursuing,  and  enjoying  fills  such  things  in  these  lower  regions  as  participate  of  gene, 
ration  with  every  thing  beautiful  and  good." 

And  lastly,  the  Emperor  Julian,  in  a  fragment  of  an  Oration  or  Epistle  on  the  duties  of  a  priest, 
has  the  following  remarks  on  religiously  venerating  statues :  "  Statues  and  altars,  and  the  preser- 
vation of  unextinguished  fire,  and  in  short,  all  such  particulars,  have  been  established  by  our  fathers 
as  symbols  of  the  preseuce  of  the  Gods;  not  that  tee  should  believe  that  thete  tymboU  art 
Gods,  but  that  through  thete  we  should  vorthip  the  God$.   For  since  we  are  connected  with  body, 

*  For  T-Xf  •xi.M<x.«»pU",  it  is  necessary  to  read  as  in  the  translation,  «x.t  ix«"  »-x*r»f  *"> 


Digitized  by  Google 


xl  INTRODUCTION. 

it  is  alio  Decenary  that  our  worship  of  the  God*  should  be  performed  in  a  corporeal  manner;  but 
they  are  incorporeal.  And  they  indeed  have  exhibited  to  us  aa  the  first  of  statues,  that  which 
ranks  as  the  second  genus  of  Gods  from  the  first,  and  which  circularly  revolves  round  the  whole  of 
heaven.1  Since,  however,  a  corporeal  worship  cannot  even  be  paid  to  these,  because  they  are 
naturally  unindigenl,  a  third  kind  of  statues  was  devised  on  the  earth,  by  the  worship  of  which  we 
render  the  Gods  propitious  to  us.  For  as  those  who  reverence  the  images  or  kings,  who  are  not 
in  want  of  any  such  reverence,  at  the  same  time  attract  to  themselves  their  benevolence  ;  thus  also 
those  who  venerate  the  statues  of  the  Gods,  who  are  not  in  want  of  any  thing,  persuade  the  Gods 
by  this  veneration  to  assist  and  be  favourable  to  them.  For  alacrity  in  the  performance  of  tilings 
T  in  our  power  is  a  document  of  true  sanctity ;  and  it  is  very  evident  that  he  who  accomplishes  the 
former,  will  in  a  greater  degree  possess  the  latter.  But  he  who  despises  things  in  his  power,  and 
i  pretends  to  desire  impossibilities,  evidently  does  not  pursue  the  latter,  and  overlooks  the 
For  though  divinity  is  not  in  want  of  any  thing,  it  does  not  follow  that  on  this  account 
;  is  to  be  offered  to  him.  For  neither  is  he  in  want  of  celebration  through  the  ministry  of 
words.  What  then  I  (Is  it  therefore  reasonable  that  he  should  be  deprived  of  this  ?  By  no  means. 
Neither  therefore  is  he  to  be  deprived  of  the  honour  which  is  paid  him  through  works;  which 
honour  has  been  legally  established,  not  for  three,  or  for  three  thousand  years,  but  in  all  preceding 
ages,  among  all  natiotis  of  the  earth. 


"  But  [the  Galilssans  will  say,]  O !  you  who  hai 
whom,  though  according  to  you  tbey  are  formless  and  unfigured,  you  have  fashioned  in  a  corporeal 
resemblance,  it  is  not  fit  that  honour  should  be  paid  to  divinity  through  such  works.  How,  then, 
do  not  we  [heathens]  consider  as  wood  and  stones  thaw  statues  which  are  fashioned  by  the  hands 
of  men*  O  more  stupid  than  even  stones  themselves !  Do  you  fancy  that  all  men  are  to  be 
drawn  by  the  nose  at  you  are  drawn  by  execrable  dwmont,  so  as  to  think  that  the  artificial  resem- 
blances of  the  Gods  are  the  Gods  themselves*  Looking  therefore  to  the  resemblances  of  the 
Gods,  we  do  not  think  them  to  be  either  stones  or  wood  ;  for  neither  do  we  think  that  the  Gods 
are  these  resemblances;  since  neither  do  we  say  that  royal  images  are  wood,  or  stone,  or  brass,  nor 
that  tbey  are  the  kings  themselves,  but  the  images  of  kings.  Whoever,  therefore,  loves  his  king, 
beholds  with  pleasure  the  image  of  his  king ;  whoever  loves  his  child  is  delighted  with  his  image ; 

loves  his  father  surveys  bis  image  with  delight*    Hence  also,  he  who  is  a  lover  of 


at  bodies  the  celestial  orbs,  which  in  const quence  of  participating  a  divine  life  from  the 
corporeal  powers  from  which  they  are  suspend* 
*  Dt.  Sullingteet  quotes  this  part  of  the  extract,  in  his  i 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


divinity  gladly  surveys  the  statues  and  image*  of  the  Gods;  at  the  i 
with  a  holy  dread  the  Gods  who  invisibly  behold  hint.' 


The  Catholics  have  employed  arguments  similar  to  these,  in  defence  of  the  reverence  which  they 
pay  to  the  images  of  their  saints.    Indeed,  it  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England,*  that  the 


1  "  Dio  Chrysostome  (says  Dr.  Stillingfleet  in  the  before-cited  work,  p.  414)  at  large  debates  the  case 
images,  in  bis  Olympic  Oration;  wherein  he  first  show*,  thmt  all  me  a  have  a  natural  apprehension  of  one 
supreme  God  the  father  of  all  things;  and  that  this  Cod  was  represented  by  the  statue  made  by  Phidias  of 
Jupiter  Olympius,  for  so  he  said  *«f'  r  mnpnt  btfert  n-aom  ire  note  art;  and  then  describe*  him  to  be  the  ting, 
ruler,  and  father  of  all,  both  Gods  and  men.  This  image  be  calls  the  roost  blessed,  the  most  excellent,  the  most 
beautiful,  the  most  beloved  image  of  God.  He  says  there  are  four  ways  of  comiug  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  by 
nature,  by  the  instructions  of  the  poets,  by  the  laws,  and  by  images;  but  neither  poets,  nor  lawgivers,  nor  arti- 
ficers were  the  best  interpreters  of  the  deity,  but  only  the  philosophers  who  both  understood  and  explained  the 
divine  nature  most  truly  and  perfectly.  After  this,  he  supposes  Phidias  to  be  called  to  account  for  making  such 
an  image  of  God,  as  unworthy  of  him;  when  Iphitus,  Lycurgus,  and  the  old  Eleans,  made  none  at  all  of  him,  as 
being  out  of  the  power  of  man  to  express  his  nature.  To  this  Phidias  replies,  that  no  man  can  express  miud  and 
understanding  by  figures,  or  colours,  and  therefore  they  are  forced  to  By  to  that  in  which  the  soul  inhabits,  and 
from  thence  they  attribute  the  *«»t  of  wisdom  and  reason  to  God,  having  nothing  better  to  represent  him  by. 
And  by  that  means  joining  power  and  art  together,  they  endeavour  by  something  which  may  be  seen  and  painted, 
to  represent  that  which  is  invisible  and  inexpressible.  But  it  may  be  said,  we  had  better  then  have  no  image  or 
representation  of  him  at  all.  No,  says  be ;  for  mankind  doth  not  love  to  worship  God  at  a  distauce,  but  to  come 
near  and  feel  him,  and  with  assurance  to  sacrifice  to  him  and  crown  him.  Like  children  newly  i 
their  parents,  who  put  out  their  hands  towards  them  in  their  dreams  as  if  they  were  still  present;  so  do  i 
of  the  sense  of  God's  goodness  and  their  relation  to  him,  love  to  have  him  represented  as  present  with  them,  and 
so  to  converse  with  him.  Thence  have  come  all  the  'representations  of  God  among  the  barbaruus  nations,  in 
mountains,  and  trees,  and  stones." 

The  same  conceptions  also  about  statues  are  entertained  by  the  Brachmans  in  Benares  on  the  Ganges.  For 
Monsieur  Bernier  when  he  was  at  their  university,  and  was  discoursing  with  one  of  the  most  learned  men  among 
tbem,  proposed  to  him  the  question  about  the  adoration  of  their  idols,  and  reproaching  him  with  it  as  a  thing 
very  unreasonable,  received  from  him  this  remarkable  answer :  "  We  nave  indeed  in  our  temples  many  different 
statues,  as  those  of  Brahma,  Mahadeo,  Genick,  and  Gavani,  who  are  some  of  the  chief  and  most  perfect  Deutas 
(or  Deities) ;  and  we  have  also  many  others  of  less  perfection,  to  whom  we  pay  great  honour,  prostrating  our- 
selves before  them,  and  presenting  them  flowers,  rice,  oylcs,  saffron,  and  the  like,  with  much  ceremony.  But 
we  do  not  believe  these  statues  to  be  Brahma  or  Becben,  Arc.  themselves,  but  only  their  images 
lions,  and  we  only  give  them  that  honour  ou  account  of  the  beings  they  represent.  They  are  in  our 
because  it  is  necessary  in  order  to  pray  well,  to  have  something  before  our  eyes  that  may  fix  the  mind.  And 
when  we  pray,  il  is  not  the  statue  we  pray  to,  but  be  that  is  represented  by  it."  The  Brahmans  have  also  ano- 
ther way  of  defending  their  worship  of  statues,  of  which  the  same  author  gives  the  following  account:  "  That 
God,  or  that  sovereign  being  whom  they  call  Achar  (immutable)  has  produced  or  drawn  out  of  his  own  substance, 
not  only  souls,  but  also  whatever  is  material  and  corporeal  in  the  universe,  so  that  all  things  in  the  world  are 
but  one  and  the  same  thing  with  God  himself,  as  all  numbers  are  bat  one  and  the  same  unity  repeated.''  Ber- 
nier Metnoires,  tome  3.  p.  171. 178' 

From  this  Utter  extract  it  appears  that  the  Brachmans  as  well  as  the  ancient  Egyptian*,  believe  that  the 
supreme  principle  is  all  things.  According  to  the  best  of  the  Platonists  likewise,  this  principle  is  olitkingt  prior 
to  ait.   For  by  being  tie  one,  it  is  oil  Miagi  after  the  most  umpU  manner,  1.  e.  so  as  to  transcend  i 

»  See  its  Homilies,  tome  «.  p.  40. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  / 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


Catholic*  form  the  game  opinions  of  the  saints  whose  images  they  worship  as  the  Heathens  did  of 
their  Gods  ;  and  employ  the  same  outward  rites  in  honouring  their  images,  as  the  Heathens  did 
in  the  religious  veneration  of  their  statues.  Thus  as  the  Heathens  had  their  luttlar  Gods,  such  as 
were  Belus  to  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians,  Osiris  and  lsis  to  the  Egyptians,  aad  Vulcan  to 
the  Leronians,  thus  also  the  Catholics  attribute  the  defence  of  certain  countries  to  certain  saints. 
Have  not  the  saints  also  to  whom  the  safeguard  of  particular  cities  is  committed,  the  same  office 
as  the  Dii  Provides  of  the  Heathens.'  Such  as  were  at  Delphi,  Apollo;  at  Athens,  Minerva; 
at  Carthage,  Juno  ;  and  at  Rome,  Quirinus.  And  do  not  the  saints  to  whom  churches  arc  built 
and  altars  erected  correspond  to  the  Dii  Palrooi  of  the  Heathens  ?  Such  as  were  in  the  Capitol, 
Jupiter,  in  the  temple  at  Paphos,  Venus,  in  the  temple  of  Ephesus,  Diana.  Are  not  likewise,  our 
Lady  of  Walsingham,  our  Lady  of  Ipswich,  otir  Lady  of  Wilsdon,  and  the  like,  imitations  of  Diana 
Agrotera,  Diana  Coripbca,  Diana  Ephesia,  Venus  Cypria,  Veuus  Paphia,  Venus  Gnidin,  and  the 
like  ?  The  Catholics  too,  have  substituted  for  the  marine  deities  Neptune,  Triton,  Xereus,  Castor 
and  Pollux,  Venus,  8tc.  Saint  Christopher,  Saint  Clement,  and  others,  and  especially  our  Lady, 
as  she  is  called  by  them,  to  whom  seamen  sing  Ave  Maris  stella.  Neither  has  the  fire  escaped 
their  imitation  of  the  Pagans.  For  instead  of  Vulcan  and  Vesta,  the  respective  guardians  of  tire 
according  to  the  Heathens,  the  Catholics  have  substituted  Saint  Agatha,  ou  the  day  of  whose  nati- 
vity they  make  letters  for  the  purpose  of  extinguishing  lire.  Every  artificer  likewise  and  profession 
has  a  special  saint  in  the  place  of  a  presiding  God.  Thus  scholars  have  Saint  Nicholas  and  Saint 
Gregory;  painters  Saint  Luke;  nor  are  soldiers  in  want  of  a  saint  corresponding  to  Mars,  nor  lovers 
of  one  who  is  a  substitute  for  Venus. 

All  diseases  too  haTc  their  special  saints  instead  of  Gods,  who  arc  invoked  as  possessing  a  healing 
power.  Thus  the  venereal  disease  has  Saint  Roche ;  the  falling  sickness  Saint  Cornelius,  the  tooth- 
ach  Saint  Apollin,  &c.  Beasts  and  cattle  also  have  their  presiding  saints :  for  Saint  Loy  (says  the 
Homily)  is  the  horse-leach,  and  Saint  Antony  the  swineherd,  &c.  The  Homily  adds,'  "  that  in 
many  points  the  Papists  exceed  the  Gentiles  in  idolatry,  and  particularly  in  honouring  and  wor- 
shipping the  relics  and  bones  of  saints,  which  prove  that  they  be  mortal  men  and  dead,  and  there- 
fore no  Gods  to  be  worshipped,  which  the  Gentiles  would  never  confess  of  their  Gods  for  very 
shame."  And  after  enumerating  many  ridiculous  practices  of  the  Catholics  in  reference  to  these 
relics,  the  Homily  concludes  with  observing,  "  that  they  are  not  only  more  wicked  than  the  Gen- 
tile idolaters,  but  also  no  wiser  than  asses,  horses,  and  mules,  which  have  no  understanding." 

In  the  wcond  place  the  Homilies  shew*  that  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Papists  in  honour 
'  Tome  a.  p.  54.  1  p-  *9- 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION,  xkfii 

ing  and  worshipping  their  images  or  saints,  are  the  same  with  the  rites  of  the  Pagans.  "  This, 
say  (hey,  is  evident  in  their  pilgrimages  to  visit  images  which  had  more  holiness  and  virtue  in  them 
than  others.  In  their  candle-religion,  burning  incense,  offering  up  gold  to  images,  hanging  up 
crutches,  chairs,  and  ships,  legs,  arms,  and  whole  men  and  women  of  war,  before  images,  as  though 
by  Ihem,  or  saints  (as  they  say)  lliey  were  delivered  from  lameness,  sickness,  captivity,  or  shipwreck." 
In  spreading  abroad  after  the  manner  of  the  Heathens,  the  miracles  that  have  accompanied,  images. 
"  Such  an  image  was  sent  from  heaven,  like  the  Palladium,  or  Diana  of  the  Epbesians.  Such  an 
image  was  brought  by  angels.  Such  a  one  came  itself  far  from  the  east  to  the  west,  as  Dame 
Fortune  Bed  to  Rome.  Some  images  though  they  were  hard  and  stony,  yet  for  tender-heart  and 
pity  wept.  Some  spake  more  monstrously  than  ever  did  Balaam's  ass,  who  had  life  and  breath 
in  him.  Such  a  cripple  came  and  saluted  this  saint  of  oak,  and  by  and  by  he  was  made  whole, 
and  here  hangeth  his  crutch.  Such  a  one  in  a  tempest  vowed  to  Saint  Christopher,  and  scaped,  and 
behold  here  is  bis  ship  of  war.  Such  a  one,  by  Saint  Leonard's  help,  brake  out  of  prison,  and  see 
where  his  fetters  bang.  And  infinite  thousands  more  miracles  by  like,  or  more  shameless  lies  were 
reported." 

After  all  this,  I  appeal  to  every  intelligent  reader,  whether  the  religion  of  the  Heathens,  accord- 
ing to  its  genuine  purity  as  delineated  in  this  Introduction,  and  as  professed  and  promulgated  by 
the  best  and  wisest  men  of  antiquity,  is  not  infinitely  preferable  to  that  of  the  Catholics  ?  And 
whether  it  is  not  more  holy  to  reverence  beings  the  immediate  progeny  of  the  ineffable  principle  of 
all  things,  and  which  are  eternally  centered  and  rooted  in  him  ;  and  to  believe  that  in  reverencing 
these,  we  at  the  same  time  reverence  the  ineffable,  because  they  partake  of  his  nature,  and  that 
through  these  as  media  we  become  united  with  him,'  than  to  reverence  men,  and  the  images  of 
men,  many  of  whom  when  living,  were  the  disgrace  of  human  nature?  The  Church  of  England  a» 
we  sec  prefers  the  Pagans  to  the  Pap  11  is ,  and  1  trust  that  every  other  sect  of  Protestant  Christians 
will  unanimously  subscribe  to  her  decision.  And  thus  much  in  defence  of  the  theology  of  Plato, 
and  the  religious  worship  of  the  Heathens. 

It  now  remains  that  I  should  speak  of  the  following  work,  of  its  author,  and  the  translation.  The 
work  itself  then  is  a  scientific  development  of  the  deifonn  processions  from  the  meltable  principle 

'  The  ineffable  principle  of  things,  as  is  demonstrated  in  tbe  Elements  of  Theology  io  this  work,  is  beyond 
self-subsistence.  Hence  the  first  ineffable  eroluliou  from  him  consists  of  self-subsistcnt  natures.  As  we 
therefore  are  only  the  dregs  of  the  rational  tialure,  many  media  arc  necessary  to  conjoin  us  with  a  yrimiple  so 
hnmeoscly  exalted  above  us.  And  these  media  are  the  golden  chain  of  powers  that  have  deified  summits,  or 
(hat  have  the  ineffable  united  with  the  citable. 


Digitized  by  Google 


xllV  INTKODUCTION. 

of  things,  and  this,  as  k  appears  to  me  id  (he  greatest  perfection  possible  to  mm.  For  the  reason- 
ing ia  every  where  consummately  accurate,  and  deduced  from  eelf-evident  priiiciplei ;  and  the 
conclusions  are  the  result  of  what  Plato  powerfully  call*  geometrical  neceaaitiei.  To  the  reader 
of  thia  work  indeed,  who  haa  not  been  properly  disciplined  io  Eleatic  and  Academic  studies,  and 
who  haa  not  a  genius  naturally  adapted  to  such  abetruae  speculations,  it  will  doubtless  appear  to 
be  perfectly  unintelligible,  and  in  the  language  of  critical  cant,  nothing  but  jargon  and  revery. 
Thia,  however,  ia  what  Plato  the  great  bierophant  of  this  theology  predicted  would  be  the  caae,  if 
ever  it  was  unfolded  to  the  multitude  at  large.    "  For  a$  it  appears  to  me,^iayi  he,  there  art 

££0^C£^£f  ^^GfiifltfafM  ^pA^^A  6f  tOJl4Wsw^,rl  WlO^t  r^^s^l^We^Otf^J  fA^US  t^9£9£ * 

to  perceive  them."' 

In  his  seventh  epistle  also  he  oWrves  a*  follows :  "  Thus  much,  however,  I  shall  &ay  respecting 
all  thoae  who  either  have  written  or  shall  write,  affirming  that  they  know  those  thinga  which  are 
the  objects  of  my  study  (whether  they  have  heard  them  from  me  or  from  others,  or  whether  they 
have  discovered  them  themselves)  thnt  they  have  not  heard  any  thing  about  these  things  conform- 
able to  my  opinion :  for  I  never  have  written  nor  ever  shall  write  about  them.1  For  a  thing  of  ibis 
kind  cannot  be  expressed  by  words  like  other  discipline*,  but  by  long  familiarity,  and  living  in 
conjunction  with  the  thing  itself,  a  light*  as  it  were  leaping  from  a  fire  will  on  a  sudden  be  enkindled 
in  the  soul,  and  there  itself  nourish  itself."  And  shortly  after  he  adds ;  "  But  if  it  appeared  to  me 
that  the  particulars  of  which  I  am  speaking  could  be  sufficiently  communicated  to  the  multitude 
by  writing  or  speech,  what  could  we  accomplish  more  beautiful  in  life  than  to  impart  a  mighty 
benefit  to  mankind,  and  lead  an  intelligible  nature  into  light,  ao  as  to  be  obvious  to  all  men  i  I 
think,  however,  that  an  attempt  of  this  kind  would  only  be  beneficial  to  a  few,  who  from  some 
small  veatigea  previously  demonstrated  are  themselves  able  to  discover  these  abstruse  particulars. 
But  with  respect  to  the  rest  of  manund,  some  it  will  fill  with  a  contempt  by  no  means  elegant,  and 
others  with  a  lofty  and  arrogant  hope  that  they  shall  now  learn  certain  venerable  things."4 

Km  nttvtamtomf*.    Epist.  9. 

*  Plato  means  by  this,  that  he  has  never  written  perspicuously  about  imuUigMa  or  true  being;  toe  proper 
objects  of  intellect. 

'  This  light  is  a  thing  of  a  very  different  kind  from  that  which  is  produced  by  the  evidence  arising  from 
truths  perceptible  by  the  multitude,  as  those  who  have  experienced  it  well  know. 

mnn:,       m\Xm,  «>•'  wc  mptnc  «itk,  twnut  in  wti  am  y  th»  <fuii  «tpt  tn  «jwypum(  mini  nitn.  iv%  m  i/ae 

r  iif.  um  •»»<  9vm»w*,  «>tt  im  ntn  ymrnr  font  yuf  nimj*f  irr»,  «(  a>x»  l*M>*lx*n,  «>J.'  a  mxx«  rvm<r*n  r>jniunc 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  prediction  of  Plato  therefore,  has  been  but  too  truly  fulfilled  in  the  fate  which  baj  attended 
the  writing!  of  the  best  of  bis  disciples,  among  whom  Proclut  certainly  maintains  the  most  distin- 
guished rank.  This  indeed,  these  disciples  well  knew  would  be  the  case ;  but  perceiving  that  the 
hand  of  Barbaric  and  despotic  power  was  about  to  dettroy  the  school*  of  the  philosophers,  and 
foreseeing  that  dreadful  naht  of  ifuorancc  and  folly  which  succeeded  so  nefarious  an  undertaking 
they  benevolently  disclosed  in  as  luminous  a  manner  as  the  subject  would  permit,  toe  arcana  of 
their  master's  doctrines,  thereby,  as  Plato  expresses  it,  giving  assistance  to  Philosophy,  and  also 
preserving  it  as  a  paternal  and  immortal  inheritance,  to  the  latest  posterity.  Proclus  in  the  first 
book  of  this  work  has  enumerated  the  requisites  which  a  student  of  it  ought  to  possess ;  and  it  is 
most  certain  that  be  who  does  not  possess  them,  will  never  fathom  the  depths  of  this  theology,  or 
perceive  his  mind  irradiated  with  that  admirable  light,  mentioned  by  Plato  in  the  foregoing 
extract,  and  which  is  only  to  be  seen  by  that  eye  of  the  soul  which  is  better  worth  saving  than  tea 
thousand  corporeal  eyes. 


With  respect  to  the  diction  of  Proclus  in  this  work,  its  general  character  is  that  of  purity, 
clearness,  copiousness,  and  magnificence ;  so  that  even  the  fastidious  critic,  who  considers  every 
Greek  writer  as  partially  barbarous  who  lived  after  the  fall  of  the 

ever  unwillingly,  be  forced  to  acknowledge  that  Proclus  is  a  splendid  exception.  The  i 
Kepler,  whose  decision  on  this  subject,  outweighs  in  my  opinion,  that  of  a  sown  of  mo 
critics,  after  having  made  a  long  extract  from  the  commentaries  of  Proclus  on  Euclid,  gives  the 
following  animated  encomium  of  his  diction.  "  O ratio  fluit  ipsi  torrcntis  instar,  ripas  bundans,  et 
gurgitesque  occulta ns,  dum  mci 

it."  i.  e.  "  His  language  flows  like  a  torrent,  i 
hiding  the  dark  fords  and  whirlpools  of  doubts,  while  his  mind  full  of  the  majesty  of  things  of  such 
a  magnitude,  struggles  in  the  straits  of  language,  and  the  conclusion  never  satisfying  him,  exceeds 
by  the  copia  of  words,  the  simplicity  of  the  propositions."  If  we  omit  what  Kepler  here  says 
about  the  struggle  of  the  mind  of  Proclus,  and  his  never  being  satisfied  with  the  conclusion,  the 
rest  of  bis  eulogy  is  equally  applicable  to  the  style  of  the  present  work,  so  far  as  it  is  possible  for 
i  to  be  combined  with  the  rigid  accuracy  of  geometrical  i 


9tf  rt  »fayp>  *vr«,  »i  wu  rv{<n,  «{«»vnr  «t «"  *"-7N  *<yi<—*ms  (lej«  nhm)  i(«f$rr  fwt,  i,  rj  +»XJ  fntftnn  mvn  am 

S*«  if**-  1»  h  put  i*w>i«  rp""»  *'  "•»"•£         *f*  ■>«  rir"<  T1  ■"vrmi  aaXfeir  nil|w'  «i  v">  "  «F  fiv,  V 

ra;  T«  arfftmtri  fuym  rr*4**>       *■»  *<*"  ■*  f»r  ***         *{♦«  W»  i         >vn  attfmt  wynpM,  m  mxuf  wit  Wf 

um  \tyifxmt  ayafa,  h  pi  r-nt  "mi  Jnani  minftn  mtm  1m>  paf><  niu(im,f  «ai  n  1 


Digitized  by  Google 


xlvi 


INTBODOCT10N. 


With  respect  to  the  life  of  Proclus,  it  his  been  written  with  great  elegance  by  his  disciple  Mari- 
ons ;  and  a  translation  of  it  by  me  prefixed  to  my  version  of  the  commentaries  of  Proclus  was  pub- 
lished in  1788.    From  the  edition  of  that  life  therefore,  by  Fabricius,  the  following  particulars 
relative  to  this  very  extraordinary  man  are  extracted,  for  the  information  of  the  reader  who  may  not 
have  the  translation  of  it  in  his  possession.    According  to  the  accurate  chronology  then  of 
Fabricius,  Proclus  was  born  at  Byzantium  in  the  year  of  Christ  412,  on  the  6th  of  the  Ides 
of  February,  and  died  in  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-fourth  year  after  the  reign  of  the  empe- 
ror Julian,  on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  Attic  Munichion,  or  the  April  of  the  Romans, 
Nicagoran  the  junior,  being  at  that  time  the  Athenian  archon.    His  father  Patriciua,  and  his 
mother  Marcella,  were  both  of  them  of  the  Lyc'tan  nation,  and  were  no  le*s  illustrious  for  their 
virtue  than  their  birth.    As  soon  as  he  was  bom,  his  parents  brought  him  to  their  native  country 
Xantbus,  which  was  sacred  to  Apollo.  And  this,  says  Martinis,  happened  to  him  by  a  certain  divine 
allotment.    "  For,  he  adds,  I  think  it  was  necessary  that  he  who  was  to  be  the  leader  of  alt 
sciences,  should  be  nourished  and  educated  under  the  presiding  deity  of  the  Muses."    The  person 
of  Proclus  was  uncommonly  beautiful ;  and  he  not  only  possessed  all  tbe  moral  and  intellectual 
virtues  in  the  highest  perfection,  but  the  veatigies  of  them  also,  which  are  denominated  the  physical 
virtues,  were  clearly  seen,  says  Marinus,  in  his  last  and  shelly  vestment  the  body.     Hence  he 
possessed  a  remarkable  acuteness  of  sensation,  and  particularly  in  the  most  honourable  of  the 
senses,  sight  and  hearing,  which,  as  Plato  says,  were  imparted  by  the  Gods  to  men  for  the  purpose 
of  philosophising,  and  for  the  well  being  of  the  animal  life,    in  the  second  place,  he  possessed  so 
great  a  strength  of  body,  that  it  was  neither  injured  by  cold,  nor  any  endurance  of  labours,  though 
these  were  extreme,  both  by  night  and  day.  In  the  third  place,  he  was,  as  we  have  before  observed, 
very  beautiful.    "  For  not  only,  says  Marinus,  did  his  body  possess  great  symmetry,  but  a  living 
light  as  it  were  beaming  from  his  soul  was  efflorescent  in  his  body,  and  shone  forth  with  au  admira- 
ble- splendor,  which  it  is  impossible  to  di-scribe."    Marinus  adds,  "  Indeed  he  was  so  beautiful, 
that  no  painter  could  accurately  exhibit  his  resemblauce ;  and  all  the  pictures  of  him  which  were 
circulated,  though  very  beautiful,  were  very  inferior  to  the  beauty  of  the  original."    And  in  the 
fourth  place,  he  possessed  health  in  such  perfection,  that  he  was  not  ill  above  twice  or  thrice  in 
the  course  of  so  long  a  life  as  seventy-five  years. 

Such  then  were  the  corporeal  prerogatives  which  Proclus  possessed,  and  which  may  be  called 
the  forerunners  of  the  forms  of  perfect  virtue.  But  he  possessed  in  a  wonderful  manner  what 
Plato  calls  the  elements  of  a  philosophic  genius.'  For  he  had  an  excellent  memory,  learned  with 
facility,  was  magnificent  and  graceful,  and  the  friend  and  ally  of  truth,  justice,  fortitude,  and  tern, 

■  See  the  sixth  bouk  of  the  Republic  of  Plato. 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


pemnce.  Having  for  a  short  space  of  time  applied  himself  in  Lycia  to  grammar,  he  weal  to  Alex- 
andria  in  Egypt,  and  was  there  instructed  in  rhetoric  by  Leonas  who  derived  his  lineage  from 
lsauru*,  and  in  grammar  by  Orion,  whose  ancestors  discharged  the  sacerdotal  office  among  the 
Egyptians,  and  who  composed  elaborate  treatises  on  that  art.  A  certain  good  fortune  however, 
says  iMarinun,  brought  him  back  to  the  place  of  his  nativity.  For  on  his  return  his  tutelar  Goddess 
exhorted  him  to  philosophy,  and  to  visit  the  Athenian  schools.  Having  therefore,  first  returned  to 
Alexandria  and  bade  farewell  to  rhetoric,  and  the  other  arts  which  he  had  formerly  studied,  he  gave 
himself  up  to  the  discourses  of  the  philosophers  then  resident  at  Alexandria.  Here,  he  became  an 
auditor  of  Olyrnpiodorus,1  the  most  illustrious  of  philosophers,  for  the  sake  of  imbibing  the  doc- 
trine of  Aristotle ;  and  was  instructed  in  the  mathematical  disciplines  by  Hero,  a  religious  man, 
and  eminently  skilful  in  teaching  those  sciences.  Prod  us  however,  not  being  satisfied  with  the 
Alexandrian  schools,  went  to  Athens,  "  with  a  certain  splendid  procession,  says  Martnus,  of  all  elo- 
quence and  elegance,  and  attended  by  the  Gods  that  preside  over  philosophy,  and  by  beneficent 
daemons.  For  that  the  succession  of  philosophy,  might  be  preserved  legitimate  and  genuine,  the 
Gods  led  him  to  the  city  over  which  its  inspective  guardian  presides."  Hence  Proclua  was  called 
x«r'  htf  way  of  eminence,  the  Platonic  Succetsor.  At  Athens  therefore,  Proclus  fortunately 
met  with  the  first  of  philosophers,  Syrianus,*  the  son  of  Philoxenus,  who  not  only  much  assisted 
him  in  his  studies,  but  made  him  his  domestic  as  to  other  concerns,  and  the  companion  of  his  philo- 
sophic life,  having  found  him  such  an  auditor  and  successor  as  he  had.  a  long  time  sought  for,  and  one 
who  was  capable  of  receiving  a  multitude  of  disciplines  and  divine  dogmas. 

In  less  than  two  whole  years  therefore,  Proclus  read  with  Syrianus  all  the  «orks  of  Aristotle,  vii. 
his  logic,  ethics,  politics,  physics,  and  theological  science.  And  being  sufficiently  instructed  in  these 
as  in  certain  proteleia,  or  things  preparatory  to  initiation,  and  lesser  mysteries,  Syrianus  led  him 
to  the  mystic  discipline  of  Plato,  in  an  orderly  progression,  and  not  according  to  the  Chaldean 
oracle  with  a  transcendent  foot.  He  likewise  enabled  Proclus  to  survey  in  conjunction  with  him, 
says  Marinus,  truly  divine  mysteries,  with  the  eyes  of  his  soul  free  from  material  daikness,  and 
with  undefiled  intellectual  vision.     But  Proclus  employing  sleepless  exercise  and  attention,  both 

'  This  Olympiodorus  is  not  the  fame  with  I  he  philosopher  of  that  nunc  whose  leurnrd  commentaries  on  cer- 
tain dialogues  of  Plato  are  extant  in  manuscript ;  as  in  these,  not  only  Proclus,  but  Darnascius  who  flourished 
after  Proclus  is  celebrated. 

*  This  truly  great  man  appears  to  luu  o  been  ihe  first  who  thoroughly  penetrated  the  profundity  contained  in 
the  writings  of  the  moie  ancient  philosophers,  contemporary  with  and  prior  to  Plato,  and  to  have  demon- 
strated the  admirable  agreement  of  their  doctrines  with  each  other.    Unfortunately  but  few  of  bis  works  are 


INTRODUCTION. 


by  night  and  by  tiny,  arid  avnoptically  and  judiciously  committing  to  writing  what  be  beard  from 
Syria ii in,  made  so  great  a  progress  in  a  little  time,  that  by  then  he  wu  twenty-eight  year*  of  age, 
he  had  composed  a  multitude  of  work*  and  among  the  rest  hit  commentarie 
are  truly  elegant  and  full  of  science.  But  from  men  a  discipline  as  this,  his 
adorned  ;  and  a.s  he  advanced  in  science  he  ; 


Marinus  after  this,  shows  how  Proclus  possessed  all  the  virtues  in  the  greatest  possible  perfec- 
tion; and  how  be  proceeded  from  the  exercise  of  the  political  virtues,  which  are  produced  by 
reason  adorning  the  irrational  part  as  its  instrument,  to  the  cathartic  virtues  which  pertain  to  reason 
alone,  withdrawing  from  other  things  to  itself,  throwing  aside  the  instruments  of  sense  as  vain, 
repressing  also  the  energies  through  these  instruments,  and  liberating  the  soul  from  the  bonds  of 
generation.  He  then  adds,  "  Proclus  having  made  a  proficiency,  through  these  virtues,  as  it  were 
by  certain  mystic  steps,  recurred  from  these  to  such  as  are  greater  and  more  telestic,  being  con- 
ducted to  them  by  a  prosperous  nature  and  scientific  discipline.  For  being  now  purified,  rising 
above  generation,  and  despising  its  thyrsus-bearers,'  be  was  agitated  with  a  divinely  inspired  fury, 
about  the  first  essences,  and  became  an  inspector  of  the  truly  blessed  spectacles  which  they  coutain. 
No  longer  collecting  discursively  and  demonstratively  the  science  of  them,  but  surveying  the  in  u* 
it  were  by  simple  intuition,  and  beholding  through  intellectual  energies  tbe  paradigms  in  a  divine 

tC.ll^£t  p    H-SSU  til  1  ^lj^  ^  VlF ^Fs>llCs>l  0U2  110  lOO^CT  a^^  dcUOIHittea1  sjC^sI        wWlCUl 0£  a  bttsi  ^rYa*adl  OU|j^  ll  t  Flat.}]  CP 

to  be  called  wisdom,  or  something  still  more  venerable  than  this.  The  ; 
gizing  according  to  this  virtue,  easily  comprehended  all  the  theology  of  the  Greeks  and 
and  that  which  is  adumbrated  in  mythological  fictions,  aud  brought  it  into  light,  to  those  who  are 
willing  and  able  to  understand  it.  He  explained  likewise  every  thing  in  a  mora  enthusiastic  man- 
ner, and  brought  the  different  theologies  to  an  harmonious  agreement.  At  the  same  time  also, 
investigating  the  writings  of  the  ancients,  whatever  he  found  in  them  genuine,  he  judiciously 
adopted ;  but  if  he  found  any  thing  of  a  spurious  nature,  this,  he  entirely  rejected  as  erroneous. 
He  also  strenuously  subverted  by  a  diligent  examination  such  doctrines  as  were  contrary  to  truth. 
In  his  associations  too  with  others,  he  employed  no  less  force  and  perspicuity.  For  he  was  a  man 
laborious  beyond  measure ;  as,  in  one  day,  he  gave  five,  and  sometimes  more  lectures,  and  wrote 

■  Socrates  in  the  Phardo  of  Plato,  Orphically  calls  the  multitude  thyrsus-bearers  as  living  TilannicaMy.  For 
tbe  thyrsus,  says  Olymjriodorn*,  (in  MS.  comment  in  Pliasd.)  is  a  symbol  uf  material  and  partible  fabrication,  on 
account  of  its  divulaed  continuity,  whence  also  it  is  a  Titannic  plant.  "  For  it  is  txteaded,  says  he,  before  Bac- 
chus, instead  of  his  paternal  sceptre,  and  through  this  they  call  him  into  a  partial  nature.  He  adds,  "  Besides 
the  Titans  are  thyrsus-bearers;  and  Prometheus  concealed  fire  in  a  read,  whether  by  this  we  an  to  understand 
that  he  draws  down  celestial  light  into  generation,  or  impels  soul  into  body,  or  calls  forth  divine  illumination,  the 
whole  of  which  is  l 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


as  many  as  seven  hundred  verse*.  Betides  this,  he  went  to  other  philosophers,  and  spent  the 
evening  in  conversation  with  them.  And  all  these  employments  he  executed  in  such  a  manner  as 
not  to  neglect  his  nocturnal  and  vigilant  piety  to  the  Gods,  and  assiduously  supplicating  the  huh 
when  rising,  when  at  his  meridian  altitude,  and  when  he  sets." 

M annus  farther  observes  of  this  most  extraordinary  man,  "  that  be  did  not  seem  to  be  without 
divine  inspiration.  For  words  similar  to  the  most  white  and  thick-tailing  snow '  proceeded  from  his 
wise  mouth,  his  eyes  appeared  to  be  filled  with  a  fulgid  splendor,  and  the  rest  of  his  face  to  partici- 
pate of  divine  illumination.  Hence  Rufinus,  a  man  illustrious  in  the  Republic,  and  who  was  also 
.1  man  of  veracity,  and  in  other  respects  venerable,  happening  to  be  present  with  him  when  he  was 
lecturing,  perceived  that  his  bead  was  surrounded  with  a  light.  And  when  Proclus  had  finished 
his  lecture,  Rufinus  rising,  adored  him,  and  testified  by  an  oath  the  truth  of  the  divine  vision  which 
tie  had  seen." 

Marians  also  informs  us,  "that  Proclus  being  purified  in  an  orderly  manner  by  the  Chaldean  puri- 
fications, was  an  inspector  of  the  lucid  Heratic  visions,  as  he  himself  somewhere  mentions  in  one 
of  his  writing*.  By  opportunely  moving  Likewise  a  certain  Hecatic  spharula,*  he  procured  shower* 
of  rain,  and  freed  Athens  from  an  unseasonable  heat.  Besides  tins,  by  certain  phylactcria  or 
charms,  he  stopt  an  earthquake,  and  had  made  trial  of  the  divining  energy  of  the  tripod,  having 
been  instructed  by  certain  verses  respecting  its  failure.  For  when  he  was  in  his  fortieth  year,  be 
appeared  in  a  dream  to  utter  the  following  verses  : 

High  abo?e  a-ther  there  with  radiance  bright, 
A  pure  immortal  splendor  wings  its  flight ; 1 
Whose  beams  divine  with  vivUI  force  aspire, 
And  leap  resounding  from  a  fount  of  hre. 

*  Alluding  to  the  beautiful  description  given  of  Ulysses  in  the  third  book  of  the  Iliad,  v.  n.  which  is  thus 
elegantly  paraphrased  by  Pope. 

But  when  he  speaks  what  elocution  flows! 
8oft  as  the  fleeces  of  descending  snows 
The  copious  accents  fall  with  easy  art : 
Melting  they  fall  and  sink  into  the  heart. 

*  Nicephorus  in  bis  commentary  on  Synesius  de  Insomniis,  p.  3da.  informs  us  that  the  Heratic  orb  is  a  golden 
sphere,  which  has  a  sspphire'stooe  inclosed  in  its  middle  part,  and  through  its  whole  extremity  characters,  aod 
various  figures.  He  adds,  that  turning  this  sphere  round,  the  Chaldeans  perform  invocations  which  they  call 
Ijnga:.  Thus  too,  according  to  Suidas,  the  magician  Julian  of  Chalda-a,  and  Arnuphis  the  Egyptian  brought 
down  showers  of  rain,  by  a  magical  power.  And  by  an  artifice  of  this  kind,  Empedvcles  was  accustomed  to 
restrain  the  fury  of  the  winds;  on  which  account  tie  was  called  t>»«Ji»if«,-(  mu  erptlltr  of  wind. 

*  This  signifies  that  the  divine  splendor  which  is  the  cause  of  the  prophetic  energy,  would  leave  the  earth, 
in  consequence  of  the  then  Misting  inaptitude  of  persons,  places,  and  instruments,  to  receive  it. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  g 


Digitized  by  Google 


I  INTRODUCTION. 

And  io  the  beginning  of  his  fortj-secoud  year  he  appeared  to  himself  to  pronounce  with  a  loud 

Lo  !  on  my  soul  a  sacred  Arc  descends, 
Whose  vivid  power  the  intellect  estends ; 
From  whence  far  beaming  thro'  dull  body's  night, 
It  soars  to  xthcr  deck'd  with  starry  light ; 
And  with  soft  murmurs  thru'  tbeaiura  round. 
The  lucid  regions  of  tlie  Gods  resound. 

• 

Besides,  he  clearly  perceived  that  tie  belonged  to  the  Mercurial  series ;  and  was  persuaded  from  \ 
dream,  that  he  possessed  the  soul  of  Nicomachus  the  Pythagorean."' 

In  the  last  place,  M annua  adds,  "  that  the  lovers  of  more  elegant  studies  may  be  able  to  conjec- 
ture from  the  position  of  the  stars  under  which  he  was  bom,  that  the  condition  of  his  life,  was  by 
no  means  among  the  but  or  middle,  but  among  the  first  orders,  we  have  thought  lit  to  expose  in 
this  place  the  following  scheme  of  his  nativity." 

0  16°  «6*  « 
>        17        29  n 

■  No  opinion  is  more  celebrated,  than  that  of  the  metempsychosis  of  Pythagoras ;  but  perhaps  no  doctrine  is 
more  generally  mistaken.  By  most  of  the  present  day  it  is  exploded  as  ridiculous ;  and  the  few  who  retain  some 
veneration  for  its  founder,  endeavour  to  destroy  the  literal,  and  to  confine  it  to  an  allegorical  meaning.  By  some 
of  the  ancients  this  mutation  was  limited  to  similar  bodies;  t*>  that  thry  conceived  the  human  soul  might  trans- 
migrate into  various  human  bodies,  but  not  into  those  of  brutes.  And  this  was  the  opinion  of  Hicroclcs,  as  may 
be  seen  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Golden  Verses.  But  why  may  not  the  Iti'inan  soul  l>ecome  connected  with 
subordinate,  as  w  ell  as  wiili  superior  lives,  by  a  tendency  of  inclination  ?  Do  not  similars  love  to  be  united;  aod 
is  there  not  in  all  kinds  of  life  something  similar  and  common  ?  Hence  when  the  affections  of  the  soul  verge  to 
a  baser  nature,  whilf  connected  with  a  human  body,  these  affections  on  the  dissolution  of  such  a  body,  become 
envelo|>cd  as  it  were,  in  a  brutal  nature,  and  the  rational  eye,  in  this  case,  clouded  with  perturbations,  is  oppressed 
bv  the  irrational  entries  of  the  bmlc,  and  surveys  nothing  but  the  dark  phantasms  of  a  degraded  imagination. 
But  this  doctrine  is  viudica'ed  by  Proclus  with  his  usual  acutenes*,ui  his  admirable  Commentaries  on  the  Tima-us, 
lib.  s.  p.  3»9,  aslollowsi  "  It  is  tiMial,  says  he,  to  enquire  bow  human  souls  can  descend  into  brute  animals. 
And  some  indeed,  think  that  there  are  certain  similitudes  of  men  to  brutes,  which  they  call  savage  lives  :  for  they 
by  no  means  think  it  possible  that  the  rational  essence  can  become  the  soul  of  a  savage  animal.  On  the  contrary, 
others  allow  it  may  be  sent  into  brute;,  because  all  souls  are  of  one  and  the  same  kind;  so  that  they  may  become 
wolves  and  panthers,  and  ichneumons.  But  true  reason  indeed,  asserts  that  the  human  soul  may  be  lodged  in 
brutes,  yet  in  such  a  manner,  as  that  it  may  obtain  its  own  proper  life,  and  that  the  degraded  soui  may,  as  it 
were,  be  canied  above  it,  and  be  bound  to  the  baser  nature  by  a  propensity  aod  similitude  of  affection.  And  that 
tins  is  tl.c  only  mode  of  insinuation,  we  have  proved  by  a  multitude  of  arguments,  in  our  Commentaries  on  the 
rim  drtis.  If  however,  it  lie  requisite  to  take  notice,  that  this  is  the  opinion  of  I'lato,  we  add  that  in  his  Republic 
he  *;iys,  that  the  <oul  of  Thcrsitrs  assumed  an  ape,  but  not  the  body  of  an  ape  i  and  in  the  Phzdms,  that  the 
<cjI  descends  into  a  savage  Int.  but  not  into  a  savage  body.  For  life  is  conjoined  with  its  proper  soul.  And  in 
this  place  be  says  it  is  changed  inc.  a  brutal  nature.  For  a  brutal  nature  is  not  a  brutal  body,  but  a  brutal  life." 


Digitized  by  Google 


INTKOPUCTION. 


24 

23  g 

1\ 

41  b 

29 

50  , 

s 

ea  v 

4 

42  M 

Horos. 

8 

19  nr 

Mid.  j 

Heaven.  S 

4 

42  * 

9  or  the  bead  of  the  dr 

24 

33  „ 

The  new  i 

moon  pr 

ccediug  his 

8 

51  » 

And  thus  much  for  the  life  of  Procliu. 

W4 .reject  to  the  translation  of  the  following  work,  0i,  the  Theology  of  Plato,  1  can  only  s.y 
•bat  I  have  endeavoured  to  render  it  as  faithful  as  possible,  and  to  preserve  the  manner  a,  well  a, 
the  matter  of  the  author ;  tbi,  being  mdisperuably  necemry,  both  from  the  importance  of  the  sub- 
**  *C,Cnt,fic  8CCUrac*  of      «**»»i"g  w«h  which  it  is  discussed.  I  have  added  a  .even* 


sr  the  work  complete;  for  without  the  development  of  the  mundane  God*, 


and  the  more  excellent  e<   i  , 

^  P"ual  ancnaants,  it  would  obviously  be  incomplete.  From 

the  catalogue  of  the  manuscript.  i„  the  late  French  king'.  librarv>  it  is  evident  ,„.,  Pfoc|ua  M 
wrmen  seventh  book,-  as  ,ome  chapters  of  it  are  mere  «id  to  be  e.tan,  in  that  library.  These 
I  have  endeavoured,  bu,  without  success,  to  obtain.  The  want  of  this  seventh  book  by  Produs, 
wi  oubtless  be  considered  by  all  the  friends  of  Greek  literature,  and  particularly  by  all  who  are 
lovers  of  the  doctrme,  of  Plato,  a,  a  loss  of  „o  common  magnitude.  It  is,  however,  a  fortunate 
crcumstancc,  that  in  the  composition  of  the  seventh  book  I  have  been  able  to  supply  the  deficiency 
ansmg  from  the  want  of  that  which  was  written  by  Proclus,  in  .  great  measure  from  other  works 
of  Proclu,  himself,  and  particularly  from  his  very  elegant  and  scientific  commentaries  on  the 
IWus  of  Plato.  So  that  I  trust  the  loss  is  in  some  measure  supplied  ;  though  1  am  sensible, 
very  madequately,  could  i,  be  compared  with  the  book  which  was  written  by  a  man  of  such  gigantic 

him  whtUhB4!.,hCe,!d0fthte  «mbwkofthi»^My..  «Uia«  divine™*™  will  I* accuracy  discoid  bv 

Zl  are  ~ 1 T  I luT  "J*""'  P0Wm"  ™S'  Wer'»  ■otdMebyhim  in  any  onsoflbe  »u  book, 
Hat  are  extant ;  which  shows  that  another  book  is  warning.  T 


Digitized  by  Google 


u. 


1NTBODUCTIOV. 


powers  of  mind  as  Proclus,  and  who  had  also  sources  of  informatiou  ou  the  subject,  which  at  the 
present  period,  it  is  impossible  to  obtain. 

A  translation  of  the  Elements  of  Theology  is  added  in  order  to  render  the  treatise  On  the 
Theology  of  Plato,  more  complete,  and  to  assist  the  reader  who  wishes  to  penetrate  the  depths  of 
that  most  abstruse  and  sublime  work;  for  the  former  elucidates,  and  is  elucidated  by  the  Utter. 

In  translating  the  treatise  of  Proclus  On  Providence  and  Fate,  I  had  great  difficulties  to  encoun- 
ter, as  the  original  Greek  is  lost,  and  nothing  but  a  Latin  translation,  which  Fabricius  observes,  is 
all  but  barbaroia,  remains.  If  the  reader  compares  that  translation  with  mine,  he  will  at  once 
acknowledge  the  truth  of  my  remark.  Indeed,  that  translation  is  in  some  parts  so  barbarous,  that 
nothiug  but  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  writings  of  Proclus,  and  the  philosophy  of  Plato 
could  enable  any  one  to  render  them  intelligible  in  another  language.  The  same  observation  is 
partially  applicable  to  the  translation  of  the  Extracts  from  two  other  treatises  of  Proclus. 

The  Greek  text  of  Proclus  abounds  with  errors,  so  that  the  emendations  which  I  have  made, 
and  the  deficiencies  which  1  have  supplied  in  this  volume,  amount  to  more  than  four  hundred. 
And  the  Latio  translation  of  Portus  is  so  very  faulty,  as  to  be  almost  beyond  example  bad. 
Having  discovered  this  to  be  the  case,  and  having  in  so  many  places  corrected  the  original,  I 
scarcely  think  that  any  of  my  critical  enemies  will  be  hardy  enough  to  say,  that  any  part  of  this 
volume  was  translated  from  the  Latin,  where  the  Greek  could  be  obtained.  As  I  am  conscious 
however,  that  in  what  is  now  offered  to  the  public,  I  had  no  other  view  man  to  benefit  those  who 
are  capable  of  being  benefited  by  such  sublime  speculations;  that  wishing  well  to  all  mankind,  and 
"  particularly  to  iny  country,  I  have  laboured  to  disseminate  the  philosophy  and  theology  of  Plato,  as 
highly  favourable  to  the  interests  of  piety  and  good  government,  and  most  hostile  to  lawless  conduct 
and  revolutionary  principles;  and  that  I  have  done  my  best  to  deserve  the  esteem  of  the  wise  and 

worthy  part  of  mankind,  1  am  wholly  unconcerned  as  to  the  reception  it  may  meet  with  from  the 
malevolent,  though  I  wish  for  the  approbation  of  the  candid  critics  of  the  day.  For  in  all  my  labours 

I  have  invariably  observed  the  following  Pythagoric  precept :  "  Do  those  things  which  you  judge 

to  be  beautiful,  though  m  doing  them  you  should  be  without  renown ;  for  the  rabble  is  a  bad  judge 

of  a  good  thing."' 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS 

or 

THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  I. 


CHAPTER  I. 

The  Preface,  in  which  the  scope  of  the  treatise  is  unfolded,  together  with  die  praise  of  Plato  him- 
self, and  of  those  that  received  the  philosophy  from  him. 

CHAPTER  U. 

What  the  mode  of  the  discussion  is  in  the  present  treatise,  and  what  preparation  of  the  auditors  of 
it  is  previously  necessary. 

CHAPTER  III. 

What  a  tneologist  is  according  to  Plato,  whence  he  begins,  as  far  as  to  what  hypostases  be  ascends, 
and  according  to  what  power  of  the  soul  be  particularly  energizes. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

The  theological  types  or  forms  according  to  all  which  Plato  disposes  the  doctriuc  concerning  the 

Gods. 

CHAPTER  V. 

What  the  dialogues  are  from  which  the  theology  of  Plato  may  especially  be  assumed ;  and  to  what 
orders  of  Goda  each  of  these  dialogues  refers  us. 


Digitized  by  Google 


lit 


CONTENT*. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

collecting  the  Platonic  tlicologv  from  many  dialogue*,  in  consequence  of  it* 
"  into  minute  parts. 

CHAPTEK  VII. 

A  solution  of  the  before  ineiitiooed  objection,  referring  to  one  dialogue,  the  Parmeuides,  the 
whole  truth  concerning  the  Gods  according  to  Plato. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

numeration  of  the  different  opinion*  concerning  the  Parmenides,  aud  a  division  of  the  objec- 
tion, to  then,. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

A  confutation  of  those  who  assert  that  the  Parmenides  is  a  logical  dialogue,  and  who  admit  that  the 
i  in  it  is  argumentative,  proceeding  through  subjects  of  opinion. 


CHAPTER  X. 

How  far  they  are  right  who  assert  that  the  hypotheses  of  the  Parmenides  are  concerning  the  princi- 
plea  of  things,  and  what  is  to  be  added  to  what  they  say  from  the  doctrine  of  our  preceptor 
[Syrianus.] 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Many  demonstrations  concerning  the  conclusions  of  the  second  hypothesis,  and  of  the  divuiou  of 
it  according  to  the  divine  orders. 

CHAPTER  XII. 

The  intention  of  the  hypotheses,  demonstrating  their  connexion  with  each  other,  and  their  coascut 
with  the  things  themselves.' 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

What  the  common  rules  concerning  the  Gods  are,  which  Plato  delivers  in  die  Laws.  And  also 
concerning  the  hyparxis  of  the  Gods,  their  providence,  and  their  immutable  perfection. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

How  the  hyparxis  of  the  Gods  is  delivered  in  the  Laws,  and  through  what 

recurs  to  the  truly  existing  Gods.  How  the  providence  of  die  Gods  is 

the  Laws,  aud  what  the  mode  of  their  providence  is  according  to  Plato.* 

'  The  12th  chapter  is  not  market!  in  the  original ;  but  it  begins  conformably  to  my  translation. 
1  The  15th  chapter  also  is  nut  marked  in  the  original ;  aud  ia  comprehended  in  my  translation  in  the  Uth 
ter.   Perhaps  it  should  begin  at  the  word*,  "  If  tlierefore  the  Gods  produce  all  things,"  in  p.  40. 


Digitized  by  Google 


f 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Through  what  argument*  in  the  tune  treatise  [the  Law*]  it  is  demonstrated  that  the  Godi  provide 
[for  all  things,]  immutably. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

What  the  axioms  are  concerning  the  Gods  which  are  delivered  in  the  Republic,  and  what  order 
they  have  with  respect  to  each  other. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

What  the  goodness  of  the  Gods  u,  and  how  they  are  said  to  be  the  causes  of  all  good ;  and  that 
evil  according  to  every  hypostasis  is  itself  adorned  and  arranged  by  the  Gods. 

CHAFFER  XVIII. 


What  the  immutability  is  of  the  Gods ;  where  also  it  is  shown  what  their  self-sufficiency,  and  firm 
impassivity  are  ;  and  how  we  are  to  understand  their  possessing  an  invariable  sameness  of 


CHAPTER  XLX. 

What  the  simplicity  is  of  the  Gods ;  and  how  that  which  is  simple  in  them  appears  to  be  various 
in  secondary  natures. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

What  the  truth  is  m  the  Gods  ;  and  whence  falsehood  is  introduced  in  the  participations  of  the 
Gods  by  secondary  natures. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

From  tbe  axioms  in  the  Phsedrus  concerning  every  tiling  divine  [it  follows]  that  every  thing  divine 
is  beautiful,  wise,  and  good. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 


A  discussion  of  the  dogmas  concerning  the  goodness  [of  the  Gods,]  and  an  investigation  of  the 
elements  of  the  good  in  the  Philebus. 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 
What  the  wisdom  of  the  Gods  is,  and  what  elements  of  it  may  be  assumed  from  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 
nd  tbe  elements  of  it,  as  delivered  by  Plato. 


Digitized  by  Google 


l«i  CONT1NTI. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Whit  the  triad  is  which  is  conjoined  with  the  good,  the  wise,  and  the  beautiful,  and  what  auxili- 
aries to  the  theory  of  it,  Plato  affords  us.' 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Concerning  the  axioms  delivered  in  the  Pruedo,*  respecting  an  invisible  nature.    What  the  divine 
nature  is.   What  the  immortal,  and  the  intelligible  >  are ;  and  what  order  these  possess  with 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

What  the  uniform  and  indissoluble  are,  and  how  sameness  of  subsistence  [and  the  unbegotteu  are] 
to  be  assumed  in  divine  natures. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 
How  paternal,  and  bow  maternal  causes  arc  to  be  assumed  in  the  Gods. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 
Concerning  divine  names,  and  the  rectitude  of  them  as  delivered  in  the  Cratjlu*. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  II. 
CHAPTER  I. 

A  method  leading  to  the  superessential  principle  of  all  things,  according  to  the  intellectual  concep- 
tion of  the  one  and  multitude. 

CHAPTER  II. 

A  second  method  unfolding  the  hypostasis  of  the  one,  aod  demonstrating  it  to  be  exempt  from  all 
corporeal  and  incorporeal  essences. 

•  Such  is  the  tide  of  this  chapter  in  the  Greek,  which  is  obviously  erroneous.  For  the  proper  title  is,  «  What 
that  is  which  unites  us  to  tktgood  ;  and  that  it  is  divine  faith."  What  is  said  indeed  in  the  Greek  to  be  the  con- 
tents  of  this,  belong  to  the  preceding  chapter. 

»  For  "  f^'fr  it  is  necessary  to  read  nfthnt. 

Mn  the  Greek  r.  f-wnfc,  tk*  uniform,  but  it  should  evidently  be  »•  »*t»,  Ike  intclligMe, 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS. 


Ivu 


CHAPTER  III. 

Many  arguments  in  confirmation  of  the  Mine  thing,  and  evincing  the  irreprehensible  hypothesis  of 
the  one. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

A  confutation  of  those  who  say  that  the  first  principle  is  not  according  to  Plato  above  intellect,  ami 
demonstrations  from  the  Republic,  the  Sophists,  the  Philebus,  and  the  Parmcnidci,  of  the 
superessential  hypostasis'  of  the  one. 

CHAPTER  V. 

What  the  modes  are  of  ascent  to  the  one  according  to  Plato  ;  and  that  the  modes  are  two,  through 
analogy,  and  through  negations.  Likewise,  where  Plato  treats  of  each  of  these,  and  through 
what  cause. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

By  what,  and  by  how  many  names  Plato  unfolds  the  ineffable  principle,  and  why  he  unfolds  it  by 
such  and  by  so  main  names.    And  how  these  names  accord  with  the  modes  of  ascent  to  it. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

What  the  assertions  are  in  the  Republic  concerning  the  first  principle,  through  its  analogy  to  the 
sun ;  where  also  it  is  shown,  how  it  is  celebrated  as  the  good,  and  as  the  most  splendid  of 
being.  How  the  sun  is  the  offspring  of  the  good;  and  that  according  to  each  order  of 
divine  natures,  there  is  a  monad  analogous  to  the  first  principle.  And  how  the  first  principle 
is  the  cause  of  all  beings,  and  is  itself  prior  to  power  and  energy. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

What  Plato  in  his  Epistle  to  Dionysius  says  the  first  king  is.  And  admonitions,  that  the  first  God 
is  discussed  in  that  Epistle. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

What  the  three  conceptions  arc  which  arc  delivered  [in  that  Epistle]  concerning  the  first  king.  How 
all  things  are  about  him.  How  all  things  are  for  his  sake.  How  he  is  the  cause  of  all 
beautiful  things.    What  the  order  is  of  these  conceptions.    And  from  what  hypotheses  they 

CHAPTER  X. 

How  in  the  first  hypothesis  of  the  Parmenidcs,  Plato  delivers  the  doctrine  concerning  ike  one, 
employing  for  this  purpose  negations.  And  on  what  account  the  negations  are  such  and  so 
many. 

'  For  ym>.n«tl  read  nim»^. 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  A 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XI. 


How  it  is  nereiiary  to  eotwr  on  the  theory  concerning  the  one,  through  negations.    And  what  dis- 
position of  the  soul  is  most  adapted  to  discussions  of  th 


CHAPTER  XII. 

A  celebration  of  the  one,  demonstrating  through  negative  conclusions  that  it  U  exempt  from  all  the 
orders  of  beings,  according  to  the  order  delivered  in  the 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  III. 


CHAPTER  I. 

That  after  the  discussion  in  common  of  the  one  principle  of  things,  it  is  requisite  to  treat  of  the 
divine  orders,  and  to  show  how  many  they  are,  and  how  they  are  divided  from  each  other. 

CHAPTER  II. 

That  the  multitude  of  unities  according  to  which  the  Gods  have  their  hypostasis,  subsists  after 
the  one. 

CHAPTER  III. 

How  many  the  particulars  are  which  ought  to  be  demonstrated  previous  to  the  discovery  of  the 
!  of  the  divine  orders,  and  an  uninterrupted  narration  of  the  doctrine  of  these. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


That  all  the  unities  are  participate.    And  that  there  is  only  one  truly  su|ieressenlial  one ;  but  that 
all  the  other  unities  are  participated  by  essences.' 

CHAPTER  V. 


That  the  participations  of  the  unities  which  are  nearer  to  the  one,  proceed  into  moi 

tases ;  but  the  participations  of  those  that  are  remote  from  the  one,  proceed  into  more 
posite  hypostases. 

1  These  four  chapters  are  comprehended  in  one  in  my  translation,  as  they  are  not  marked  in  the  Greek;  and 
I  bad  not  divided  them,  when  this  work  »u  sent  to  the  press,  as  I  have  done  the  chapters  of  the  other  books, 
in  wukh  there  is  a  similar  defect  in  the  ordinal. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

What  the  natures  are  which  participate  of  the  divine  unities,  and  what  the  order  of  them  is  with  res- 
pect to  each  other.  And  that  being  indeed,  is  the  most  ancient  of  these ;  life,  the  second; 
intellect,  the  third;  soul,  the  fourth ;  and  body,  the  last.   And  that  there  aie  also  as  many 

CHAPTER  VII. 

A  resumption  of  the  doctrine  concerning  the  one,  and  a  discussion  of  the  biformod  principles  pos- 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

What  the  two  principles  are  of  all  things  posterior  to  the  one  ;  how  Socrates  the  Philebus  calls 
them  bound  and  infinity ;  and  of  what  things  they  are  the  causes*  to  beings.' 

CHAPTER  IX. 

What  the  third  thing  is  which  is  produced  from  the  two  principles.  Why  Socrates  in  the  Philebus 
calls  it  that  which  it  mixed.  That  it  is  nothing  else  than  that  which  is  primarily  being.* 
And  how  this  proceeds  from  the  two  principles,  and  from  the  one. 

CHAPTER  X. 

How  from  image*  also,  it  may  be  inferred,  that  the  first  thing  which  subsists  from  bound  and  infi- 
nity is  being.  How  this  may  be  demonstrated.  And  how  bound  and  infinity  are  twofold ; 
one  order  of  these  subsisting  in  being,  but  the  other  existing  prior  to  being.' 

CHAPTER  XI. 

What  the  triad  is,  which  Socrates  in  the  Philebus  says  is  inherent  in  erery  thing  that  is  mixed  * 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Concerning  the  first  intelligible  triad  in  common ;  and  how  the  second  triad  proceeds  analogous  to 
this.* 

*  For  mntmt,  it  is  necessary  to  read  mtmu. 

>  The  seventh  and  eighth  chapters  form  the  third  in  my  translation. 

*  For  w,  it  is  necrssary  to  read  •». 

»  And  die  ninth  and  tenth  an  the  fourth  and  fifth  chapters  in  my  translation. 
'  This  is  the  sixth  chapter  in  my  translation. 

'  It  appears  from  this  account  of  the  contents  of  the  twelfth  chapter,  that  a -considerable  part  of  it  is  wanting 
in  the  original ;  because  nothing  is  said  in  it  about  the  manner  in  which  the  second  triad  proceeds  tualogou*  to 

the  firrt. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

What  the  second  intelligible  triad  is.   A  more  accurate  account  of  it,  as  subsisting  from  that 

predominates,  from  that  which  is  participated,  and  from  that  which  characterizes  the  mixture. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

What  the  third  iutclligible  triad  is ;  what  that  is  which  predominates,  and  is  participated  in  this. 
And  at  the  end,  a  discourse  in  common  concerning  die  distinction  of  the  three  triads. 


CHAPTER  XV. 
How  the  intelligible  triads  are  delivered  in  the  Timeus.  And 
itself,  [evincing]  that  it  has  the  third  order  in  intelligible*. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Many  demonstrations  that  eternity  subsists  according  to  the  middle  order  of  intelligible*. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 
That  the  one  in  which  eternity  abides  is  the  summit  of  intelligibles. 

CHAPTER  XVIH. 


all  the  intelligible  orders  in  common,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Timarus.    And  a 
of  the  peculiarities  m  the  i 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

intelligible  forms,  and  the  doctrine  unfolding  the  peculiarity  of  them.    How  likewise 
they  are  four,  and  from  what  causes  they  i 


CHAPTER  XX. 

That  also  from  what  is  said  in  the  Sophista,  it  is  possible  to  discover  die  three  intelligible  orders; 
viz.  in  that  part  of  the  Sophista,  in  which  it  is  shown  what  the  one  being,  what  whole,  and 
what  ail  are. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

A  summary  account  of  .what  has  been  said  concerning  the  intelligible  triads.  And  admonitions 
from  Plato  that  it  is  possible  to  divide  them  into  father,  power,  an 

CHAPTER  XXII. 


How  in  the  Phxdrus  it  is  said  that  every  thing  divine  is  beautiful,  wise,  and  good.    What  triple 
i  of  these  Plato  delivers.    And  how  from  these  it  is  possible  to  accede  to  the 
I  separation  of  the  intelligible  triads. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 


How  Parmenides  delivers  the  multitude  of  Gods  in  the  second  hypothesis.    And  how  we  should 
about  each  order  of  them,  employing  for  this  purpose  the  conclusions  of  that 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 


What  the  first  intelligible  triad  is  according  to  Parmcuidcs.    Whence  be  begins,  and  how  far  he 
proceeds,  teaching  concerning  it. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

What  the  second  intelligible  triad  is.    How  it  is  delivered  by  Parmenides  in 
triad  prior  to  it.    And  how  far  be  produces  the  discourse  concerning  it. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

What  the  third  intelligible  triad  is.    And  bow  Parmenides  unfolds  it  throngh  the  third  conclusion. 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 


the  three  conclusions  in  common,  through  which  the  three  orders  of  intelligible*  are 
characterized.  And  how  through  these  it  is  possible  to  dissolve  the  most  difficult  of  theolo- 
gical doubts. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

A  celebration  of  the  intelligible  Gods,  unfolding  at  the  same  time  tite  union  of  intelligible!)  themselves 
with  the  good,  and  their  exempt  hyparais. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  IV. 
CHAPTER  I. 

What  the  peculiarity  is  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods.    How  they  illuminate  imparticipa- 
bleliie,  and  are  in  continuity  with  the  intelligible  Gods. 


CHAPTER  II. 

How  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods  subsist  from  the  intelligible  Gods.    And  how  they  roni- 


Digitized  by  Google 


ltii 


CONTENT 


CHAPTER  III. 

What  the  division  is  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  God.  according  to  triad*.  And  what  the  dif- 
ference is  of  these  triads  with  respect  to  the  intelligible  triads. 

CHAPTER  IV. 
How  Socrates  in  the  Phssdra*  leads  us  to  this  order  of  Gods. 

CHAPTER  V. 

That  it  U  not  proper  to  understand  the  Heaven,  and  celestial  circulation  [celebrated  in  the  Ph*- 
drus]  as  pertaining  to  sensibles  ;  and  many  admonitions  from  the  Platonic  words  themselves, 
that  these  are  to  be  referred  to  the  first  order  of  Heaven. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

That  the  supercelestial  place  is  not  simply  intelligible ;  but  demonstrations  from  what  is  delivered 
about  it  [in  the  Phcdrus,]  that  it  is  allotted  an  intelligible  order  at  in  intellectuals. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

That  the  subcclestial  arch  is  the  boundary  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods,  evinced  from  the 
peculiarities  of  it. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Why  Plato  characterizes  this  order  of  Gods  from  the  middle  which  it  contains,  and  deliver*  the 

CHAPTER  IX. 

That  Plato  delivers  tbe  same  mode  of  ascent  to  the  intelligible,  as  is  delivered  by  initiators  into  the 

CHAPTER  X. 

What  the  supercelestial  place  is.  How  it  proceeds  from  the  first  intelligible*.  How  it  is  supreme 
in  intellectual*.    And  how  Plato  demonstrates  its  prolific  power. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

How  Plato  has  indicated  the  unknown  peculiarity  of  the  summit  of  intelfigibles  and  intellectuals, 
and  why  he  celebrates  it  at  one  and  the  same  time  affirmatively  and  negatively. 

CHAPTER  XII. 

What  the  negations  are  of  the  supercelestial  place.  That  they  are  produced  from  the  divine  orders. 
What  kind  of  negations  also  designate  the  uncoloured,  what,  the  unfigured,  and  what,  the  pri, 
valiou  of  contact. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS.  luii 


CHAPTER  XHf. 

What  the  things  are  which  Plato  affirm*  of  the  s upercelcstial  place,  and  from 
liarities,  he  ascribes  to  it  affirmative  sign*. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

What  the  three  deities  of  the  virtues,  viz.  science,  temperance,  and  jujticf,  are  in  the  supercelestial 
place ;  what  order  the;  have  with  respect  to  each  other ;  and  what  perfection  each  of  them 
imparts  to  the  Gods. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

What  the  plain  of  Truth,  and  what  the  meadow-  are.  What  the  unical  form  of  intelligible  nutri- 
ment is.  What  the  twofold  nutriment  of  the  Gods  Lt  which  is  distributed  from  this  intelligible 
food. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Many  admonitions  that  the  supercelestial  place  is  triadic.  And  what  the  signs  are  of  the  three 
hypostases  in  it. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Who  Adrastia  is.  What  the  sacred  law  of  Adrastia  is.  That  she  ranks  in  the  supercelestial  place. 
And  on  what  account  she  does  so. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 
A  summary  account  of  what  is  said  about  the  sup 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Demonstrations  that  the  connected! jr -containing  order  is  in  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods. 
And  that  it  is  necessary  there  should  be  three  connective  causes  of  wholes. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

That  according  to  Plato  the  celestial  circulation  is  the  same 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

How  we  may  obtain  auxiliaries  from  what  is  said  by  Plato  of  the  triadic  division  in  the  connective 
deity.    And  why  he  especially  venerates  the  union  b  tb 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

What  the  theology  in  the  Cratylus  is  concerning  Heaven.  And  how  it  is  possible  to  collect  from  it 
by  a  reasoning  process  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ixiv  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 


Thai  the  most  diviiiel) -inspired  of  the  interpreter*  have  defined  the  subceleslial  arch  to  be  a  certain 
liar  order.   And  that  our  preceptor  has  unfolded  it  in  the  most  perfect  manner. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Many  admonitions  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  subcelestial  arch  is  perfective,  from  whit  Plato  ba« 
;  it,  and  from  the  souls  that  are  elevated  to  it. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

What  the  triadic  division  is  of  the  perfective  order,  which  Plato  has  delivered  in  the  subcelestial 
arch. 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

What  the  elevation  is  of  souls  separate  from  bodies  to  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  triads. 
What  the  most  blessed  tthtt  is.  What  mueas,  and  cpopteia  are.  What  the  entire,  simple, 
and  unmoved  visions  are.    And  what  the  end  is  of  all  this  elevation. 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

How  Plato  unfolds  in  the  Pannenides,  from  rotelligibles  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  orders. 

i  is  common,  and  that  which  is  different  are,  in  the  theology  < 

CHAPTER  XX VIII. 


How  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  number  proceeds  from  intelligible*.    And  in  what  it  differs 
from  intelligible  multitude. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

How  divine  number  adorns  all  beings.    And  what  the  powers  in  it  are  which  are  symbolically  deli- 
i  the  division  of  number. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

How  Pannenides  has  delivered  the  feminine  and  generative  peculiarity  [of  first  number]  in  what  he 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

How  we  may  discover  in  what  is  delivered  concerning  number,  the  triadic  division  of  the  summit  of 
mtelligibles  and  intellectuals. 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 
Whether  it  is  proper  to  place  number  prior  to  animal  itself,  or  in  animal  itself,  or  posterior  to  it. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS. 


Uv 


CHAPTER  XXXIII, 

Whence  Parmcnidrs  begins  to  speak  about  uuinber.  Uuw  tar  Ik-  proceeds  in  what  he  says  about 
iL  And  Imw  lie  unfold*  the  different  orders  in  it. 

CM  \PTF.K  XX  XIV. 

What  the  unknown  is  in  divine  numbew.  What  the  generative  lain  them.  And  admonitions  of 
these  tilings  from  what  in  elsewhere  said  by  Plato  concerning  number*. 

CH  APT  till  XXXV. 

How  Parmcnidca  delivers  the  middle  order  of  intelligible*  and  intellectuals  through  the  one,  whole, 
and  Jiiute.    And  what  the  peculiarities  are  of  these. 

chapter  xxxvr 

W  hence  Parnienidcs  begins  to  apeak  about  this  order.  And  hoy*  fai  lie  proccedi  in  what  he  say  a 
about  it.  How  he  likewise  unlolda  the  three  monad*  in  it  conformably  to  what  is  *aid  iii  the 
Phaedrus  concerning  them. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

How  Partnenides  delivers  the  third  order  of  intelligible*  and  intellectuals.  Ami  how  he  unfolds 
the  perfective  peculiarity,  and  tiiadic  division  of  it. 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

An  admonition  what  the  union  is  of  the  three  intelligible  and  intellectual  triads,  from  the  conclu- 
sion', of  Piiinienides. 

CM  A  I'TKK  XXXIX. 

How  many  theological  dogmas  wc  may  assume,  through  the  order  of  the  conclusions  delivered  by 
Parruenidcs  in  his  discourse  concerning  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  God*. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  V. 
CH  AP  I  KK  I. 

How  the  intellectual  order*  proceed  from  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  God.-.    And  according  to 
what  peculiarities  they  subsist. 

CHAPTER  II. 

What  the  division  is  of  the  intellectual  Gods.    And  the  progression  according  to  hebdomads  in  this 
order  of  Goda, 

Proe.  VOL.  II.  i 


CONTENTS. 


chapter  nr. 

Who  tbe  three  intellectual  fathers  are  according  to  Plato.   What  the  three  tmdefiled 
i  deity  is,  that  it  co-arranged  w  ith  tbe  two 

CHAPTER  IV. 


How  from  the  writing*  of  Plato,  the  procession  of  the  intellectual  Gods  into  .ere 
be  collected  by  a  reasoning  process. 

CHAPTER  V. 

Who  the  mighty  Saturn  is,  according  to  the  theology  in  the  Cratylaa.   And  how  he  is  in  a . 

respect  intelligible,  and  in  a  certain  respect  intellectual.  In  which  also,  the  dogmas  are  dis- 
cussed concerning  the  uniou  of  intellect  with  the  intelligible,  and  its  separation  from  it. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

What  the  kingdom  of  Saturn  is.    In  what  manner  it  is  defirered  by  Plato  in  the  Politkus.  And 
of  what  it  is  the  cause  to  the  world,  to  the  mundane  Gods,  asm  to  partial  souls. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

What  the  Satumian  life  of  souls  is.    And  what  peculiarities  of  this  circulation  the  Elean  Guest 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

How  souls  are  said  to  be  nourished  by  ioleUigibles.    And  what  the  difference  is  of  the 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Wlut  the  ordors  are  which  the  mighty  Saturn  causes  to  preside  over  wholes.    In  which  also,  who 
the  Satumian  intellect  is  that  is  delivered  in  the  Gorgias  is  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  X. 

How  this  God  (Saturn]  is  peculiarly  called  by  thoologisU  insenescible,  or  free  from  old  agr.  And 
bow  Plato  has  delivered  this  peculiarity  of  him. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Who  the  t ivitV  Goddess  it-    How  she  is  the  collector  of  the  Satumian  and  Jovian  kingdoms.  And 
what  orders  she  possesses  conjoined  with  bodt  I 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Who  the  third  father  in  intellectuals  ia.    How  be  proceeds  from  the  causes  prior  to  him.  Aud 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Demonstrations  thai  lh«  whole  demiargtu  of  the  universe,  is  the  third  father  of  the  intellectual 
God*. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

through  man)'  arguments  that  the 
in  the  third  order  of  intellectuals. 

CHAPTER  XV. 


That  Timcus  especially  delivers  the  peculiarity  of  the  demiurgus,  by  calling  him  intellect.  And 
that  this  pertains  to  the  third  of  the  intellectual  i 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


How  according  to  another  method  it  is  requisite  to  discover  the  peculiarity  of  the  demiurgus.  And 
how  the  demiurgus  is  called  in  the  Tunaeus  effector  aud  father.  In  which  also,  it  is  clearly 
shown,  where  the  paternal,  where  the  paternal  and  at  the  same  time  effective,  wliere  the  effec- 
tive and  uatcnial   aud  where  the  effective  oulv  are.  acconiimr  to  Plato.    Anil  in  short  in 

CHAPTER  XVII. 


How  following  Timeeus,  according  to  a  third  method,  we  may  purify  our 
the  demiurgic  monad. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

A  theological  explanation  of  the  speech  of  the  demiurgus  in  the  Tinraus,  distinctly  evolving  our 
conceptions  about  the  demiurgic  energy. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

What  the  second  speech  of  the  demiurgus  is  to  divisible  souls.    In  what  it  differs  from  the  former. 
And  bow  in  this  all  the  measures  of  the  life  of  souls  are  defined. 

CHAPTER  XX. 
of  all  that  is  said  about  the  demiurgus,  following  the 


"  '"■.1 
.J 


CHAPTER  XXI. 
from  what  is  said  iu  the  Cratylus,  that  Plato  attributes  fabrication  to  Jupiter. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ufili  COHTIKTI. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

Admonitions  from  what  is  said  in  the  Cratylus  of  tbe  fsbricatioo  of  Jupiter.  In  which  also  the 
concord  is  demonstrated  of  the  theology  from  name*,  with  the  arrangement  of  the  demiurgim 
in  the  Tinwus. 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Admonitions  of  the  fabrication  of  Jupiter  from  what  is  demonstrated  in  the  Philebiu.  In  which 
also  it  is  shown,  what  the  royal  soul,  and  the  royal  intellect  are. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Demonstration*  of  the  same  thing,  from  what  is  said  in  the  Protagoras  about  the  political  science. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

An  argument  shewing  that  Jupiter  is  the  demiurgus  and  father  of  tbe  universe*  according  to  Plato, 
from  what  is  said  in  the  Politic  us  concerning  the  twofold  circulation  [of  the  uniTcrse.] 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Admonitions  of  the  same  things,  from  what  is  said  in  the  Laws  concerning  analogy,  viz.  that  it  is 
the  judgment  of  Jupiter. 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 
How  Jupiter  subsists  according  to  cause  in  animal  itself,  and  how  animal  itself  is  in  Jupiter. 

CHAFrER  XXVIII. 
How  Tim  ecu  j  attributes  to  the  demiurgus  die  unknown  and  ineffable. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Why  Timaus  thinks  fit  to  denominate  animal  itself,  and  is  of  opinion  that  it  may  be  known,  but 
leaves  the  demiurgus  unkuowu  and  ineffable. 

CHAFrER  XXX. 

Concerning  the  Crater  in  the  Tiuiaras,  a  theology  teaching  w  hat  tbe  genera  are  that  are  mingled  in 
it,  and  how  it  is  the  tausc  of  the  essence  of  souls. 

CHAFrER  XXXI. 

Thai  tlie  Craler  in  the  Timaius  is  fontal.  And  admonitions  from  the  writings  of  Plato,  concerning 
the  principle  and  fouutaii)  of  souls. 

Ivt  * »««•[,  it  is  necessary  to  read  ««»t*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXH. 

That  the  three  vWific  fountains  co-arranged  with  the  demiurgua,  may  be  assumed  from  what  is  said 
in  the  Timaeas,  via.  the  fountain  of  souls,  the  fountain  of  the  virtues,  and  the  fountain  of 
natures. 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Admonitions  concerning  the  undc filed  Gods ;  that  there  are  such  Gods  according  to  Plato;  and 
what  the  peculiarity  is  of  their  essence. 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 
More  manifest  demonstrations  of  the  hypostasis  of  the  untie  filed  Gods,  according  to  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

Admonitions  through  many  arguments  how  it  is  proper  to  denominate  the  undented  Gods  accord- 
ing to  Plato.  In  which  also,  the  tuiion  of  tbcm,  what  their  separation,  and  what  their  pecu- 
liarity are,  is  delivered. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

How  from  what  is  mystically  asserted  by  Plato,  auxiliaries  may  be  obtained,  concerning  the  seventh 
monad  of  intellectuals. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 
How  Plato  delivers  in  the  Parmcnides  the  summit  of  the  intellectual  Gods.' 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 
How  Parroenidcs  unfolds  the  middle  order  of  the  intellectual  breadth,  and  through  what  signs 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 
How  Parmenides  defines  the  third  order  of  intellectuals,  and  through  that  peculiarities. 

CHAPTER  XL. 

A  common  theory  of  the  intellectual  hebdomad,  from  the  conclusions  of  Parmenides. 

'  The  contents  of  chapter  thirty-seren  in  the  original  erroneously  form  the  conclusion  of  the  contents  of 
chapter  thirtv-sit.  And  instead  of  «K  »m  it  is  therefore  necessary  to  read  .n-  m  ■prn,  Uence  what 

are  marked     «».»,',«».  x,,  and  «f .  >»,  should  be  marked  «*.  *»,  anrt  «*.  ^.  It  will  be  found  also  Uiat 

ehspter  lojiy  is  wantiug. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTENTS. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  VI. 


CHAPTER  L 

That  the  ruling  order  of  God*  is  in  continuity  with  the  intellectual  God*.    And  that  the  division 
.and  principles  may  be 


CHAPTER  n. 

How  the  ruling  Gods  proceed.   And  that  the  supermundane  peculiarity  pertain*  to  these  God* 

CHAPTER  HI. 


What  tie  peculiarity  is  of  the  ruling  Gods.    That  the  aantnilaUve  i.  especially  characteristic  of 


them.  And  how  the  causes  of  assimi 
how  to  .Unintelligible  paradigm. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

What  the  powers  are  of  the  assimilative  Gods.   What  their  energies, 
imparted  by  them  to  the  world,  and  to  all  mundane  natures. 

CHAPTER  V. 

What  the  divisions  are  of  the  assimilative  Gods.   And  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  discourse  about 
i  middle  orders  in  them. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Many  demonstrations,  that  both  according  to  Plato  and  other  theologists,  there  is  ont 

CHAPTER  VII. 

That  Jupiter  is  twofold ;  one  indeed,  being  prior  to  the  three  sons  of  Saturn,  [but  the 
one  of  them.]    And  bow  the  three  proceed  from  Saturn,  and  the  one  Jupiter. 

CHAPTER  V1U. 

That  according  to  Plato  also,  the  demiurgic  monad  subsists  prior  to  the  three  sons  of 
Demonstrations  of  this  from  what  is  said  in  the  Politicus,  and  in  the  Laws. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTBWT*.  Uxi 


CHAPTER  IX. 

More  manifest  admonitions  of  the  game  things  from  what  is  said  in  the  Gorgias,  nod  in  the 
Cratyius. 

CHAPTER  X. 

Who  the  three  demiurp  are,  and  what  order  they  have  with  reference  to  each  other. 

CHAPTER  XI. 


What  the  rivific  triad  is  among  the  ruling  Gods.    And  whence  we  may  derive 
i  of  Plato  concerning  the  union  and  division  of  this  triad. 


CHAPTER  XII. 


What  the  cottvertrve  triad  of  the  ruling  Gods  is;  and  what  die  monad  which  it  contains.  In  which 
also,  the  union  of  Apollo  with  the  sun  is  demonstrated ;  and  it  is  shewn,  how  from  what  is 
wid  about  Apollo  we  may  be  led  to  the  theory  of  the  solar  orders. 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

What  the  undented  order  is  of  the  ruling  Gods.  And  how  from  the  writings  of  Plato  conceptions 
about  it  may  be  obtained. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

How  Parmcnidcs  forms  his  conclusions  about  the  ruling  Gods,  in  continuity  with  the  demiurgic 
order.   And  that  he  characterizes  the  whole  order  of  them,  through  similitude  and  dis- 

CHAPTER  XV. 


Wlut  the  supermundane  and  at  die  same  time  mundane  genus  of  Gods  is.    And  how  through  their 
own  medium  they  preserve  the  continuity  of  the  Gods  that  proceed  from  the  demiargus. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

How  die  liberated  Gods  are  characterized.    And  how  from  their  liberated  peculiarity  they  are 
:  from  the-  universe,  and  arc  co-arranged  with  the  mundane  Gods. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Wliat  the  common  power*,  and  what  the  common  energies  are  of  the  liberated  Gods,  according 
with  the  essence  that  has  been  dehSeied  of  them. 


Digitized  by  Google 


bsii  CONTENT 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Concerning  the  twelve  leaders  or  ruler*  mentioned  in  the  Phasdrus,  and  that  they  have  a  liberated 

CHAPTER  XIX. 


Man;  and  clearer  demonstrations  that  the  great  leader  Jupiter,  and  all  the  dodecad  of  leaden, 
are  liberated. 

CHAPTER  XX. 


An  explanation  from  precedaueous  causes  whence  the  number  of  the  dodecad  in  the  liberated 
Gods  is  derived. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 


What  the  division  of  the  liberated  leaders  is  into  two  monads  and  one  decad.    And  what  the  one 
division  of  them  is. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

The  theology  concerning  each  of  the  twelve  Gods,  unfolding  the  peculiarities  of  them  from  the 
subjects  of  their  government. 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

ing  the  mother  of  the  Fates  mentioned  in  the  Republic.  Likewise  concerning  the  triad  of 
the  Fates.  What  orders  they  have  with  reference  to  each  other.  What  powers  of  them  are 
delivered  through  divine  symbols.  What  their  energies  are.  And  how  Plato  ■ 
the  liberated  peculiarity. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 


now  Pannenides  forms  his  conclusions  concerning  the  liberated  Gods  immediately  after  the 

milatiTe  Gods.    And  how  he  characterizes  the  order  of  them  by  touching  and  not  touching 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  VII. 
CHAPTER  I. 


On  the  mundane  Gods  in  general,— the  source  of  their  progression, — their  orders,  powers,  ami 
spheres. 

CHAPTER  II. 


On  the  division,  and  allotments  of  the  mundane  Gods. 


Digitized  by  Google 


COKTKHTS.  llini 


CHAPTER  nr. 

That  (he  mundane  do  not  differ  from  the  supermundane  Gods  in  habitudes  to  bodies,  &c. — That 
the  providence  of  the  Gods  is  not  circumscribed  by  place.— That  h  pervade*  all  things,  and 
like  the  light  of  die  sun,  fills  whatever  is  capable  of  receiving  it. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

After  what  manner  the  visible  celestial  orbs  are  Gods.— That  a  celestial  body  is  eminently  allied 
to  the  incorporeal  essence  of  die  Gods.— That  the  visible  are  connected  with  tire  intelligible 
Gods. — And  that  the  perfectly  iurorporcal  are  united  to  the  sensible  Gods,  through  the 
essence  of  each  being  characterized  by  the  one. 

CHAPTER  V. 

The  nature  of  the  mundane  Gods  unfolded  from  the  speech  of  the  Demiurgus  to  them,  in  the 
Timcus. — And  what  the  whole  conception  of  the  speech  is  according  to  Proclus. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

What  the  demiurgus  effects  in  the  multitude  of  mundane  Gods  by  the  first  words  of  his  speech*— 
That  the  words  of  the  Demiurgus  are  addressed  to  the  composite  from  soul  and  animal,  via. 
to  the  animal  which  is  divine  and  partakes  of  a  soul. — The  meaning  of  the  words,  "  Of 
whom  [  am  the  demiurgus  and  father,"  8cc. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

The  meaning  of  the  words  unfolded  in  the  speech  of  the  Demiurgus,  "  Every  thing  therefore  which 
is  bound  is  dissoluble,  but  to  be  willing  to  dissolve  that  which  is  beautifully  harmonized  and 
well  composed,  is  the  province  of  an  ill  nature." 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  following  part  of  the  speech  of  the  Demiurgus  to  the  mundane  Gods  unfolded.— The  differ' 
ence  between  the  primarily  and  secondarily  immortal,  and  the  primarily  and  secondarily 
mdissoluble.-And  that  the  mundane  Gods  are  neither  primarily  immortal,  nor  primarily 
indissoluble. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

That  part  of  the  speech  of  the  Demiurgus  uufolded,  in  which  be  says  to  the  mundane  God.«, 
«'  Learn  now  therefore  what  I  say  to  you  indicating  my  desire." 

CHAPTER  X. 

The  developetneat  of  the  remaining  part  of  the  speech  of  the  Demiurgus. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  k 


Digitized  by  Google 


txiiv  CONTIXTI. 

CHAPTER  XI. 
Who  the  junior  God*  are,  and  why  they  are  thus  called. 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Farther  important  particulars  respecting  the  fabrication  of  the  mundane  Gods,  collected  from  the 
Timseus,  and  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  XIII. 
Continuation  of  the  deYelopement  of  these  particulars. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

The  peculiarities  of  the  celestial  Gods  separately  discussed.— Why  the  one  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars 
cotuprcheuds  a  multitude  of  stars,  but  each  of  the  planetary  spheres  convolves  only  one  star. 
—And  that  in  each  of  the  planetary  spheres,  there  is  a  number  of  satellites,  analogous  to  the 
choir  of  the  fixed  stars,  subsisting  with  proper  circulations  of  their  own. 

CHAPTER  XV. 
The  nature  of  the  Moon,  Mercury,  Venus,  and  the  Sun  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
Extract  from  the  Oration  of  the  Emperor  Julian  to  the  Sovereign  Sun. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Extract  from  the  MS.  Scholia  of  Proclus  on  the  Cratylus  of  Plato  concerning  Apollo,  in  which 
the  principal  powers  of  the  God  are  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 
The  nature  of  ihc  Muses  unfolded  from  the  above  MS.  Scholia. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

The  nature  of  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn,  unfolded.  The  manner  in  which  ea«-h  of  the  seven  plane- 
tary divinities  becomes  an  animal,  and  in  suspended  from  a  more  divine  soul  ;  and  what  kind 
of  perfection  it  affords  to  the  universe. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

That  all  the  celestial  Gods  nre  beneficent,  and  after  a  similar  manner  the  causes  of  good.— And  that 
the  participation  of  them,  and  the  mixture  of  material  with  immaterial  influences,  become  the 
causes  of  tbe  abundant  difference  in  secondary  natures. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CONTMNTS.  lllT 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Tlie  nature  of  Minerva  unfolded  from  the  Commentaries  of  Proclus  on  the  Timaeu*. — The  spear 
and  shield  with  which  this  Goddess,  in  the  statues  of  her,  ia  represented  aa  armed, 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

The  nature  of  the  great  mundane  divinity,  the  earth,  unfolded  from  Proclus  on  the  Timams  of 
Plato. 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 


The  manner  in  which  the  earth  is  said  to  bo  the  most  ancient,  and  the  first  of  the  Gods  within  the 
s,  explained. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 


On  the  essence  of  the  sublunary  deities.-What  Plato  says  of  them  in  the  Timwis  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Where  the  sublunary  Gods  are  to  be  arranged.— And  the  meaning  of  the  subsequent  words  of  Plato 
developed. 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

The  nature  of  the  sublunary  Gods  more  fully  unfolded.— On  the  dscmoniacal  order.— And  that 
about  each  of  the  fabricators  of  generation,  there  ia  a  co-ordinate  angelical,  demoniacal,  sod 
beroical  multitude,  which  retains  die  appellation  of  its  producing  monad. 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

What  Pythagoras  says  in  the  Sacred  Ditcours*.  —  What  the  Orphic  traditions  are  concerning 
Phanes,  Night,  Heaven,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Bacchus — That  Plato  begins  the  Theogony  of 
the  sublunary  Gods  from  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  not  from  Phanes  and  Night.— And  whv  he 
does  so. 

CHAPTER  XXVIH. 

On  die  two  principles  Heaven  and  Earth. — What  each  of  them  is  ;  and  particularly  concerning  the 
power  of  Heaven. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

The  wb«le  theory  of  Earth  unfolded— And  also  the  theory  of  Ocean  and  Tethys  That  the  causes 

i  are  in  the  intellectual  Gods,  and  likewise  in  the  sensible  i 


Digitized  by  Google 


Uxvi  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XXX. 
The  theory  of  Phorcjs,  Saturn,  and  Rhea,  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  XXXf. 


The  nature  of  the  sublunary  Jupiter  aud  Juno  unfolded. — And  why  Plato  comprehends  in  this 
ennead,  viz-  Heaven  aud  Earth,  Ocean  aud  Tetfays,  Phorcys,  Saturn,  Rhea,  Jupiter,  and  Juno, 
the  Gods  who  are  the  fabricators  of  generation. 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 

Why  Plato  denominates  the  sublunary  deities,  "  such  as  become  apparent  when  they  please."— 
General  observations  respecting  the  Gods  that  govern  generation. 

CHAPTER  XX  XI 1 1. 

On  the  summit,  or  monad  of  all  the  mundane  Gods,  Bacchus.— And  on  the  mundane  soul  which  is 
the  immediate  participant  of  the  Bacchic  iutellect. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 
How  the  mundane  Gods  arc  characterized  in  the  Parmenides  of  Plalo. 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

A  developement  of  what  Plato  says  m  the  Pha*driu,  about  Boreas  and  Orkhya,  the  Centaurs, 
Chimaras,  Gorgons,  Pegasuses,  Typbons,  Acbelous,  and  die  Nymulis. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

The  meaning  of  Plato  unfolded,  in  what  lie  says  about  Pan,  Tartarus,  Prometheus, 
the  Syrens. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 
A  developement  of  Plato's  theological  conceptions  respecting  Nature,  Fate,  aod  Fortune. 

CHAPTER  XXXVIH. 


What  Time,  Day  and  Night,  Month  and  Year  are,  so  far  as  tbey  are  deities,  according  to  the 
theology  of  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 
A  discmsion  of  the  order  of  divioe  souls,  who  are  deified  by  always  participating  of  the  Gods. 


Digitized  by  Google 


COMTIHTI.  IWVS 

CHAPTER  XL. 

A  derelopement  of  the  Rata  re  of  Love,  from  the  MS.  Commentary  of  Proclus  on  the  FurX  Alcj- 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

of  the  same  subject. 

CHAPTER  XLII. 


The  nature  of  demon*  more  fully  disclosed.— An  extract  from  the  MS.  Commentary  of  Prod  us 
on  the  First  Alcibiades,  on  this  subject. 

CHAPTER  XL1H. 

On  the  daemons  who  are  allotted  the  superintendence  of  mankind. 

CHAPTER  XUV. 


On  the  daemon  of  Socrates.— The  peculiarily^of  this  daemon ;  and  that  it  belonged  to  the  Apolio- 
niacal  series. 

CHAPTER  XLV. 

Important  information  concerning  daemons  from  the  MS.  Scholia  of  Prod  us  on  the  Cralylus  of 
Plato. — And  also  from  the  MS.  Commentary  of  Olympiodorus  on  the  Pluedo  of  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XLVI. 

The  nature  of  those  human  souls  that  are  of  an  heroic  characteristic  unfolded. —What  Plato  says  of 
these  souls  in  the  Cratylus.— His  meaning  elucidated  from  the  MS.  Scholia  of  Proclua  on 
that  dialogue. 

CHAPTER  XLVII. 

How  the  triple  genera  that  are  the  perpetual  attendants  of  the  Gods,  are  indicated  in  the  Parma* 
nidea  of  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XLVIH. 

■  ■  * 

An  elucidation  from  Proclus  of  what  Plato  says  in  the  Tinwus,  in  celebration  of  the  divinity  of  die 
World,  ao  far  as  the  whole  of  it  is  a  God. 

CHAPTER  XLIX. 
A  further  elucidation  from  Proclus  of  the  same  subject 


Digitized  by  Google 


lliriii  COMIIKTI. 

CHAPTER  L. 

Tfae  atoning  of  the  words  of  Plato,  "  And  casing  circle  to  revolve  in  a  circle,  he  established 
heaven  (i.  e.  the  world)  one,  only,  solitary  nature,"  unfolded  from  Proclus. 

CHAPTER  hi. 

Whit  Plato  says  in  the  Timreus  about  the  name  of  the  World,— with  the  elucidations  of  Proclus. 


Digitized  by  Google 


hui* 


An  explanation  of  certain  terms  which  are  unusual,  or  have  a  meaning  dif- 
ferent from  their  common  acceptation,  and  which  there  was  a  necessity  of 
introducing  in  the  translation  of  this  work. 


Composite,  fft/vtrrsc.  1  have  used  the  word  composite  iiutcad  of  compounded,  became  the 
Utter  rather  denotes  the  mingling  than  the  contiguous  union  of  one  thing  with  another,  which  the 
former,  through  its  derivation  from  the  Latin  word  compositui,  solely  denotes. 

Demihrcus  op  wholes,  &]/M«»fys;  raw  t*jm.  The  artificer  of  the  universe  is  thus  denomi- 
nated, because  be  produces  the  universe  so  far  as  it  is  a  whole,  and  likewise  all  the  wholes  it  con- 
tains, by  his  own  immediate  energy ;  other  subordinate  powers  co-operating  with  him  iu  the  pro- 
duction of  parts.    Hence  he  produces  the  universe  totally  and  at  once. 

Dksire,  twtfo/ua.  Is  an  irrational  appetite  solely  directed  to  external  objecU,  and  to  the 
gratification  arising  from  the  possession  of  them. 

Diaxoia,  hemm,  from  whence  dionottic,\*  the  discursive  energy  of  reason;  (Swfofcxi)  too  Xsyw 
tvipyn*)  or  according  to  its  most  accurate  signification,  it  is  that  power  of  the  soul  which  reasons 
scientifically,  deriving  the  principles  of  iu  reasoning  from  intellect,  or  the  power  which  sees  truth 
intuitively. 

Do  x  a  stic,  formed  from  !*£«,  opinio*,  is  the  last  of  the  gnostic  powers  of  the  rational  soul ;  and 
knows  thai  a  thing  is,  but  is  ignorant  of  the  cause  of  it,  or  why  it  is.  The  knowledge  of  the  fan, 
or  a-Ay  a  thing  is,  being  the  province  of  dianoia. 

CJn  est,  £«ef.  This  word,  iu  its  more  ample  signification  in  the  Greek,  tleuolrs  a  »t ranger,  but 
properly  implies  one  »lip  receives  another,  or  is  himself  received  at  an  entertainment.  In  the  dia- 
logue of  Plato  therefore,  (and  consequently  in  this  work  of  Pioclus  when  he  cites  the  dialogues  in 
which  this  word  occurs)  wherever  one  of  the  speakers  is  introduced  as  a  £•»»$,  I  have  translated  this 
word  gutit,  as  being  more  conformable  to  the  genius  of  Plato's  dialogues,  which  may  be  justly 
called  rich  mental  banquets,  and  consequently  the  speakers  in  them  may  be  considered  as  so  many 
guests.  Hence  in  thcTimaus,  the  persons  of  that  dialogue  are  expressly  spoken  of  as  guests  from 
having  been  feasted  with  discourse. 

Hvpabxis,  vwaebi.  The  first  principle,  or  foundation  as  it  were,  of  the  esseuce  of  a  thing. 
Hence,  also,  it  is  the  summit  of  essence. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Ixxx 

Impahticipadle,  «p»J#xTOf.  Oi>e  tiling  i*  said  to  be  imparticipable  with  respect  to  another, 
to  which  it  i«  superior,  when  it  is  not  consubsistent  with  it. 

Intellectual  projection.  The  immediate  energy  of  intellect  is  thus  denorniniled, 
because  it  is  an  intuitive  perception,  or  an  immediate  darting  forth,  as  it  were,  to  its  proper  object, 
the  intelligible. 

Monad,  ftora,-,  in  divine  natures  is  that  which  contains  distinct,  but  at  the  same  time  pro- 
foundly-united multitude,  and  which  produces  a  multitude  exquisitely  allied  to  itself.  But  in  lite 
ncnsible  universe,  the  first  monad  is  (he  world  itself,  which  comprehends  in  itself  all  the  multitude  of 
which  it  is  the  cause  (in  conjunction  with  the  cause  of  all).  The  second  monad  is  the  iuerratic 
sphere.  In  the  third  place,  the  spheres  of  the  pluncts  succeed,  each  of  w  hicb  is  also  a  monad,  com- 
prehending an  appropriate  multitude.  And  in  the  fourth  and  last  place  are  the  spheres  of  the 
elements,  which  are  in  a  similar  manner  monads.  All  these  mounds  likewise  are  denominated 
•^onrrtf,  wholenesses,  and  have  a  perpetual  subsistence. 

Permanency,  rratrif.  The  proper  word  for  rest,  in  Greek,  is  qpifiia.  And  Simplicity  justly 
observes,  that  not  every  a-rowij  is  ljftfuo,  but  that  only  which  is  after  motion,  'litis  word  is 
employed  by  Plato  in  the  Sophista,  to  express  one  of  the  five  genera  of  being,  viz.  essence,  perma- 
nency, (orairi;),  motion,  sameness,  and  difference ;  in  which  place  it  evidently  does  not  signify  rest. 

PriANTAfcT,  or  Imagination,  ^amairia,  is,  /a4;pivri»i|  voijvi;,  i.  e.  a  Jigured  intelligence,  because 
all  the  perceptions  of  this  power  are  intcard,  and  not  external,  like  those  of  sense,  and  are  accom- 
panied with  figure. 

Psychical,  ^ux*xef,  i.  c.  pertaining  to  soul,  in  the  same  manner  as  fuvmec,  physical,  is  some- 
thing pertaining  to  nature. 

Reason,  Aoy»r.  This  word  in  Platonic  writers  signifies  either  that  inward  discursive  energy 
called  reasoning ;  or  a  certain  productive  and  seminal  principle  ;  or  that  which  is  indicative  and 
definitive  of  a  tiling.    Hence  Knyot  or  reasons  in  the  soul,  are,  gnoslically  producing  principles. 

Unical,  man;,  that  whkh  is  characterized  by  unity. 

Uniform  twxiJijj.  This  word  when  it  occurs  in  Proclus,  and  other  Platonic  writers,  signifies 
that  which  has  the  form  of  the  one,  and  not  as  ii>  Johnson,  that  which  keeps  its  tcnour,  or  is  similar 


to  itself. 


PROCLUS, 

THE  PLATONIC  SUCCESSOR, 

ON 


Cije  Cfjeolosp  of  $lato. 


BOOK  I. 


CHAPTER  I. 

o  PERICLES,  to  me  the  dearest  of  friends,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the 
whole  philosophy  of  Plato  was  at  first  unfolded  into  light  through  the 
beneficent  will  of  superior  natures,  exhibiting  the  intellect  concealed  in 
them,  and  the  truth  subsisting  together  with  beings,  to  souls  conversant 
with  generation  (so  far  as  it  is  lawful  for  thein  to  participate  of  such 
supernatural  and  mighty  good);  and  again,  that  afterwards  having  received 
its  perfection,  returning  as  it  were  into  itself,  and  becoming  unapparent  to 
many  who  professed  to  philosophize,  and  who  earnestly  desired  to  engage 
in  the  investigation  of  true  being,  it  again  advanced  into  light.  But  I 
particularly  think  that  the  mystic  doctrine  respecting  divine,  concerns, 
which  is  purely  established  on  a  sacred  foundation,  and  which  perpetually 
subsists  with  the  gods  themselves,  became  thence  apparent  to  such  as  are 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  A 


Digitized  by  Google 


2 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


capable  of  enjoying  it  for  a  time,  through  one  man,'  whom  I  should  not 
err  in  calling  the  primary  leader  and  hierophant  of  those  true  mysteries, 
into  which  souls  separated  from  terrestrial  places  are  initiated,  and  of 
those  entire  and  stable  visions,  which  those  participate  who  genuinely 
embrace  a  happy  and  blessed  life.  But  this  philosophy  shone  forth  at 
first  from  him  so  venerably  and  arcanely,  as  if  established  in  sacred 
temples,  and  within  their  adyta,  and  being  unknown  to  many  who  have 
entered  into  these  holy  places,  in  certain  orderly  periods  of  time,  proceeded 
as  much  as  was  possible  for  it  into  light,  through  certain  true  priests, 
and  who  embraced  a  life  corresponding  to  the  tradition  of  such  mystic 
concerns.  It  appears  likewise  to  me,  that  the  whole  place  became 
splendid,  and  that  illuminations  of  divine  spectacles  every  where 
presented  themselves  to  the  view. 

These  interpreters  of  the  epopteia  (or  mystic  speculations)  of  Plato,  who 
have  unfolded  to  us  all-sacred  narrations  of  divine  concerns,  and  who 
were  allotted  a  nature  similar  to  their  leader,  I  should  determine  to  be 
the  Egyptian  Plotinus,  and  those  who  received  the  theory  from  him,  I 
mean  Amelius  and  Porphyry,  together  with  those  in  the  third  place  who 
were  produced  like  virile  statues  from  these,  viz.:  Jamblichus  and 
Theodoras,  and  any  others,  who  after  these,  following  this  divine  choir, 
have  energized  about  the  doctrines  of  Plato  with  a  divinely-inspired 
mind.  From  these,  he*  who,  after  the  gods,  has  been  our  leader  to  every 
thing  beautiful  and  good,  receiving  in  an  undented  manner  the  most 
genuine  and  pure  light  of  truth  in  the  bosom  of  his  soul,  made  us  a 
partaker  of  all  the  rest  of  Plato's  philosophy,  communicated  to  us  that 
arcane  information  which  he  had  received  from  those  more  ancient  than 
himself,  and  caused  us,  in  conjunction  with  him,  to  be  divinely  agitated 
about  the  mystic  truth  of  divine  concerns. 

To  this  man,  therefore,  should  we  undertake  to  return  thanks  adequate 
to  the  benefits  which  we  have  received  from  him  j  the  whole  of  time 
would  not  be  sufficient.  But  if  it  is  necessary,  not  only'  that  we  should 
have  received  from  others  the  transcendant  good  of  the  Platonic 

'  Meaning  Plato.    *  Meaning  his  preceptor  Syrian  us.    '  The  word  jmwv  is  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  II. 


OF  PMTO 


3 


philosophy,  but  that  we  should  leave  to  posterity  monuments  of  those 
blessed  spectacles  of  which  we  have  been  spectators,  and  emulators  to 
the  utmost  of  our  ability,  under  a  leader  the  most  perfect  of  the  present 
time,  and  who  arrived  at  the  summit  of  philosophy  ;  perhaps  we  shall 
act  properly  in  invoking  the  gods,  that  they  will  enkindle  the  light  of 
truth  in  our  soul,  and  in  supplicating  the  attendants  and  ministers  of 
better  natures  to  direct  our  intellect  and  lead  it  to  the  all-perfect,  divine, 
and  elevated,  end  of  the  Platonic  theory.  For  I  think  that  every  where 
he  who  participates  in  the  least  degree  of  intelligence,  will  begin  his 
undertakings  from  the  Gods,  and  especially  in  explications  respecting 
the  Gods  :  for  we  can  no  otherwise  be  able  to  understand  a  divine  nature 
than  by  being  perfected  through  the  light  of  the  Gods ;  nor  divulge  it  to 
others  unless  governed  by  them*  and  exempt  from  multiform  opinions, 
and  the  variety  which  subsists  in  words,  preserving  at  the  same  time  the 
interpretation  of  divine  names.  Knowing  therefore  this,  and  complying 
with  the  exhortation  of  the  Platonic  Timteus,  we  in  the  first  place  establish 
the  Gods  as  leaders  of  the  doctrine  respecting  themselves.  But  may 
they  in  consequence  of  hearing  our  prayers  be  propitious  to  us,  and 
benignantly  approaching,  guide  the  intellect  of  our  soul,  and  lead  it  about 
the  Vesta  of  Plato,  and  to  the  arduous  sublimities  of  this  speculation  ; 
where,  when  arrived,  we  shall  receive  all  the  truth  concerning  them,  and 
shall  obtain  the  best  end  of  our  parturient  conceptions  of  divine  concerns, 
desiring  to  know  something  respecting  them,  inquiring  about  them  of 
others,  and,  at  the  same  time,  as  far  as  we  are  able,  exploring  them 
ourselves. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Akd  thus  much  by  way  of  preface.  But  it  is  necessary  that  I  should 
unfold  the  mode  of  the  proposed  doctrine,  what  it  is  requisite  to  expect 
it  will  be,  and  define  ihe  preparatives  which  a  hearer  of  it  ought  to 
possess ;  that  being  properly  adapted,  he  may  approach,  not  to  our 
discourses,  but  to  the  intellectually-elevated  and  deific  philosophy  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


4  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

Plato.  For  it  is  proper  that  convenient  aptitudes  of  auditors  should  be 
proposed  according  to  the  forms  of  discourses,  just  as  in  the  mysteries, 
those  who  are  skilful  in  concerns  of  this  kind,  previously  prepare 
receptacles  for  the  Gods,  and  neither  always  use  the  same  inanimate 
particulars,  nor  other  animals,  nor  men,  in  order  to  procure  the  presence 
of  the  divinities  ;  but  that  alone  out  of  each  of  these  which  is  naturally 
capable  of  participating  divine  illumination,  is  by  them  introduced  to  the 
proposed  mystic  rites. 

The  present  discourse,  therefore,  will  first  of  all  be  divided  by  me  into 
three  parts.  In  the  beginning,  considering  all  those  common  conceptions 
concerning  the  Gods,  which  Plato  summarily  delivers,  together  with  the 
power  and  dignity  every  where  of  theological  axioms ;  but  in  the  middle 
of  this  work,  speculating  the  total  orders  of  the  Gods,  enumerating  their 
peculiarities,  defining  their  progressions  after  the  manner  of  Plato,  and 
referring  every  thing  to  the  hypotheses  of  theologists ;  and,  in  the  end, 
speaking  concerning  the  Gods  which  are  in  different  places  celebrated  in 
the  Platonic  writings,  whether  they  are  supermundane  or  mundane,  and 
referring  the  theory  respecting  them  to  the  total  genera  of  the  divine 
orders. 

In  every  part  of  this  work,  likewise,  we  shall  prefer  the  clear,  distinct, 
and  simple,  to  the  contraries  of  these.  And  such  things  as  are  delivered 
through  symbols,  we  shall  transfer  to  a  clear  doctrine  concerning  them  ; 
but  such  as  are  delivered  through  images,  we  shall  transmit  to  their 
exemplars.  Such  things  too  as  are  written  in  a  more  affirmative  way, 
we  shall  examine  by  causal  reasonings ;  but  such  as  arc  composed  through 
demonstrations,  we  shall  investigate ;  and  besides  this,  explain  the  mode 
of  truth  which  they  contain,  and  render  it  known  to  the  hearers.  And 
of  things  enigmatically  proposed,  we  shall  elsewhere  discover  perspicuity, 
not  from  foreign  hypotheses,  but  from  the  most  genuine  writings  of  Plato. 
But  with  respect  to  the  things  which  immediately  occur  to  the  hearers, 
of  these  we  shall  contemplate  the  consent  with  things  themselves.  And 
from  all  these  particulars,  one  perfect  form  of  the  Platonic  theology  will 
present  itself  to  our  view,  together  with  its  truth  which  pervades  through 
the  whole  of  divine  intellections,  and  the  one  intellect  which  generated  all 


Digitized  by  Google 


CliAP.  II.  OF  PLATO.  5 

■ 

the  beauty  of  this  theology,  and  the  mystic  evolution  of  this  theory. 
Such,  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  will  be  my  present  treatise. 

But  the  auditor  of  the  proposed  dogmas  is  supposed  to  be  adorned 
with  the  moral  virtues,  and  to  be  one  who  has  bound  by  the  reason  of 
virtue  all  the  illiberal  and  inharmonious  motions  of  the  soul,  and 
harmonized  them  to  the  one  form  of  intellectual  prudence :  for,  as 
Socrates  says,  it  is  not  lawful  for  the  pure  to  be  touched  by  the  impure. 
But  every  vicious  man  is  perfectly  impure ;  and  the  contrary  character 
is  pure.  He  must  likewise  have  been  exercised  in  all  the  logical  methods, 
and  have  contemplated  many  irreprehensible  conceptions  about  analyses, 
and  many  about  divisions,  the  contraries  to  these,  agreeably,  as  it  appears 
to  me,  to  the  exhortation  of  Parmenides  to  Socrates.  For  prior  to  such  a 
contest  in  arguments,  the  knowledge  of  the  divine  genera,  and  of  the  truth 
established  in  them,  is  difficult  and  impervious.  But  in  the  third  place, 
he  must  not  be  unskilled  in  physics.  For  he  who  has  been  conversant 
with  the  multiform  opinions  of  physiologists,  and  has  after  a  manner 
explored  in  images  the  causes  of  beings,  will  more  easily  advance 
to  the  nature  of  separate  and  primary  essences.  An  auditor  therefore 
of  the  present  work,  as  I  have  said,  must  sot  be  ignorant  of  the  truth 
contained  in  the  phenomena,  nor  unacquainted  with  the  paths  of  erudition, 
and  the  disciplines  which  they  contain ;  for  through  these  we  obtain  a 
more  immaterial  knowledge  of  a  divine  essence.  But  all  these  must  be 
bound  logether  in  the  leader  intellect.  Being  likewise  a  partaker  of  the 
dialectic  of  Plato,  meditating  those  immaterial  energies  which  arc  separate 
from  corporeal  powers,  and  desiring  to  contemplate  by  intelligence*  in 
conjunction  with  reason  [true]  beings,  our  auditor  must  genuinely  apply 
himself  to  the  interpretation  of  divine  and  blessed  dogmas,  and  fill  his 
soul,  according  to  the  Oracle,  with  profound  love;  since,  as  Plato 
somewhere  observes,  for  the  apprehension  of  this  theory,  a  better  assistant 
than  love  cannot  be  obtained. 

He  must  likewise  be  exercised  in  the  truth  which  pervades  through  all 
things,  and  must  excite  his  intelligible  eye  to  real  and  perfect  truth.  He 

•• 

*  Instead  of  tws  >"t*  Aoyw,  iU»  necessary  to  read,  vo^w  prr*  Xayov. 


Digitized  by  Google 


6  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

must  establish  himself  in  a  firm,  immovable,  and  safe  kind  of  divine 
knowledge,  and  must  be  persuaded  not  to  admire  any  thing  else,  nor  even 
to  direct  his  attention  to  other  things,  but  must  hasten  to  divine  light 
with  an  intrepid  reasoning  energy,  and  with  the  power  of  an  unwearied 
life ;  and  in  short,  must  propose  to  himself  such  a  kind  of  energy  and 
rest  as  it  becomes  him  to  possess  who  intends  to  be  such  a  coryphaeus  as 
Socrates  describes  in  the  Theaetetus.  Such  then  is  the  magnitude  of  our 
hypothesis,  and  such  the  mode  of  the  discourses  about  it.  Before, 
however,  I  enter  on  the  narration  of  the  things  proposed,  I  wish  to  speak 
about  theology  itself,  its  different  modes,  and  what  theological  forms 
Plato  approves,  and  what  he  rejects ;  that  these  being  previously  known, 
we  may  more  easily  learn  in  what  follows,  the  auxiliaries  of  the  demon- 
strations themselves. 


CHAPTER  III. 

All,  therefore,  that  have  ever  touched  upon  theology,  liave  called 
things  first,  according  to  nature,  Gods ;  and  have  said  that  the  theological 
science  is  conversant  about  these.  And  some,  indeed,  have  considered  a 
corporeal  essence,  as  that  alone  which  has  any  existence,  and  have  placed 
in  a  secondary  rank  with  respect  to  essence,  all  the  genera  of  incorporeal 
natures,  considering  the  principles  of  things  as  having  a  corporeal  form, 
and  evincing  that  the  habit  in  us  by  which  we  know  these,  is  corporeal. 
But  others,  suspending  indeed  all  bodies  from  incorporeal  natures,  and 
defining  the  first  hyparxis1  to  be  in  soul,  and  the  powers  of  soul,  call  (as 
it  appears  to  me)  the  best  of  souls,  Gods  ;  and  denominate  the  science 
which  proceeds  as  far  as  to  these,  and  which  knows  these,  theology. 
But  such  as  produce  the  multitude  of  souls  from  another  more  ancient 
principle,  and  establish  intellect  as  the  leader  of  wholes,  these  assert  that 
the  best  end  is  a  union  of  the  soul  with  intellect,  and  consider  the 
intellectual  form  of  life  as  the  most  honourable  of  all  things.  They 

■  Hrparxis,  it  the  summit  of  any  nature,  or  blossom,  as  it  were,  of  Its  essence. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  III. 


OF  PLATO. 


7 


doubtless  too  consider  theology,  and  the  discussion  of  intellectual  essence, 
as  one  and  the  same.  All  these,  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  call  the  first 
and  most  self-sufficient  principles  of  things,  Gods,  and  the  science 
respecting  these,  theology. 

The  divine  narration  however,  of  Plato  alone,  despises  all  corporeal 
natures,  with  reference  to  principles.  Because,  indeed,  every  thing  divisible 
and  endued  with  interval,  is  naturally  unable  either  to  produce  or  preserve 
itself,  but  possesses  its  being,  energy,  and  passivity  through  soul,  and  the 
motions  which  soul  contains.  But  Plato  demonstrates  that  the  psychical 
essence  [i.e.  the  essence  pertaining  to  soul]  is  more  ancient  than  bodies,  but 
is  suspended  from  an  intellectual  hypostasis.  For  every  thing  which  is  moved 
according  to  time,  though  it  may  be  self-moved,  is  indeed  of  a  more  ruling 
nature  than  things  moved  by  others,  but  is  posterior  to  an  eternal  motion. 
He  shows,  therefore,  as  we  have  said,  that  intellect  is  the  father  and  cause 
of  bodies  and  souls,  and  that  all  things  both  subsist  and  energize  about 
it,  which  are  allotted  a  life  conversant  with  transitions  und  evolutions. 

Plato,  however,  proceeds  to  another  principle  entirely  exempt  from 
intellect,  more  incorporeal  and  ineffable,  and  from  which  all  things,  even 
though  you  should  speak  of  such  as  ore  last,  have  necessarily  a  subsistence. 
For  all  things  are  not  naturally  disposed  to  participate  of  soul,  but  such 
things  only  as  are  allotted  in  themselves  a  more  clear  or  obscure  life. 
Nor  are  all  things  able  to  enjoy  intellect  and  being,  but  such  only  as 
subsist  according  to  form.  But  it  is  necessary  that  the  principle  of  all 
things  should  be  participated  by  all  things,  if  it  does  not  desert  any  thing, 
since  it  is  the  cause  of  all  things  which  in  any  respect  are  said  to  have  a 
subsistence.  Plato  having  divinely  discovered  this  first  principle  of 
wholes,  which  is  more  excellent  than  intellect,  and  is  concealed  in 
inaccessible  recesses ;  and  having  exhibited  these  three  causes  and  monads, 
and  evinced  them  to  be  above  bodies,  I  mean  soul,  the  first  intellect,  and 
a  union  above  intellect,  produces  from  these  as  monads,  their  proper 
numbers ;  one  multitude  indeed  being  uniform,'  but  the  second  intellectual, 
and  the  third  psychical.  For  every  monad  is  the  leader  of  a  multitude 

*  Wherever  this  word  occurs  in  this  translation,  it  signifies  that  which  is  characterized  by  unity. 


Digitized  by  Google 


8  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

coordinate  to  itself.  But  as  Plato  connects  bodies  with  souls,  so  likewise 
he  connects  souls  with  intellectual  forms,  and  these  again  with  the  unities 
of  beings.  But  he  converts  all  things  to  one  ira participate  unity.  And 
having  run  back  us  far  as  to  this  unity,  he  considers  himself  as  having 
obtained  the  highest  end  of  the  theory  of  wholes ;  and  that  this  is  the 
truth' respecting  the  Gods,  which  is  conversant  with  the  unities  of  beings, 
and  which  delivers  their  progressions  and  peculiarities,  the  contact  of 
beings  with  them,  and  the  orders  of  forms  which  are  suspended  from  these 
unical'  hypostases. 

But  he  teaches  us  that  the  theory  respecting  intellect,  and  the  forms 
and  the  genera  revolving  about  intellect,  is  posterior  to  the  science  which 
is  conversant  with  the  Gods  themselves.  Likewise  that  the  intellectual 
theory  apprehends  intelligibles,  and  the  forms  which  are  capable  of  being 
known  by  the  soul  through  the  projecting  energy  of  intellect ;  but  that 
the  theological  science  transcending  this,  is  conversant  with  arcane  and 
ineffable  hyparxes,  and  pursues  their  separation  from  each  other,  and 
their  unfolding  into  light  from  one  cause  of  all :  whence,  I  am  of  opinion, 
that  the  intellectual  peculiarity  of  the  soul  is  capable  of  apprehending 
intellectual  forms,  and  the  difference  which  subsists  in  them,  but  that 
the  summit,  and,  as  they  say,  dower  of  intellect  and  hyparxis,  is  conjoined 
with  the  unities  of  beings,  and  through  these,  with  the  occult  union  of  all 
the  divine  unities.  For  as  we  contain  many  gnostic  powers,  through 
this  alone  we  are  naturally  capable  of  being  conjoined  with  and 
participating  this  occult  union.  For  the  genus  of  the  Gods  cannot  be 
apprehended  by  sense,  because  it  is  exempt  from  all  bodies  ;  nor  by 
opinion  and  dianoia,'  for  these  are  divisible  and  come  into  contact  with 
multiform  concerns  ;  nor  by  intelligence  in  conjunction  with  reason,  for 
knowledge  of  this  kind  belongs  to  true  beings;  but  the  hyparxis  of  the 
Gods  rides  on  beings,  and  is  defined  according  to  the  union  itself  of 
wholes.  It  remains,  therefore,  if  it  be  admitted  that  a  divine  nature  can 
be  ,in  any  respect  known,  that  it  must  be  apprehended  by  the  hyparxis 
of  the  soul,  and  through  this,  as  far  as  it  is  possible,  be  known.    For  wo 

*  i.  e.  Of  the  nature  of  the  one. 

*  i.  e.  The  ducursire  energy  of  reason,  or  the  power  of  the  soul  that  reasons  scientifically, 


Digitized  by  Google 


II 

CHAP.  Ji.  OF  PLATO.  9 

say  that  every  where  things  similar  can  be  known  by  the  similar ;  viz. 
the  sensible  by  sense,  the  doxastic'  by  opinion,  the  dianoetic  by  dianoia, 
and  the  intelligible  by  intellect  So  that  the  most  unical  nature  must  be 
known  by  the  one,  and  th«:  ineffable  by  that  which  is  ineffable. 

Indeed,  Socrates  in  the  [First]  Alcibiades  rightly  observes,  that  the  soul 
entering  into  herself  will  behold  all  other  things,  and  deity  itself.  For 
verging  to  her  own  union,  and  to  the  centre  of  all  life,  laying  aside  mul- 
titude, and  the  variety  of  the  all  manifold  powers  which  she  contains,  she 
ascends  to  the  high<st  watch-tower  of  beings.  And  as  in  the  most  holy 
of  the  mysteries,  they  say,  that  the  mystics  at  first  meet  with  the  multi- 
form, and  many-shaped*  genera,  which  are  hurled  forth  before  the  Gods, 
but  on  entering  the  interior  parts  of  the  temple,  unmoved,  and  guarded 
by  the  mystic  rites,  they  genuinely  receive  in  their  bosom  divine  illumi- 
nation, and  divested  of  their  garments,  as  they  would  say,  participate  or 
a  divine  nature ; — the  same  mode,  as  it  appears  to  me,  takes  place  in  the 
speculation  of  wholes.  For  the  soul  when  looking  at  things  posterior  to 
herself,  beholds  the  shadows  and  images  of  beings,  but  when  she  converts 
herself  to  herself  she  evolves  her  own  essence,  and  the  reasons  which  she 
contains.  And  at  first  indeed,  she  only  as  it  were  beholds  herself ;  but, 
when  she  penetrates  more  profoundly  into  the  knowledge  of  herself,  she 
finds  in  herself  both  intellect,  and  the  orders  of  beings.  When  however, 
she  proceeds  into  her  interior  recesses,  and  into  the  adytum  as  it  were  of 
the  soul,  she  perceives  with  her  eye  closed,  the  genus  of  the  Gods,  and 
the  unities  of  beings.  For  all  things  are  in  us  psychically,  and  through 
this  we  are  naturally  capable  of  knowing  all  things,  by  exciting  the 
powers  and  the  images  of  wholes  which  wc  contain. 

And  this  is  the  best  employment  of  our  energy,  to  be  extended  to  a 
divine  nature  itself,  having  our  powers  at  rest,  to  revolve  harmoniously 
round  it,  to  excite  all  the  multitude  of  the  soul  to  this  union,  and  laying 
aside  all  such  things  as  are  posterior  to  the  one,  to  become  seated  and 
conjoined  with  that  which  is  ineffable,  and  beyond  all  things.  For  it  is 
lawful  for  the  soul  to  ascend,  till  she  terminates  her  flight  in  the  principle 

•  i.  e.  The  object  of  opinion.  *  i.  e.  EtU  demon* 

froc.  Vol.  I.  B 


Digitized  by  Google 


10  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  1. 

of  things ;  but  arriving  thither,  beholding  the  place  which  is  there,  de- 
scending thence,  and  directing  her  course  through  beings;  likewise, 
evolving  the  multitude  of  forms,  exploring  their  monads  and  their 
numbers,  and  apprehending  intellectually  how  each  is  suspended  from  its 
proper  unity,  then  we  may  consider  her  as  possessing  the  most  perfect 
science  of  divine  natures,  perceiving  in  a  uniform  manner  the  progressions 
of  the  Gods  into  beings,  and  the  distinctions  of  beings  about  the  Gods. 
Such  then  according  to  Plato's  decision  is  our  thcologist ;  and  theology  is 
a  habit  of  this  kind,  which  unfolds  the  hyparxis  itself  of  the  Gods,  se- 
parates and  speculates  their  unknown  and  unical  light  from  the  peculia- 
rity of  their  participants,  and  announces  it  to  such  as  arc  worthy  of  this 
energy,  which  is  both  blessed  and  comprehends  all  things  at  once. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

After  this  all-perfect  comprehension  of  the  first  theory,  we  must 
deliver  the  modes  according  to  which  Plato  teaches  us  mystic  conceptions 
of  divine  natures.  For  he  appears  not  to  have  pursued  every  where  the 
same  mode  of  doctrine  about  these ;  but  sometimes  according  to  a  deific 
energy,  and  at  other  times  dialectically,  he  evolves  the  truth  concerning 
them.  And  sometimes  he  symbolically  announces  their  ineffable  pecu- 
liarities, but  at  other  times  he  recurs  to  them  from  images,  and  discovers 
in  them  the  primary  causes  of  wholes.  For  in  the  Phsedrus  being  inspired 
by  the  Nymphs,  and  having  exchanged  human  intelligence  for  a  better 
possession,  fury,  he  unfolds  with  a  divine  mouth  many  arcane  dogmas 
concerning  the  intellectual  Gods,  and  many  concerning  the  liberated 
rulers  of  the  universe,  who  lead  upwards  the  multitude  of  mundane  Gods 
to  the  monads  which  are  intelligible  and  separate  from  [mundane]  wholes. 
But  relating  still  more  about  those  Gods  who  are  allotted  the  world,  he 
celebrates  their  intellections,  and  mundane  fabrications,  their  unpolluted 
providence  and  government  of  souls,  and  whatever  else  Socrates  delivers 
entheastically  [or  according  to  a  divinely-inspired  energy]  in  that  dialogue, 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IV.  OF  PLATO.  *  H 

as  be  clearly  asserts,  ascribing  at  the  same  time  this  fury  to  the  deities  of 
the  place. 

But  in  the  Sophista,  dialectically  contending  about  being,  and  the 
separate  hypostasis  of  the  one  from  beings,  and  doubting  against  those 
more  ancient  than  hiniseJf,  he  shows  how  all  beings  are  suspended  from 
their  cause,  and  the  first  being,  but  that  being  itself  participates  of  the 
unity  which  is  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things,  that  it  is  a  passive  one, 
but  not  the  one  itself,  being  subject  to  and  united  to  the  one,  but  not 
being  that  which  is  primarily  one.  Iu  a  similar  manner  too,  in  the  Par- 
menides,  he  unfolds  dialectically  the  progressions  of  being  from  the  one, 
and  the  transcendancy  of  the  one,  through  the  first  hypotheses,  and  this, 
as  he  asserts  in  that  dialogue,  according  to  the  most  perfect  division  of 
this  method.  And  again,  in  the  Gorgias,  he  relates  the  fable  concerning 
the  three  demiurgi  [or  fabricators]  and  their  demiurgic  allotment,  which 
indeed  is  not  only  a  fable,  but  a  true  narration.  But  in  the  Banquet,  he 
speaks  concerning  the  union  of  Love.  And  in  the  Protagoras,  about  the 
distribution  of  mortal  animals  from  the  Gods;  in  a  symbolical  manner 
concealing  the  truth  respecting  divine  natures,  and  as  far  as  to  mere  in- 
dication unfolding  his  mind  to  the  most  genuine  of  his  hearers. 

If  likewise,  you  are  willing  that  I  should  mention  the  doctrine  deli- 
vered through  the  mathematical  disciplines,  and  the  discussion  of  divine 
concerns  from  ethical  or  physical  discourses,  of  which  many  may  be  con- 
templated in  the  Timaeus,  many  in  the  dialogue  called  the  Politicus,  and 
many  may  be  seen  scattered  in  other  dialogues ;  here  likewise  to  you  who 
are  desirous  of  knowing  divine  concerns  through  images,  the  method  will 
be  apparent.  For  all  these  shadow  forth  the  powers  of  things  divine. 
The  Politicus,  for  instance,  the  fabrication  in  the  heavens.  But  the 
figures  of  the  five  elements  delivered  in  geometrical  proportions  in  the 
Timaeus,'  represent  in  images  the  peculiarities  of  the  Gods  who  ride  on 
the  parts  of  the  universe.  And  the  divisions  of  the  psychical  essence  in 
that  dialogue  shadow  forth  the  total  orders  of  the  Gods. 

I  omit  to  mention  that  Plato  composes  polities,  assimilating  them  to 

•  »  rtfuum  is  omitted  in  the  Creek. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


divine  natures,  and  to  the  whole  world,  and  adorns  them  from  the  powers 
which  it  contains.  All  these  therefore,  through  the  similitude  of  mortal 
to  divine  concerns,  exhibit  to  us  in  images,  the  progressions,  orders,  and 
fabrications  of  divine  natures.  And  such  are  the  modes  of  thcologic  doc- 
trine employed  by  Plato. 

It  is  evident  however,  from  what  has  been  already  said,  that  they  are 
necessarily  so  many  in  number.  For  those  who  treat  of  divine  concerns 
in  an  indicative  manner,  either  speak  symbolically  and  fabulously,  or 
through  images.  But  of  those  who  openly  announce  their  conceptions, 
some  frame  their  discourses  according  to  science,  but  others  according  to 
inspiration  from  the  Gods.  And  he  who  desires  to  signify  divine  con- 
cerns through  symbols  is  Orphic,  and  in  short,  accords  with  those  who 
write  fables  concerning  the  Gods.  But  he  who  docs  this  through  images 
is  Pythagoric.  For  the  mathematical  disciplines  were  invented  by  the 
Pythagoreans,  in  order  to  a  reminiscence  of  divine  concerns,  at  which, 
through  these  as  images  they  endeavour  to  arrive.  For  they  refer  both 
numbers  and  figures  to  the  Gods,  according  to  the  testimony  of  their  his- 
torians. But  the  entheastic  character,  or  he  who  is  under  the  influence 
of  divine  inspiration,  unfolding  the  truth  itself  by  itself  concerning  the 
Gods,  most  perspicuously  ranks  among  the  highest  initiators.  For  these 
do  not  think  proper  to  unfold  the  divine  orders,  or  their  peculiarities  to 
their  familiars,  through  certain  veils,  but  announce  their  powers  and  their 
numbers,  in  consequence  of  being  moved  by  the  Gods  themselves.  But 
the  tradition  of  divine  concerns  according  to  science,  is  the  illustrious 
prerogative  of  the  philosophy  of  Plato.  For  Plato  alone,  as  it  appears 
tome,  of  all  those  who  are  known  to  us,  has  attempted  methodically  to 
divide  and  reduce  into  order,  the  regular  progression  of  the  divine  genera, 
their  mutual  difference,  the  common  peculiarities  of  the  total  orders,  and 
the  distributed  peculiarities  in  each.  But  the  truth  of  this  will  be  evi- 
dent when  we  frame  precedaneous  demonstrations  about  the  Parrae- 
nides,  and  all  the  divisions  which  it  contains. 

At  present  we  shall  observe  that  Plato  does  not  admit  all  the  fabulous 
figments  of  dramatic  composition,  but  those  only  which  have  reference 
to  the  beautiful  and  the  good,  and  which  are  not  discordant  with  a  di- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IV.  OF  PLATO.  j$ 

v 

vine  essence.  For  that  mythological  mode  which  indicates  divine  con- 
cerns through  conjecture  is  ancient,  concealing  truth  under  a  multitude 
of  veils,  and  proceeding  in  a  manner  similar  to  nature,  which  extends 
sensible  figments  of  intelligibles,  material,  of  immaterial,  partible,  of  im- 
partible natures,  and  images,  and  things  which  have  a  false  being,  of 
things  perfectly  true.  But  Plato  rejects  the  more  tragical  mode  of  my- 
thologizing  of  the  ancient  poets,  who  thought  proper  to  establish  an 
arcane  theology  respecting  the  Gods,  and  on  this  account  devised  wan- 
derings, sections,  battles,  lacerations,  rapes  and  adulteries  of  the  Gods, 
and  many  other  such  symbols  of  the  truth  about  divine  natures,  which 
this  theology  conceals ;  this  mode  he  rejects,  and  asserts  that  it  is  in 
every  respect  most  foreign  from  erudition.  But  he  considers  those  my- 
thological discourses  about  the  Gods,  as  more  persuasive,  and  more 
adapted  to  truth  and  the  philosophic  habit,  which  assert  that  a  divine 
nature  is  the  cause  of  all  good,  but  of  no  evil,  and  that  it  is  void  of  all 
mutation,  ever  preserving  its  own  order  immutable,  and  comprehending 
in  itself  the  fountain  of  truth,  but  never  becoming  the  cause  of  any  de- 
ception to  others.  For  such  types  of  theology,  Socrates  delivers  in  the 
Republic. 

All  the  fables  therefore  of  Plato,  guarding  the  truth  in  concealment, 
have  not  even  their  externally  apparent  apparatus  discordant  with  our 
undisciplined  and  un perverted  anticipation  respecting  the  Gods.  But 
they  bring  with  them  an  image  of  the  mundane  composition,  in  which 
both  the  apparent  beauty  is  worthy  of  divinity,  and  a  beauty  more  di- 
vine than  this,  is  established  in  the  unapparent  lives  and  powers  of  the 
Gods.  This  therefore,  is  one  of  the  mythological  modes  respecting  di- 
vine concerns,  which  from  the  apparently  unlawful,  irrational,  and  inor- 
dinate, passes  into  order  and  bound,  and  regards  as  its  scope  the  com- 
position of  the  beautiful  and  good. 

But  there  is  another  mode  which  he  delivers  in  the  Phaedrus.  And 
this  consists  in  every  where  preserving  theological  fables,  unmixed  with 
physical  narrations,  and  being  careful  in  no  respect  to  confound  or 
exchange  theology,  and  the  physical  theory  with  each  other.  For,  as  a 
divine  essence  is  separate  from  the  whole  of  nature,  in  like  manner,  it  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


14 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  t 


perfectly  proper  that  discourses  respecting  the  Gods  should  be  pure  from 
physical  disquisitions.  For  a  mixture  of  this  kind  is,  says  he,  laborious : 
and  to  make  physical  passions  the  end  of  mythological  conjecture,  is  the 
employment  of  no  very  good  man ;  such  for  instance,  as  considering 
through  his  [pretended]  wisdom,  Chimaera,  Gorgon,  and  things  of  a  simi- 
lar kind,  as  the  same  with  physical  figments.  Socrates,  in  the  Phtedrus, 
reprobating  this  mode  of  mythologizing,  represents  its  patrons  as  saying 
under  the  figure  of  a  fable,  that  Orithya  sporting  with  the  wind  Boreas, 
and  being  thrown  down  the  rocks,  means  nothing  more,  than  that  Orithya 
who  was  a  mortal,  was  ravished  by  Boreas  through  love.  For  it  appears 
to  me,  that  fabulous  narrations  about  the  gods,  should  always  have  their 
concealed  meaning  more  venerable  than  the  apparent.  So  that  if  certain 
persons  introduce  to  us  physical  hypotheses  of  Platonic  fables,  and  such 
as  are  conversant  with  sublunary  affairs,  we  must  say  that  they  entirely 
wander  from  the  intention  of  the  philosopher,  and  that  those  hypotheses 
alone,  are  interpreters  of  the  truth  contained  in  these  fables,  which  have 
for  their  scope,  a  divine,  immaterial,  and  separate  hypostasis,  and  which 
looking  to  this,  make  the  compositions  and  analyses  of  the  fables,  adapted' 
to  our  inherent  anticipations  of  divine  concerns. 


CHAPTER  V. 

As  we  have  therefore  enumerated  all  these  modes  of  the  Platonic 
theology,  and  have  shown  what  compositions  and  analyses  of  fables  are 
adapted  to  the  truth  respecting  the  Gods,  let  us  consider,  in  the  next 
place,  whence,  and  from  what  dialogues  principally,  we  think  the 
dogmas  of  Plato  concerning  the  Gods  may  be  collected,  and  by  a  spe- 
culation of  what  types  or  forms  we  may  be  able  to  distinguish  his 
genuine  writings,  from  those  spurious  compositions  which  are  ascribed 
to  him. 

The  truth  then  concerning  the  Gods  pervades,  as  I  may  say,  through 

•  For  <>.«.„(,  it  is  necwaaiy  to  read  «*««,. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  V. 


OF  PLATO. 


15 


all  the  Platonic  dialogues,  and  in  all  of  them  conceptions  of  the  first 
philosophy,  venerable,  clear,  and  snpernatural,  are  disseminated,  in 
some  indeed,  more  obscurely,  but  in  others  more  conspicuously ;  con* 
ceptions  which  excite  those  that  are  in  any  respect  able  to  participate  of 
them,  to  the  immaterial  and  separate  essence  of  the  Gods.  And,  as  in 
each  part  of  the  universe,  and  in  nature  herself,  the  demiurgus  of  all 
that  the  world  contains,  established  resemblances  of  the  unknown 
hyparxis  of  the  Gods,  that  all  things  might  be  converted  to  a  divine  na- 
ture, through  their  alliance  with  it,  in  like  manner  I  am  of  opinion,  that 
the  divine  intellect  of  Plato  weaves  conceptions  about  the  Gods  in  all 
his  writings,  and  leaves  nothing  deprived  of  the  mention  of  divinity,  that 
from  the  whole  of  them,  a  reminiscence  of  wholes  may  be  obtained,  and 
imparted  to  the  genuine  lovers  of  divine  concerns. 

If  however,  it  be  requisite  to  lay  before  the  reader  those  dialogues  out 
of  many,  which  principally  unfold  to  us  the  mystic  discipline  about  the 
gods,  I  should  not  err  in  ranking  among  this  number,  the  Phsedo  and 
Phedrus,  the  Banquet,  and  the  Philebus,  and  together  with  these,  the 
Sophista  and  Politicus,  the  Cratylus  and  the  Timaeus.  For  all  these  are 
full  through  the  whole  of  themselves,  as  I  may  say,  of  the  divine  science 
of  Plato.  But  I  should  place  in  the  second  rank  after  these,  the  fable  in 
the  Gorgias,  and  that  in  the  Protagoras ;  likewise  the  assertions  about 
the  providence  of  the  Gods  in  the  Laws,  and  such  things  as  are  delivered 
about  the  Fates,  or  the  mother  of  the  Fates,  or  the  circulations  of  the 
universe,  in  the  tenth  book  of  the  Republic.  Again,  you  may,  if  you 
please,  place  in  the  third  rank  those  Epistles,  through  which  we  may  be 
able  to  arrive  at  the  science  about  divine  natures.  For  in  these,  mention 
is  made  of  the  three  kings ;  and  very  many  other  divine  dogmas  worthy 
the  Platonic  theory  are  delivered.  It  is  necessary  therefore,  looking  to 
these,  to  explore  in  these  each  order  of  the  Gods. 

Thus  from  the  Philebus,  we  may  receive  the  science  respecting  the  one 
good,  and  the  two  first  principles  of  things,  together  with  the  triad* 
which  is  unfolded  into  light  from  these.    For  you  will  find  all  these 

'  rpm&>(  is  omitted  in  the  origin*]. 


Digitized  by  Google 


!6  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

distinctly  delivered  to  us  by  Plato  in  that  dialogue.  But  from  the  Ti- 
njaeus,  you  may  obtain  the  theory  about  intelligibles,  a  divine  narration 
about  the  demiurgic  monad:  and  the  most  full  truth  about  the  mundane 
Gods.  But  from  the  Phaedrus,  [you  may  acquire  a  scientific  knowledge 
of]  all  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  genera,  and  of  the  liberated  orders 
of  Gods,  which  are  proximately  established  above  the  celestial  circula- 
tions. From  the  Politicus,  you  may  obtain  the  theory  of  the  fabrica- 
tion in  the  heavens,  of  the  uneven  periods  of  the  universe,  and  of  the 
intellectual  causes  of  those  periods.  But  from  the  Sophista,  the  whole 
sublunary  generation,  and  the  peculiarity  of  the  Gods  who  are  allotted 
the  sublunary  region,  and  preside  over  its  generations  and  corruptions. 
But  with  respect  to  each  of  the  Gods,  we  may  obtain  many  conceptions 
adapted  to  sacred  concerns  from  the  Banquet,  many  from  the  Cratylus, 
and  many  from  the  Phsedo.  For  in  each  of  these  dialogues,  more  or 
less  mention  is  made  of  divine  names,  from  which  it  is  easy  for  those 
who  are  exercised  in  divine  concerns  to  discover  by  a  reasoning  process 
the  peculiarities  of  each. 

It  is  necessary  however,  to  evince  that  each  of  the  dogmas  accords 
with  Platonic  principles,  and  the  mystic  traditions  of  theologists.  For 
all  the  Grecian  theology  is  the  progeny  of  the  mystic  tradition  of  Or- 
pheus ;  Pythagoras  first  of  all  learning  from  Aglaophemus  the  orgies  of 
the  Gods,  but  Plato  in  the  second  place  receiving  an  all-perfect  science 
of  the  divinities  from  the  Pythagoric  and  Orphic  writings.  For  in  the 
Philebus  referring  the  theory  about  the  two  species  of  principles  [bound 
and  infinity]  to  the  Pythagoreans,  he  calls  them  men  dwelling  with  the 
Gods,  and  truly  blessed.  Philolaus  therefore,  the  Pythagorean,  has  left 
us  in  writing  many  admirable  conceptions  about  these  principles,  cele- 
brating their  common  progression  into  beings,  and  their  separate  fabri- 
cation of  things.  But  in  the  Timjeus,  Plato  endeavouring  to  teach  us  • 
about  the  sublunary  Gods,  and  their  order,  flies  to  theologists,  calls 
them  the  sons  of  the  Gods,  and  makes  them  the  fathers  of  the  truth 
about  those  divinities.  And  lastly,  he  delivers  the  orders  of  the  sublu- 
nary Gods  proceeding  from  wholes,  according  to  the  progression  deli- 
vered by  them  of  the  intellectual  kings.    Again,  in  the  Cratylus  he  fol- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  VI.  OF  PLATO.  yj 

lows  the  traditions  of  theologtsts,  respecting  the  order  of  the  divine  pro- 
cessions. But  in  the  Gorgias,  he  adopts  the  Homeric  dogma,  respect- 
ing the  triadic  hypostasis  of  the  demiurgi.  And  in  short,  he  every 
where  discourses  concerning  the  Gods  agreeably  to  the  principles  of 
theologists ;  rejecting  indeed,  the  tragical  part  of  mythological  fiction, 
but  establislung  first  hypotheses  in  common  with  the  authors  of  fables. 


CHAFrER  VI. 

Perhaps,  however,  some  one  may  here  object  to  as,  that  we  do  not  in 
a  proper  manner  exhibit  the  every  where  dispersed  theology  of  Plato,  and' 
that  we  endeavour  to  heap  together  different  particulars  from  different  dia- 
logues, as  if  we  were  studious  of  collecting  together  many  things  into  one 
mixture,  instead  of  deriving  them  all  from  one  and  the  same  fountain. 
For  if  this  were  the  case,  we  might  refer  different  dogmas  to  different 
treatises  of  Plato,  but  we  shall  by  no  means  have  a  preccdaneoos  doc* 
trine  concerning  the  Gods,'  nor  will  there  be  any  dialogue  which  presents 
us  with  an  all-perfect  and  entire  procession  of  the  divine  genera,  and  their 
co-ordination  with  eacH  other.  But  we  shall  be  similar  to  those  who  "en- 
deavour to  obtain  a  whole  from  parts,  through  the  want  of  a  whole  prior 
to  parts,  and  to  weave  together  the  perfect  from  things  imperfect;  when,' 
on  the  contrary,  the  imperfect  ought  to  have  the  first  cause  of  its  genera- 
tion in  the  perfect.  For  the  Timseus,  for  instance,  will  teach  us  the  theory 
of  the  intelligible  genera;  and  the  Phaedrus  appears  to  present  us 
with  a  methodical  account  of  the  first  intellectual  orders.  But  where  will' 
he  the  coordination  of  intellectuals  to  intelligibles  ?  And  what  will  be  the 
generation  of  second  from  first  natures  ?  In  short,  after  what  manner  the 
progression  of  the  divine  orders  takes  place  from  the  one  principle  of  all 
things,  and  how  in  the  generations  of  the  Gods,  the  orders  between 
the  one,  and  .all-perfect  number,  are  -filled  up,  we  'shall  be  unable  to' 
evince. 

Farther  still,  it  may  be  said,  where- will -be  the  venerableness  of  your 
Troc.  Vol.  I.  C 


Digitized  by  Google 


IB 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


boasted  science  about  divine  natures  ?  For  it  is  absurd  to  call  these  dog* 
mas  which  are  collected  from  many  places  Platonic ;  and  which,  as  yoo 
acknowledge,  are  introduced  from  foreign  names  to  the  philosophy  of 
Plato ;  nor  are  you  able  to  evince  one  whole  entire  truth  about  divine  na- 
tures. Perhaps,  indeed,  they  will  say,  certain  persons,  junior  to  Plato, 
hare  delivered  in  their  writings,  and  left  to  their  disciples,  one  perfect 
form  of  theology.  You,  therefore,  are  able  to  produce  one  entire  theory 
about  nature  from  the  Timoeus ;  but  from  the  Republic,  or  Laws,  the  most 
beautiful  dogmas  about  manners,  and  which  tend  to  one  form  of  philoso- 
phy. Alone,  therefore,  neglecting  the  treatise  of  Plato,  which  contains 
all  the  good  of  the  first  philosophy,  and  which  may  be  called  the  summit 
of  the  whole  theory,  you  will  be  deprived  of  the  most  perfect  knowledge 
of  beings,  unless  you  are  so  much  infatuated,  as  to  boast  on  account  of 
fabulous  fictions,  though  an  analysis  of  things  of  this  kind  abounds  with 
much  of  the  probable,  but  not  of  the  demonstrative.  Besides,  things  of 
this  kind  are  only  delivered  adventitiously  in  the  Platonic  dialogues ;  as 
the  fable  in  the  Protagoras,  which  is  inserted  for  the  sake  of  the  politic 
science,  and  the  demonstrations  respecting  it.  In  like  manner,  the  fable 
in  the  Republic  is  inserted  for  the  sake  of  justice;  but  in  the  Gorgias, 
for  the  sake  of  temperance.  For  Plato  combines  fabulous  narrations 
with  investigations  of  ethical  dogmas,  not  for  the  sake  of  the  fables,  but 
for  the  sake  of  the  leading  design,  that  we  may  not  only  exercise  the  in- 
tellectual part  of  the  soul,  through  contending  reasons,  bat  that  the  divine, 
part  of  the  soul  may  more  perfectly  receive  the  knowledge  of  beings, 
through  its  sympathy  with  more  mystic  concerns.  For,  from  other  dis- 
courses, we  appear  similar  to  those  who  are  compelled  to  the  reception 
of  truth ;  but  from  fables  we  suffer  in  an  ineffable  manner,  and  call  forth 
our  un  perverted  conceptions,  venerating  the  mystic  information  which 
they  contain. 

Hence,  as  it  appears  to  me,  Timoeus  with  great  propriety  thinks  it  fit 
that  we  should  produce  the  divine  genera,  following  the  inventors  of  fa- 
bles as  the  sons  of  the  Gods,'  and  subscribe  to  their  always  generating 

•  tmhm,  m  omitted  is  tbt  original. 


Di 


CHAP.  VI. 


OP  PLATO. 


secondary  natures  from  such  as  are  first,  though  they  should  speak  with- 
out demonstration.  For  this  kind  of  discourse  is  not  demonstrative,  but 
entheastic,  and  was  invented  by  the  ancients,  not  through  necessity,  but 
for  the  sake  of  persuasion,  not  regarding  mere  discipline,  but  sympathy 
with  things  themselves.  But  if  you  are  willing  to  speculate  not  only  the, 
causes  of  rabies,  but  of  other  theological  dogmas,  you  will  find  that  some 
of  them  nre  scattered  in  the  Platonic  dialogues  for  the  sake  of  ethical,'  and 
others  for  the  sake  of  physical  considerations.  For  in  the  Philebus,  Plato 
discourses  concerning  bound  and  the  infinite,  for  the  sake  of  pleasure  and 
a  life  according  to  intellect  For  I  think  the  latter  are  species  of  the  for- 
mer. In  the  Timams,  the  discourse  about  the  intelligible  Gods,  is  assum-. 
ed  for  the  sake  of  the  proposed  physiology.  On  which  account  it  is  every 
where  necessary  that  images  should  be  known  from  paradigms;  but 
that  the  paradigms  of  material  things  should  be  immaterial,  of  sen- 
sibles,  intelligible,  and  that  the  paradigms  of  physical  forms  should  be 
separate. 

But  again  in  the  Phaedrus,  Plato  celebrates  the  supcrcclcstial  place, 
the  subcelestial  profundity,  and  every  genus  under  this,  for  the  sake  of 
amatory  mania :  the  manner  in  which  the  reminiscence  of  souls  takes 
place,  and  the  passage  to  these  from  hence.  But  every  where,  as  I  may 
say,  the  leading  end  is  either  physical  or  political,  while  the  conceptions 
about  divine  natures  take  place,  either  for  the  sake  of  invention  or  per- 
fection. How,  therefore,  can  such  a  theory  as  yours  be  any  longer  venerable 
and  supernatural*  and  worthy  to  be  studied  beyond  every  thing,  when  it  is 
neither  able  to  evince  the  whole  in  itself,  nor  the  perfect,  nor  that  which 
is.precedaneous  in  the  writings  of  Plato,  but  is  destitute  of  all  these,  is 
violent  and  not  sppntaneous,  and  does  not  possess  a  genuine,  but  an  ad- 
ventitious order,  as  in  a  drama  ?  And  such  are  the  objections  which  may 
be  urged  against  our  design. 

•  For  fuAtam,  k  U  aetmrj  to  read,  ra  nhnm*. 


OH  THE  THEOLOGY 


UOOK  I. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

I,  hoveteb,  to  an  objection  of  this  kind,  shall  make  a  just  and  per- 
spicuous reply.  I  say  then,  that  Plato  every  where  discourses  about  the 
Gods  agreeably  to  ancient  rumour,  and  to  the  nature  of  things.  And 
sometimes  indeed,  for  the  sake  of  the  cause  of  the  things  proposed,  he 
reduces  them  to  the  principles  of  the  dogmas ;  and  thence,  as  from  a 
watch. tower,  contemplates  the  nature  of  the  thing  proposed.  But  some- 
times he  establishes  the  theological  science  as  the  leading  end.  For  in  the 
Phaedrus  his  subject  respects  intelligible  beauty,  and  the  participation  of 
beauty  pervading  from  thence  through  all  things;  and  in  the  Banquet  it 
respects  the  amatory  order. 

But  if  it  be  necessary  to  survey  in  one  Platonic  dialogue,  the  all-per- 
fect, whole,  and  connected,  extending  as  far  as  to  the  com  pleat  number 
of  theology,  I  shall  perhaps  assert  a  paradox,  and  which  will  alone  be 
apparent  to  our  familiars.   We  ought  however  to  dare,  since  we  have 
entered  on  such  like  arguments,  and  affirm  against  our  opponents,  that 
the  Parmenides,  and  the  mystic  conceptions  it  contains,  will  accomplish 
all  you  desire.  For  in  this  dialogue  all  the  divine  genera  proceed  in- 
order  from  the  first  cause,  and  evince  their  mutual  connexion  and  de- 
pendence on  each  other.    And  those  which  are  highest  indeed,  connate 
with  the  one,  and  of  a  primary  nature,  are  allotted  a  unica),  occult  and 
simple  form  of  hyparxis ;  but  such  as  are  last,  are  multiplied,  are  distri- 
buted into  many  parts,  and  are  exuberant  in  number,  but  inferior  in 
power  to  such  as  are  of  a  higher  order ;  and  such  as  are  middle,  accord- 
ing to  a  convenient  proportion,  are  more  composite  than  their  causes, 
but  more  simple  than  their.proper  progeny.    And  in  short,  all  the  axioms 
of  the  theologic  science,  appear  in  perfection  in  this  dialogue,  and  all  the 
divine  orders  are  exhibited  subsisting  in  connexion.    So  that  this  is  no- 
thing else  than  the.  celebraled;  generation  of  the  Gods  and  the  procession 
of  every  kind  of  being  from  the  ineffable  and  unknown  cause  of  wholes. 
The  Parmenides,  therefore,  enkindles  in  the  lovers  of  Plato,  the  whole 
and  perfect  light  of  the  theological  science.  But  after  this,  the  before  men- 
tioned dialogues  distribute  parts  of  the  mystic  discipline  about  the  Gods, 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  VIII. 


OF  PLATO. 


and  all  of  them,  as  I  may  say,  participate  of  divine  wisdom,  and  excite 
our  spontaneous  conceptions  respecting  a  divine  nature.  And  it  is  ne- 
cessary to  refer  all  the  parts  of  this  mystic  discipline  to  these  dialogue*, 
and  these  again  to  the  one  and  all-perfect  theory  of  the  Parmenides.  For 
thus,  as  it  appears  to  me,  we  shall  suspend  the  more  imperfect  from  the 
perfect,  and  parts  from  wholes,  and  shall  exhibit  reasons  assimilated  to 
things,  of  which,  according  to  the  Platonic  Timacus,  they  are  interpreters, 
Such  then  is  our  answer  to  the  objection  which  may  be  urged  against  us  ; 
and  thus  we  refer  the  Platonic  theory  to  the  Parmenides ;  just  as  the* 
Timams  is  acknowledged  by  all  who  are  in  the  least  degree  intelligent,  to' 
contain  the  whole  science  about  nature. 

■ 

-  -  - 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

I  appear,  however,  by  these  means,  to  have  excited  for  myself  a  two- 
fold contest  against  those  who  attempt  to  investigate  the  writings  of 
Plato ;  and  I  see  two  sorts  of  persons,  who  will  oppose  what  has  been 
said.  One  of  these  does  not  think  proper  to  explore  any  other  design  in  the 
Parmenides,  than  exercise  through  opposite  arguments,  or  to  introduce  in 
this  dialogue  a  croud  of  arcane  and  intellectual  dogmas,  which  are  foreign 
from  its  intention.  But  the  other  sort,  who  are  more  venerable  than 
these,  and  lovers  of  forms  assert,  that  one  of  the  hypotheses  is  about  the 
first  God,  another  about  the  second  God,  and  the  whole  of  an  intellec- 
tual nature,  and  a  third,  about  the  natures  posterior  to  this,  whether 
they  are  the  more  excellent  genera,  or  souls,  or  any  other  kind  of  beings. 
For  the  investigation  of  these  particulars  does  not  pertain  to  the  present 
discourse. 

These,  therefore,  distribute  three  of  the  hypotheses  after  this  manner. 
But  they  do  not  think  proper  to  busy  themselves  about  the  multitude  of 
Gods,  the  intelligible,  and  the  intellectual  genera,  the  supermundane  and 
mundane  natures,  or  to  unfold  all  these  by  division,  or  busily  explore 


Digitized  by  Google 


12  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

them.  For  according  to  them,  though  Plato  in  the  second  hypothesis* 
treats  about  intellectual  beings,  yet  the  nature  of  intellect  is  one,  simple 
and  indivisible.  Against  both  these  therefore,  must  be  contend,  who 
entertains  that  opinion  of  the  Parmenides,  which  we  have  before  men* 
tioned.  The  contest  however  against  these  is  not  equal.  But  those 
who  make  the  Parmenides  a  logical  exercise,  are  again  attacked  by  those, 
who  embrace  the  divine  mode  of  interpretation.  And  those  who  do  upt, 
unfold  the  multitude  of  beings,  and  the  orders  of  divine  natures,  are  in- 
deed, as  Homer  says,  is  every  respect  venerable  and  skilful  menj  but 
yet  for  the  sake  of  the  Platonic  philosophy,  we  must  doubt  against  them,' 
following  in  this  our  leader  to  the  most  holy  and  mystic  truth.  It  is 
proper  likewise  to  relate  as  far  as  contributes  to  our  purpose,  what  ap- 
pears to  us  to  be  the  truth  respecting  the  hypotheses  of  the  Parmenides \ 
for  thus  perhaps  by  a  reasoning  process,  we  may  embrace  the  whole  the- 
ology of  Plato. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

,  Ijr  the  first  place  then,  let  us  consider  those,  who  draw  down  the 
design  of  this  dialogue  from  the  truth  of  things  to  a  logical  exercise,  and 
see  whether  they  can  possibly  accord  with  the  writings  of  Plato.  It  is 
therefore  evident  to  every  one,  that  Parmenides  proposes  to  himself  to 
deliver  in  reality  the  dialectic  method,  and  that  with  this  view  he  curso- 
rily assumes  it  in  a  similar  manner  in  each  of  the  things  which  have  a 
real  being,  as,  in  sameness,  difference,  similitude,  dissimilitude,  motion, 
and  permanency,  &c. ;  exhorting  at  the  same  time,  those  who  desire  to 
discover  the  nature  of  each  of  these  in  an  orderly  method,  to  this  exercise, 
as  to  a  great  contest.  He  likewise  asserts  that  it  was  by  no  means  an  easy 
undertaking  to  him  who  was  so  much  advanced  in  years,  assimilates  him- 
self to  the  Ibycean  horse,  and  presents  us  with  every  argument  to  prove 
that  this  method  is  a  serious  undertaking,  and  not  a  contest  consisting  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IX.  OP  PLATO.  S3 

mere  words.  How  therefore,  is  it  possible,  that  we  can  refer  to  empty 
arguments  those  conceptions '  about  which  the  great  Parmenides,  evin- 
cing that  they  require  much  serious  discussion,  composed  this  discourse  ? 
How  likewise  is  it  reasonable  to  suppose  that  an  aged  man  would  busy 
himself  with  mere  verbal  contests,  and  that  he  who  loved  to  speculate 
the  truth  of  things,  would  bestow  so  much  study  on  this  method,— he 
who  considered  every  thing  else,  as  having  no  real  existence,  and  who 
ascended  to  the  high  watch-tower  of  being  itself?  Indeed,  he  who  ad- 
mits this  must  suppose  that  Parmenides  is  satirized  by  Plato  in  this  dia- 
logue, by  thus  representing  him  drawn  down  to  juvenile  contests,  from 
the  most  intellectual  visions  of  the  soul. 

But  if  you  are  willing,  let  us  consider  in  addition  to  the  above,  what 
***rmenidei  ^  onuses,  and  on  what  subject  engaging  to  speak,  he  entered 
on  thb  discussiOw-  Wp.,  it  potthen  about  being  according  to  his  doc- 
trine, and  the  unity  of  all  beiugsTtj  WlUtliwwiondjnp;  himself,  his  design 
was  concealed  from  the  vulgar,  while  he  exhorts  us  to  conSP^ipPMfc 
tude  of  beings  into  one  undivided  union  ?  If,  therefore,  this  is  the  one 
being,  or  that  which  is  the  highest,  and  which  is  perfectly  established 
above  the  reasons  conversant  with  opinion,  is  it  not  absurd  to  confound 
dogmas  about  intelligibles  with  doxastic  arguments?  Tor  indeed,  such  a 
form  of  discourse  is  not  adapted  to  the  hypothesis  about  true  beings,  nor 
does  the  intellection  of  unapparent  and  separate  causes  harmonise  with 
dialectic  exercises;  but  these  differ  from  each  other,  so  far  as  intellect  is 
established  above  opinion,  as  Timaeus  informs  us,  and  not  Timaeus  only, 
but  likewise  the  daemoniacal  Aristotle,  who,  discoursing  on  a  power  of 
this  kind,  exhorts  us  to  make  our  investigations,  ueitber  about  things 
perfectly  unapparent  to  us,  nor  about  such  as  are  more  known. 

It  is  far  therefore  from  being  the  case,  that  Parmenides,  who  places 
the  science  of  beings  above  that  which  appears  to  be  truth  to  those  who 
rank  sense  before  intellect,  should  introduce  doxastic  knowledge  to  an 
intellective  nature,  since  a  knowledge  of  this  kind  is  dubious,  various, 
and  unstable ;  or  that  he- should  speculate  true  being  with  this  doxastie 

■  For  nurrcXoi,  it  if  uecxttuj  to  read  rr<0»A«f. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

wisdom,  and  inane  discussion.   For  a  varioiw  fnrm  ~f  i  ,  , 

not  harmonise'  with  th*r  *,hi,h  "  •    ?^  rf  knofW8«  docs 

.,         ,a\        Umt  whlch  *«  simple,  nor  the  multiform  with  t)„ 
un.fonn,  nor  the  doxastic  with  the  intelligible  lth 

But  still  further,  nor  must  this  be  omitted,  that  such  »  mnA  ^ 
course  i,  perfectly  foreign  from  the  discussion  of 
discourses  about  all  beings  and  deliver,  the  order  of  *ZT\u 

Does  it  not  therefore  appear,  *a  Plato  nZ  £  Z 
ant  hypothesis  to  Parme^es,  if  it  ^  8aTd  th^  L^"^  *  dUcorf- 
exercise  through  opposite  arguments,  and  tha^  tLTkl of  T*  ^ 
employed  in  this  exercise,  he  excites  the- whole  of  ^  evil  IT" 

attributes  hypotheses  to  each  of  the  pWIosonhenLaL**^ 
bar  tenets.  Thus  to  TW»*  _  jg}LL^flVnio  their  pecu- 
Sf^T-atp^diMtf  ^^^^p^^P^ffffT^TiTthp.  doctrine  about  nature  ;  to 
Republic;  to  the  Elean  guest,  that  about  being ;  and 
to  the  priestess  Diotiraa,  that  respecting  love.  Afterwards,  each  of  the 
other  dialogues  confines  itself  to  those  arguments  which  are  adapted  to 
the  writings  of  the  principal  person  of  the  dialogue.  But  Parmenides 
alone  will  appear  to  us  wise  in  his  poems,  and  in  his  diligent  investiga- 
tion of  true  being,  but  in  the  Platonic  scene,  he  will  be  the  leader  of  a 
juvenile  muse.  This  opinion,  therefore,  accuses  Plato  of  dissimilitude  of 
imitation,  though  he  himself  condemns  the  poets,  for  ascribing  to  the 
sons  of  the  Gods  a  love  of  money,  and  a  life  subject  to  the  dominion  of 
the  passions.  How,  therefore,  can  we  refer  a  discussion  of  doxastic  and 
empty  arguments  to  the  leader  of  the  truth  of  beings  ? 

But  if  it  be  necessary  that  omitting  a  multitude  of  arguments,  we 
should  make  Plato  himself  a  witness  of  the  proposed  discussion,  we  will 
cite  if  you  please  what  is  written  in  the  Thcaetetus  and  Sophista ;  for  from 
these  dialogues  what  we  assert  will  be  apparent  In  the  Tbesetetus  then 
Socrates  being  excited  by  a  young  man  to  a  confutation  of  those  who  assert 
that  being  is  immoveable,  attacks  among  these  an  opinion  of  this  kind 

■  For  pm*  cLfiuHrnot,  it  is  necemry  to  rod  t»k$ 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IX. 


OF  PLATO. 


entertained  by  Parmenides,  and  at  the  same  time  assigns  the  cause. 
"  I  blush,"  says  he,  "  for  Parmeoides,  who  is  one  of  these,  more  than 
for  all  the  rest ;  for  I,  when  very  young,  was  conversant  with  him  when 
■he  was  very  elderly,  and  he  appeared  to  me  to  possess  a  certain  profun- 
dity perfectly  generous.  1  am  afraid  therefore,  lest  we  do  not  under- 
stand what,  has  been  asserted,  and  much  more  am  I  fearful  that  we  fall 
short  of  the  meaning  of  Parmenides."  With  great  propriety  therefore  do 
we  assert,  that  the  proposed  discussion  does  not  regard  a  logical  exer- 
cise, and  make  this  the  end  of  the  whole,  but  that  it  pertains  to  the 
science  of  the  first  principles  of  things.  For  how  could  Socrates  using  a 
power  of  this  kind,  and  neglecting  the  knowledge  of  things,  testify  that 
the  discourse  of  Parmenides  possessed  a  depth  perfectly  generous  P  And 
what  venerableness  can  there  be  in  adopting  a  method  which  proceeds 
doxastically  through  opposite  reasons,  and  in  undertaking  such  an  inven- 
tion of  arguments  ? 

Again,  in  the  Sophista,  exciting  the  Elean  guest  to  a  perspicuous  evo- 
lution of  the  things  proposed  by  him,  and  evincing  that  he  was  now 
Accustomed  to  more  profound  discourses :  "  Inform  me,"  says  he,  "  whe- 
ther it  is  your  custom  to  give  a  prolix  discussion  of  a  subject  which  you  are 
able  to  demonstrate  to  any  one  by  interrogations  ;  I  mean  such  discussions 
as  Parmenides  himself  formerly  used,  accompanied  with  all-beautiful 
reasons,  and  of  which  I  was  an  auditor  when  I  was  very  young,  and  he 
was  very  elderly  ?"  What,  reason  then  can  be  assigned,  why  we  should 
not  believe  Socrates,  when  he  asserts  that  the  arguments  of  Parmenides 
were  all-beautiful,  and  possessed  a  generous  profundity,  and  why  we 
should  degrade  the  discussion  of  Parmenides,  hurl  it  from  essence  and 
being,  and  transfer  it  to  a  vulgar,  trifling,  and  empty  contest,  neither 
considering  that  discourses  of  this  kind  are  alone  adapted  to  youth,  nor 
regarding  the  hypothesis  of  being  characterized  by  the  «n«,  nor  any  thing 
else  which  opposes  such  an  opinion  ? 

But  I  likewise  think  it  is  proper  that  the  authors  of  this  hypothesis, 
should  consider  the  power  of  dialectic,  such  as  it  is  exhibited  by  Socra- 
tes in  the  Republic ; — how,  as  he  says,  it  surrounds  all  disciplines  like  a 
defensive  enclosure,  and  elevates  those  that  use  it,  to  the  good  itself,  and 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  D 


Digitized  by  Google 


■ 


36  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  t 

the  first  unities,  purifies  the  eje  of  the  soul,  establishes  it  in  true  being*, 
and  the  one  principle  of  all  things,  and  ends  at  last  in  that  which  is  no 
longer  hypothetical.  For  if  the  power  of  this  dialectic  is  so  great,  and 
the  end  of  this  path  so  mighty,  it  is  not  proper  to  confound  doxastic 
arguments,  with  a  method  of  this  kind.  For  the  former  regards  the  opi- 
nions of  men,  but  the  latter  is  called  garrulity  by  the  vulgar.  And  the  one 
is  perfectly  destitute  of  disciplinative  science,  but  the  other  is  the  defen- 
sive enclosure  of  such  sciences,  and  the  passage  to  it  is  through  these. 
Again,  the  doxastic  method  of  reasoning  has  for  its  end  *  the  apparent, 
but  the  dialectic  method  endeavours  to  arrive  at  the  one  itself,  always 
employing  for  this  purpose  steps  of  ascent,  and  at  last,  beautifully  ends 
in  the  nature  of  the  good. 

By  no  means  therefore,  is  it  fit  that  we  should  draw  down  to  doxastic 
arguments,  a  method  which  is  established  among  the  most  accurate  sci- 
ences. For  the  merely  logical  method  which  presides  over  the  demon- 
strative phantasy,  is  of  a  secondary  nature,  and  is  alone  pleased  with 
contentious  discussions ;  but  our  dialectic,  for  the  most  part,  employs 
divisions  and  analyses  as  primary  sciences,  and  as  imitating  the  progres* 
sion  of  beings  from  the  one,  and  their  conversion  to  it  again.  But  it 
likewise  sometimes  uses  definitions  and  demonstrations,  and  prior  to 
these  the  definitive  method,  and  the  dividing  method  prior  to  this.  On 
the  contrary,  the  doxastic  method  is  deprived  of  the  incontrovertible 
reasonings  of  demonstration.  Is  it  not,  therefore,  necessary  that  these 
powers  must  be  separated  from  each  other,  and  that  the  discussion  of 
Parmenides,  winch  employs  our  dialectic,  must  be  free  from  the  empty 
variety  of  mere  argument,  and  must  fabricate  its  reasonings  with  a  view 
to  being  itself,  and  not  to  that  which  is  apparent?  And  thus  much  may 
suffice  in  answer  to  those  who  reprobate  our  hypotheses.  For  if  all  this 
cannot  convince  them,  we  shall  in  vain  endeavour  to  persuade  them,  and 
urge  them  to  the  speculation  of  things. 

•  tiM{  is  omitted  in  the  origin*]. 


•Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  X. 


OF  PLATO. 


CHAPTER  X. 

But  a  greater  and  more  difficult  contest  remains  for  me,  against  those 
lovers  of  the  speculation  of  beings,  who  look  to  the  science  of  first  causes, 
as  the  end  proposed  in  the  hypothesis  of  the  Platonic  Parmenides ;  and 
this  contest  we  will  accomplish,  if  you  please,  by  numerous  and  more 
known  arguments. 

And  in  the  first  place,  we  shall  define  what  that  is,  about  which  our 
discourse  against  them  will  be  employed ;  for  this,  I  think,  will  render  the 
mystic  doctrine  of  Plato  concerning  divine  natures,  apparent  in  the 
highest  degree.  There  are,  therefore,  nine  hypotheses  which  are  dis- 
cussed by  Parmenides  in  this  dialogue,  as  we  have  evinced  in  our  com- 
mentaries upon  it.  And  the  five  precedaneous  hypotheses  suppose  that 
the  one  has  a  subsistence,  and  through  this  hypothesis,  that  all  beings, 
the  mediums  of  wholes,  and  the  terminations  of  the  progressions  of  things, 
may  be  supposed  to  subsist.  But  the  four  hypotheses  which  follow  these, 
introduce  the  one,  not  having  a  subsistence,  according  to  the  exhortation 
of  the  dialectic  method,  show  that  by  taking  away  the  one,  all  beings, 
and  such  things  as  have  an  apparent  existence,  must  be  entirely  subvert- 
ed, and  propose  to  themselves  the  confutation  of  this  hypothesis.  And 
some  of  the  hypotheses  evidently  conclude  every  thing  according  to  rea- 
son, but  others  (if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression)  perfectly  evince 
things  more  impossible  than  impossibilities ;  which  circumstance  some 
prior  to  us  perceiving,  as  it  appears  to  me,  necessarily  to  happen  in  these 
hypotheses,  have  considered  it  as  deserving  discussion/  in  their  treatises 
on  this  dialogue. 

With  respect  to  the  first  of  the  hypotheses  therefore,  almost  all  agree 
in  asserting,  that  Plato  through  this  celebrates  the  superessential  princi- 
ple of  wholes,  as  ineffable,  unknown,  and  above  all  being.  But  all  do 
not  explain  the  hypothesis  posterior  to  this  after  the  same  manner.  For 
the  ancient  Platonists,  and  those  who  participated  the  philosophy  of 

*  For  toajTv,  I  read  tiarfifa. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


Plotinus  assert  that  an  intellectual  nature  presents  itself  to  the  view  in 
this  hypothesis,  subsisting  from  the  superessenti&l  principle  of  things,  and 
endeavour  to  harmonize  to  the  one  and  all-perfect  power  of  intellect, 
such  conclusions  as  are  the  result  of  this  hypothesis.  But  that  leader  of 
ours  to  truth  about  the  Gods,  and  confabulator  of  Plato  (that  I  may  use 
the  language  of  Homer)  who  transferred  what  was  indefinite  in  the  theory 
of  the  more  ancient  philosophers,  to  bound,  and  reduced  the  confusion 
of  the  different  orders  to  an  intellectual  distinction,  in  the  writings  which 
he  communicated  to  his  associates this  our  leader,  in  his  treatise  on 
the  present  subject,  calls  upon  us  to  adopt  a  distinct  division  of  the  con- 
clusions, to  transfer  this  division  to  the  divine  orders,  and  to  harmonize 
the  first  and  most  simple  of  the  things  exhibited  to  the  first  of  beings; 
but  to  adapt  those  in  the  middle  rank  to  middle  natures,  according  to 
the  order  which  they  are  allotted  among  beings ;  and  such  as  are  last  and 
multiform,  to  ultimate  progressions.  For  the  nature  of  being  is  not  one, 
simple,  and  indivisible ;  but  as  in  sensibles,  the  mighty  heaven  is  one, 
yet  it  comprehends  in  itself  a  multitude  of  bodies ;  and  the  monad  con- 
nectedly contains  multitude,  but  in  the  multitude  there  is  an  order  of 
progression  ;  and  of  sensibles,  some  are  first,  some  middle,  and  some  last ; 
and  prior  to  these,  in  souls,  from  one  soul  a  multitude  of  souls  subsists,- 
and  of  these,  some  are  placed  in  an  order  nearer,  but  others  more  remote 
from  their  wholeness,  and  others  again  fill  up  the  medium  of  the  ex- 
tremes ; — in  like  manner,  it  is  doubtless  necessary  that  among  perfectly 
true  beings,  such  genera  as  are  uniform  and  occult,  should  be  established 
in  the  one  and  first  cause  of  wholes,  but  that  others  should  proceed  into 
all  multitude,  and  a  whole  number,  and  that  others  should  contain  the 
bond  of  these,  in  a  middle  situation.  It  is  likewise  by  no  means  proper 
to  harmonize  the  peculiarities  of  first  natures  with  such  as  are  second,  nor 
of  those  that  possess  a  subject  order,  with  such  as  are  more  unical,  but 
it  is  requisite  that  among  these,  some  should  have  powers  different  from 
others,  and  that  there  should  be  an  order  in  this  progression  of  true 
beings,  and  an  unfolding  of  second  from  first  natures. 

In  short,  being  which  subsists  according  to,  or  is  characterized  by  the 
one,  proceeds  indeed  from  the  unity  prior  to  beings,  but  generates  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  X. 


OF  PLATO. 


whole  divine  genus,  viz.  the  intelligible,  intellectual,  supermundane,  and 
that  which  proceeds  as  far  as  to  the  mundane  order.  But  our  preceptor 
likewise  asserts,  that  each  of  the  conclusions  is  indicative  of  a  divine  pe- 
culiarity. And  though  all  the  conclusions  harmonise  to  all  the  progres- 
sions of  the  one  being,  or  of  being  characterized  by  the  one,  yet  I  am  of 
opinion,  it  is  by  no  means  wonderful,  that  some  conclusions  should  more 
accord  with  some  hypotheses  than  with  others.  For  such  things  as  ex- 
press the  peculiarity  of  certain  orders,  do  not  necessarily  belong  to  all  the 
Gods ;  but  such  as  belong  to  all,  are  doubtless  by  a  much  greater  reason 
present  with  each.  If,  therefore,  we  ascribe  to  Plato,  an  adventitious 
division  ot  the  divine  orders,'  and  do  not  clearly  evince  that,  in  other 
dialogues,  he  celebrates  the  progressions  of  the  Gods  from  on  high 
to  the  extremity  of  things,  sometimes  in  fables  respecting  the  soul,  and 
at  other  times,  in  other  theological  modes,  we  shall  absurdly  attribute  to 
him,  such  a  division  of  being,  and  together  with  this,  of  the  progression 
of  the  one.  But  if  we  can  evince  from  other  dialogues,  that  he  (as  will 
be  manifest  in  the  course  of  this  work)  has  celebrated  all  the  kingdoms 
of  the  Gods,  in  a  certain  respect,  is  it  not  impossible,  that  in  the  most 
mystic  of  all  his  works,  he  should  deliver  through  the  first  hypothesis,  the 
exempt  transcendency  of  the  one  with  respect  to  all  the  genera  of  beings, 
to  being  itself,  to  a  psychical  essence,  to  form,  and  to  matter,  but  that 
he  should  make  no  mention  of  the  divine  progressions,  and  their  orderly 
separation  ?  For  if  it  is  proper  to  contemplate  last  things  only,  why  do 
we  touch  on  the  first  principle  before  other  things  ?  Or  if  we  think  fit  to 
unfold  the  multitude  of  the  proper  hypotheses,  why  do  we  pass  by  the 
genus  of  the  Gods,  and  the  divisions  which  it  contains  ?  Or  if  we  un- 
fold the  natures  subsisting  between  the  first  and  last  of  things,  why  do 
we  leave  unknown  the  whole  orders  of  those  divine  beings,  which  subsist 
between  the  one,  and  natures  that  are  in  any  respect  deified  ?  For  all 
these  particulars  evince,  that  the  whole  discourse  is  defective,  with  re- 
spect to  the  science  of  things  divine. 

But  still  farther,  Socrates,  in  the  Phiiebus,  calls  upon  those  that  love 

'  For  wp«(.w,  it  i$  necessary  to  read  «.£•«». 


Digitized  by  Google 


so 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


the  contemplation  of  beings,  to  use  the  dividing  method,  and  always  to 
explore  the  monads  of  total  orders,  and  the  duads,  triads,  or  any  other 
numbers  proceeding  from  these.  If  this  then  is  rightly  determined,  it  is 
doubtless  necessary  that  the  Parmenides,  which  employs  the  whole  dia- 
lectic method,  and  discourses  about  being  which  is  characterized  by 
the  one,  should  neither  speculate  multitude  about  the  one,  nor  remain  in 
the  one  monad  of  beings,  nor  in  short,  introduce  to  the  one  which  is  above 
all  beings,  the  whole  multitude  of  first  beings  immediately,  but  should 
unfold,  as  in  the  first  order,  such  beings  as  have  an  occult  subsistence, 
and  are  allied  to  the  one ;  but  as  in  the  middle  rank,  those  genera  of  the 
Gods  which  subsist  according  to  progression,  and  which  are  more  divided 
than  the  extremely  united,  but  arc  allotted  a  union  more  perfect,  than 
such  as  have  proceeded  to  the  utmost ;  and  should  unfold  as  in  the  last 
rank,  such  as  subsist  according  to  the  last  division  of  powers,  and  together 
with  these,  such  as  have  a  deified  essence.  If,  therefore,  the  first  of  the 
hypotheses  is  about  the  one  which  is  above  all  multitude,  it  is  doubtless 
necessary  that  the  hypothesis  which  follows  this,  should  not  unfold  being 
itself  in  an  indefinite  and  indistinct  manner,  but  should  deliver  all  the 
orders  of  beings.  For  the  dividing  method  does  not  admit,  that  we 
should  introduce  the  whole  of  multitude  at  once  to  the  one,  as  Socrates 
tcsclics  us  in  the  Philebus. 

Besides,  we  may  evince  the  truth  of  what  we  assert  from  the  very  method 
of  the  demonstrations.  For  the  first  of  the  conclusions  become  immediately 
manifest  from  the  least,  most  simple,  most  known,  and  as  it  were  com- 
mon conceptions.  But  those  which  are  next  in  order  to  these,  become 
apparent  through  a  greater  multitude  of  conceptions,  and  such  as  are 
more  various,  And  the  last  conclusions  are  entirely  the  most  composite. 
For  he  always  uses  the  first  conclusions,  as  subservient  to  the  demonstra- 
tion of  those  that  follow,1  and  presents  us  with  an  intellectual  paradigm 
of  the  order  observed  in  geometry,  or  other  disciplines,  in  the  connexion 
of  these  conclusions  with  each  other.  If,  therefore,  discourses  bring  with 
fliqm  an  image  of  the  things  of  which  they  are  interpreters,  and  if,  as  are 

'  For  ixww,  it  is  necessary  to  read  x*p4mr. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Chap.  xi. 


of  PLATO. 


31 


the  evolutions  from  demonstrations,  such  must  the  order  necessarily 
be  of  the  things  exhibited,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  necessary,  that  such 
things  as  derive  their  beginning  from  the  most  simple  principles,  must  be 
in  every  respect  of  a  more  primary  nature,  and  must  be  arranged  as  con- 
joined with  the  one ;  but  that  such  as  are  always  multiplied,  and  suspend- 
ed from  various  demonstrations,  must  have  proceeded  farther  from  the 
subsistence*  of  the  one. 

For  the  demonstrations  which  have  two  conclusions*  must  necessarily 
contain  the  conclusions  prior  to  themselves ;  but  those  which  contain  pri- 
mary, spontaneous,  and  simple  conceptions,  are  not  necessarily  united 
with  such  as  are  more  composite,  which  are  exhibited  through  more 
abundant  media,  and  which  are  farther  distant  from  the  principle  of 
beings.  It  appears  therefore,  that  some  of  the  conclusions  are  indicative 
of  more  divine  orders,  but  others,  of  such  as  are  more  subordinate; 
some,  of  more  united,  and  others,  of  more  multiplied  orders ;  and  again, 
some,  of  more  uniform,  and  others,  of  more  multiform  progressions.  For 
demonstrations  are  universally  from  causes,  and  things  first.  If,  there- 
fore, first  are  the  causes  of  second  conclusions,  there  is  an  order  of  causes, 
and  things  caused,  in  the  multitude  of  the  conclusions.  For,  indeed,  to 
confound  all  tilings,  and  speculate  them  indefinitely  in  one,  neither  ac- 
cords with  the  nature  of  things,  nor  the  science  of  Plato. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Again,  therefore,  let  us  discuss  this  affair  in  another  way,  and  view 
with  the  dianbetic  power,  where  any  thing  futile  is  delivered.  For  let  it 
be  said,  if  you  please,  and  we  will  first  of  all  allow  it,  that  the  conclusions 
of  this  second  hypothesis  are  about  true  being.  But  as  this  is  multitude, 
and*  not  only  one  itself,  like  the  one  prior  to  beings ;  for  being  is  that 


•  For  acmetoffmi,  it  U  necessary  to  read  wm»i«(. 


32  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

which  is  passive  to  the  one,  as  the  Elcan  guest  in  theSophista  informs  us ; 
and  as  it  is  universally  acknowledged  by  our  opponents,  who  establish 
that  which  is  first  as  the  one,  but  intellect,  as  one  many,  soul,  as  one  and 
many,  and  body,  as  many  and  one : — as  therefore,  this  has  been  asserted  a 
thousand  times,  I  mean  that  in  true  being  there  is  multitude  together  with 
union,  whether  will  they  say  that  these  things  harmonise  with  the  whole 
of  being,  but  not  with  its  parts,  or  both  with  the  whole  and  its  parts  ? 
And  again,  we  ask  them,  whether  they  attribute  all  things  to  each  part  of 
being,  or  whether  they  ascribe  different  things  to  different  parts  ? 

If,  therefore,  they  are  of  opinion,  that  each  particular  should  alone 
harmonize  with  the  whole  of  being,  being  will  consist  of  non-beings,  that 
which  is  moved,  of  things  immoveable,  that  which  abides,  of  things  de- 
prived of  permanency,  and  universally,  all  tilings  will  consist  of  their 
opposites,  and  we  shall  no  longer  agree  with  the  discourse  of  Parmenides, 
who  says  that  the  parts  of  being  characterized  by  the  one,  are  in  a  certain 
respect  wholes,  and  that  each  of  them  is  one  and  being,  in  a  manner 
similar  to  the  whole.  But  if  we  attribute  all  things  to  each  part,  and 
there  is  nothing  which  we  do  not  make  all  things,  how  can  the  summit  of 
being,  and  that  which  is  most  eminently  one,  contain  a  wholeness,  and 
an  incomprehensible  multitude  of  parts  ?  How  can  it  at  one  and  the  same 
time  contain  the  whole  of  number,  figure,  motion  and  permanency,  and 
in  short  all  forms  and  genera?  For  these  differ  from  each  other,  and  the 
hypothesis  will  assert  things  impossible.  For  things  near  to,  will  be  simi- 
larly multiplied  with  things  remote  from  the  one,  and  that  which  is  first, 
will  not  be  a  less  multitude  than  that  which  is  last ;  nor  again,  will  the 
last  of  things  be  a  less  one  than  the  first,  and  things  in  the  middle  will 
have  no  difference  with  respect  to  division  from  the  extremes. 

As  therefore,  it  is  not  proper  to  ascribe  all  this  multitude  of  conclu- 
sions to  the  whole  alone,  nor  to  consider  all  things  in  a  similar  manner  in 
all  the  parts  of  being,  it  remains  that  different  conclusions  must  harmonize 
with  different  things.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  either  the  enume- 
ration of  the  conclusions  should  be  inordinate,  or  ordinate.  But  if  they 
say  they  are  inordinate,  they  neither  speak  agreeably  to  the  dialectic 
method,  nor  to  the  mode  of  demonstrations,  which  always  generate  things 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  I.  OF  PLATO,  33 

secondary  from  such  as  are  first,  nor  to  the  science  of  Plato,  which  always 
accompanies  the  order  of  things.  But  if  they  say  the  conclusions  are  re- 
gular, I  think  it  is  entirely  necessary,  that  they  should  either  begin  from 
things  first  according  to  nature,  or  from  things  last.  But  if  from  things 
last  being  characterised  by  the  one  will  be  the  last,  and  that  which  is  moved 
according  to  time,  the  first.  This,  however,  is  impossible.  For  that 
which  participates  of  time,  must  by  a  much  greater  priority  participate 
of  first  being.  But  that  which  participates  of  first  being,  does  not  neces- 
sarily participate  of  time.  First  being,  therefore,  is  above  time.  If  then 
Plato  begins  from  first  being,  but  ends  in  that  which  participates  of  time, 
he  proceeds  supernal ly  from  the  first  to  the  last  parts  of  true  being. 
Hence,  the  first  conclusions  are  to  be  referred  to  the  first  orders,  the 
middle,  for  the  same  reason,  to  the  middle  orders,  and  the  last,  as  is  evi- 
dent, to  such  as  are  last.  For  it  is  necessary,  as  our  discourse  has  evinced, 
that  different  conclusions  should  be  assigned  to  different  things,  and  that 
a  distribution  of  this  kind  should  commence  from  such  things  as  are 
highest. 

But  likewise,  the  order  of  the  hypotheses,  as  it  appears  to  me,  is  a  suffi- 
cient argument  of  the  truth  of  our  assertion.  For  with  us  the  one  which 
is  exempt  from  all  multitude,  is  allotted  the  first  order,  and  from  this  the 
evolution  of  all  the  arguments  commences.  But  the  second  order  after 
this,  is  about  true  beings,  and  the  unity  which  these  participate.  And 
the  third  order  in  regular  succession,  is  about  soul.  Whether,  therefore, 
is  it  about  every  soul  or  not?  In  answer  to  this,  we  shall  observe,  that  our 
leader  Syrianus  has  beautifully  shown,  that  the  discourse  about  whole 
souls  is  comprehended  in  the  second  hypothesis.  If,  therefore,  the  order 
of  these  three  hypotheses  proceeds  according  to  the  nature  of  things,  it  is 
evident  that  the  second  is  produced  from  the  first,  and  the  last  from  the 
second.  For  I  would  ask  those  who  are  not  entirely  unskilled  in  discourses 
of  this  kind,  what  can  be  more  allied  to  the  one,  than  being  characterized 
by  the  one,  which  the  first  of  the  conclusions  of  the  second  hypothesis  un« 
folds?  Or  what  can  be  more  allied  to  soul,  than  that  which  participates 
of  time,  which  subsists  divisibly,  and  which  is  the  last  thing  exhibited  in 
this  hypothesis?  For  the  life  of  partial  as  well  as  of  total  souls  is  according 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  E 


Digitized  by  Google 


34 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


to  time.  And  first  being  is  that  which  first  participates  of  the  one,  and 
through  its  connexion  with  being,  has  a  redundant  hyparxis  with  respect 
to  the  imparticipable  unity.  But  if  this  hypothesis  is  the  middle,  and  if 
we  aptly  harmonize  the  highest  conclusions  with  things  highest,  we  should 
doubtless  harmonize  middles  with  middles.  For  this  hypothesis  com- 
mencing from  first  being,  proceeds  through  all  the  genera  posterior  to  it, 
till  it  ends  in  a  nature  participating  of  time. 

But,  farther,  from  the  common  confession  of  those  interpreters  of  Plato, 
who  were  skilled  in  divine  concerns,  we  can  demonstrate  the  same  things 
ns  we  have  above  asserted.  For  Plotinus,  in  his  book  On  Numbers,  en- 
quiring whether  beings  subsist  prior  to  numbers,  or  numbers  prior  to  beings, 
clearly  asserts  that  the  first  being  subsists  prior  to  numbers,  and  that  it 
generates  the  divine  number.  But  if  this  is  rightly  determined  by  him, 
and  being  is  generative  of  the  first  number,  but  number  is  produced  by 
being,  it  is  not  proper  to  confound  the  order  of  these  genera,  nor  to  collect 
them  into  one  hypostasis,  nor,  since  Plato  separately  produces  first  being, 
and  separately  number,  to  refer  each  of  the  conclusions  to  the  same  order. 
For  it  is  by  no  means  lawful,  that  cause  and  the  thing  caused,  should 
have  either  the  same  power,  or  the  same  order :  but  these  are  distinct 
from  each  other;  and  the  science  concerning  them  is  likewise  distinct, 
and  neither  the  nature,  nor  the  definition  of  them  is  one  and  the  same. 

But,  after  Plotinus,  Porphyry  in  his  treatise  On  Principles,  evinces  by 
many  and  beautiful  arguments,  that  intellect  is  eternal,  but  that  at  the 
same  time,  it  contains  in  itself  something  prior  to  the  eternal,  and  through 
which  it  is  conjoined  with  the  one.  For  the  one  is  above  all  eternity,  but 
the  eternal  has  a  second,  or  rather  third  order  in  intellect.  For  it  appears 
to  me  to  be  necessary  that  eternity  should  be  established  in  the  middle  of 
that  which  is  prior  to  the  eternal,  and  the  eternal.  But  of  this  hereafter. 
At  the  same  time,  thus  much  may  be  collected  from  what  has  been  said, 
that  intellect  contains  something  in  itself  better  than  the  eternal.  Ad- 
mitting this,  therefore,  we  ask  the  father  of  this  assertion,  whether  this 
something  better  than  the  eternal  is  not  only  being  characterized  by  the 
one,  but  is  a  whole  and  parts,  and  all  multitude,  number  and  figure,  that 
which  is  moved,  and,  that  which  is  permanent;  or  whether  we  are  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XI. 


OF  PLATO. 


35 


ascribe  some  of  the  conclusions  to  it,  but  not  others  ?  For  it  is  impossible 
that  all  these  can  accord  with  a  nature  prior  to  eternity,  since  every  in- 
tellectual motion,  and  likewise  permanency,  are  established  in  eternity. 
But  if  we  are  to  ascribe  some  of  the  conclusions  to  it,  and  not  others,  it  is 
evident  that  other  orders  in  intellect  are  to  be  investigated,  and  that  each 
of  the  conclusions  is  to  be  referred  to  that  order,  to  which  it  appears  par- 
ticularly adapted.  For  intellect  is  not  one  in  number,  and  an  atom,  as  it 
appeared  to  be  to  some  of  the  ancients,  but  it  comprehends  in  itself  the 
whole  progression  of  first  being. 

But  the  third  who  makes  for  our  purpose  after  these,  is  the  divine  Jam- 
blichus,  who,  in  his  treatise  Concerning  the  Gods,  accuses  those  who  place 
the  genera  of  being  in  intclligibles,  because  the  number  and  variety  of  these 
is  more  remote  from  the  one.  But  afterwards  he  informs  us  where  these 
ought  to  be  placed.  For  they  are  produced  in  the  end  of  the  intellectual 
order,  by  the  Gods  which  there  subsist.  How  the  genera  of  being,  how- 
ever, both  are,  and  arc  not  in  intclligibles,  will  be  hereafter  apparent.  But 
if,  according  to  his  arrangement  of  the  divine  orders,  intelligibles  are 
exempt  from  the  genera  of  being,  much  more  are  they  exempt  from 
similitude  and  dissimilitude,  equality  and  inequality.  Each  of  the  con- 
clusions, therefore,  ought  not  in  a  similar  manner  to  be  accommodated 
to  all  things,  so  as  to  refer  them  to  the  whole  breadth  of  the  intelligible, 
or  intellectual  order.  Hence  from  what  the  best  of  the  interpreters  have 
said,  when  philosophizing  according  to  their  own  doctrines,  both  the 
multitude  of  the  divine  orders,  and  of  the  Platonic  arguments,  are  to  be 
considered  as  proceeding  according  to  an  orderly  distinction. 

In  addition,  likewise,  to  what  has  been  said,  this  also  may  be  asserted, 
that  we  cannot,  on  any  other  hypothesis,  obtain  a  rational  solution  of  the 
many  doubts  which  present  themselves  on  this  subject,  but  shall  igno- 
rantly  ascribe  what  is  rash  and  vain  to  this  treatise  of  Plato.  For  in  the 
.  first  place,  why  are  there  only  so  many  conclusions,  and  neither  more  nor 
less  ?  For  there  are  fourteen  conclusions.  But  as  there  are  so  many,  we 
cannot  assign  the  reason  of  this,  unless  we  distribute  them  in  conjunction 
with  things  themselves.  In  the  second  place,  neither  shall  we  be  able  to 
find  the  cause  of  the  order  of  the  conclusions  with  respect  to  each  other, 


3d 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


hook  f. 


and  how  some  have  a  prior,  and  others  a  posterior  establishment,  accord- 
ing to  the  reason  of  science,  unless  the  order  of  the  conclusions  proceeds 
in  conjunction  with  the  progression  of  beings.  In  the  third  place,  why 
do  some  of  the  conclusions  become  known  from  things  proximately  de- 
monstrated, but  others  from  preceding  demonstrations  ?  For  that  the  one 
is  a  whole  and  contains  parts,  is  demonstrated  from  being,  which  is  cha- 
racterized by  the  one  ;  but  its  subsistence  in  itself  and  in  another,  is  placed 
in  a  proximate  order,  after  the  possession  of  figure,  but  is  demonstrated 
from  whole  and  parts.  Or  why  are  some  things  often  demonstrated,  from 
two  of  the  particulars  previously  evinced,  but  others  from  one  of  them  ? 
For  we  shall  be  ignorant  of  each  of  these,  and  shall  neither  be  able  scien- 
tifically to  speculate  their  number,  nor  their  order,  nor  their  alliance  to 
each  other,  unless  following  things  themselves,  we  evince  that  this  whole 
hypothesis  is  a  dialectic  arrangement,  proceeding  from  on  high  through 
all  the  middle  genera,  as  far  as  to  the  termination  of  first  being. 

Again,  if  we  should  say,  that  all  the  conclusions  demonstrate  syllogisti- 
cally  only,  in  what  respect  shall  we  differ  from  those,  who  assert  that  the 
whole  of  this  discussion  consists  of  doxastic  arguments,  and  only  regards 
a  mere  verbal  contest  ?  But  if  it  is  not  only  syllogistic,  but  likewise  de- 
monstrative, it  is  doubtless  necessary,  that  the  middle  should  be  the  cause 
of,  and  by  nature  prior  to  the  conclusion.  As,  therefore,  we  make  the 
conclusions  of  the  preceding  reasons,  the  media  of  those  that  follow,  the 
things  which  the  arguments  respect,  must  doubtless  have  a  similar  order 
as  to  being,  and  their  progeny  must  be  the  causes  of  things  subject,  and 
generative  of  such  as  are  secondary.  But  if  this  be  admitted,  how  can 
we  allow  that  all  of  them  have  the  same  peculiarity  and  nature  ?  For 
cause,  and  that  which  is  produced  from  cause,  are  separated  from  each 
other. 

But  this  likewise  will  happen  to  those  who  assert  that  one  nature  is  to 
be  explored  in  all  the  arguments,  that  they  will  by  no  means  perceive 
how  in  the  three  first  conclusions,  the  one  remains  unseparated  from  being, 
but  is  first  separated  in  the  fourth  conclusion.  But  in  all  the  following 
conclusions,  the  one  is  explored  considered  as  subsisting  itself  by  itself. 
Is  it  not  therefore  necessary,  that  these  orders  must  differ  from  each 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  xt. 


OF  PLATO. 


37 


other?  For  that  which  is  without  separation,  in  consequence  of  having 
an  occult  and  undivided  subsistence,  is  more  allied  to  the  one,  hut  that 
which  is  separated,  has  proceeded  farther  from  the  first  principle  of  things. 

Again,  if  you  are  willing  to  consider  the  multitude  of  the  arguments, 
and  the  extent  of  the  hypothesis,  how  much  it  differs  from  that  which 
follows  it, — neither  from  this  will  it  appear  to  you  to  be  entirely  about  one 
and  an  unseparated  nature.  For  reasonings  about  divine  concerns,  are  con- 
tracted in  the  more  principal  causes,  because  in  these  the  occult  is  more 
abundant  than  the  perspicuous,  and  the  ineffable  than  the  known.  But 
they  become  multiplied  and  evolved,  by  proceeding  to  divine  orders  more 
proximate  to  our  nature.  For  such  things  as  are  more  allied  to  that 
which  is  ineffable,  unknown,  and  exempt  iu  inaccessible  places,  are  allotted 
an  hyparxis  more  foreign  from  verbal  enunciation.  But  such  things  as 
have  proceeded  farther,  are  both  more  known  to  us,  and  more  apparent 
to  the  phantasy,  than  such  as  have  a  prior  subsistence. 

This,  therefore,  being  abundantly  proved,  it  is  necessary  that  tlie 
second  hypothesis,  should  unfold  all  the  divine  orders,  and  should  pro- 
ceed on  high,  from  the  most  simple  and  unical  to  the  whole  multitude, 
and  all  the  number  of  divine  natures,  in  which  the  order  of  true  being 
ends,  which  indeed  is  spread  under  the  unities  of  the  Gods,  and  at  the 
same  time  is  divided  in  conjunction  with  their  occult  and  ineffable  pecu- 
liarities. If,  therefore,  we  are  not  deceived  in  admitting  this,  it  follows, 
that  from  this  hypothesis,  the  continuity  of  the  divine  orders,  and  the  pro- 
gression of  second  from  first  natures,  is  to  be  assumed,  together  with  the 
peculiarity  of  all  the  divine  genera.  And  indeed,  what  their  communion 
is  with  each  other,  and  what  their  distinction  proceeding  according  to 
measure,  likewise,  the  auxiliaries  which  may  be  found  in  other  dialogues 
respecting  the  truth  of  real  beings,  or  the  unities  which  they  contain,  are 
all  to  be  referred  to  this  hypothesis.  For,  here  we  may  contemplate  the 
total  progressions  of  the  Gods,  and  their  all-perfect  orders,  according  to 
theological  science.  For  as  we  have  before  shown  that  the  whole  treatise 
of  the  Parmenides  has  reference  to  the  truth  of  things,  and  that  it  was 
not  devised  as  a  vain  evolution  of  words,  it  is  doubtless  necessary,  that 
the  nine  hypotheses  which  it  discusses,  employing  the  dialectic  method, 


Digitized  by  Google 


38 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


but  speculating  with  divine  science,  should  be  about  things  and  certain 
natures,  which  are  either  middle  or  last.  If,  therefore,  Parmenides  ac- 
knowledges that  his  whole  discourse  will  be  about  the  one,  and  how  it 
subsists  with  respect  to  itself,  and  all  other  things,  it  is  evident  that  the 
speculation  of  the  one,  must  commence  from  that  which  is  highest,  but 
end  in  that  which  is  the  last  of  all  things.  For  the  hyparxis  of  the  one 
proceeds  from  on  high,  as  far  as  to  the  most  obscure  hypostasis  of  things. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

As  the  first  hypothesis,  however,  demonstrates  by  negations  the  inef- 
fable supereminence  of  the  first  principle  of  things,  and  evinces  that  he  is 
exempt  from  all  essence  and  knowledge, — it  is  evident  that  the  hypothesis 
after  this,  as  being  proximate  to  it,  must  unfold  the  whole  order  of  the 
Gods.  For  Parmenides  does  not  alone  assume  the  intellectual  and  essen- 
tial peculiarity  of  the  Gods,  but  likewise  the  divine  characteristic  of  their 
hyparxis  through  the  whole  of  this  hypothesis.  For  what  other  one  can 
that  be  which  is  participated  by  being,  than  that  which  is  in  every  being 
divine,  and  through  which  all  things  are  conjoined  with  the  imparticipable 
one  ?  For  as  bodies  through  their  life  are  conjoined  with  soul,  and  as  souls 
through  their  intellective  part,  are  extended  to  total  intellect,  and  the  first  , 
intelligence,  in  like  manner  true  beings  through  the  one  which  they  contain 
are  reduced  to  an  exempt  union,  and  subsist  in  unproceeding  union  with 
this  first  cause. 

But  because  this  hypothesis  commences  from  that  which  is  one  being, 
or  being  characterized  by  the  one,  and  establishes  the' summit  of  intelligibles 
as  the  first  after  the  one,  but  ends  in  an  essence  which  participates  of  time, 
and  deduces  divine  souls  to  the  extremities  of  the  divine  orders,  it  is  ne- 
cessary that  the  third  hypothesis  should  demonstrate  by  various  con- 
clusions, the  whole  multitude  of  partial  souls,  and  the  diversities  which 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XH.  OF  PLATO.  ^ 

they  contain.  And  thus  far  the  separate  and  incorporeal  hypostasis 
proceeds. 

After  this  follows  that  nature  which  is  divisible  about  bodies,  and  in- 
separable from  matter,  which  the  fourth  hypothesis  delivers  supernally 
suspended  froni  the  Gods.  And  the  last  hypothesis  is  the  procession  of 
matter,  whether  considered  as  one,  or  as  various,  which  the  fifth  hypo- 
thesis demonstrates  by  negations,  according  to  its  dissimilar  similitude' 
to  the  first  But  sometimes,  indeed,  the  negations  are  privations,  and 
sometimes  the  exempt  causes  of  all  the  productions.  And  what  is  the 
most  wonderful  of  all,  the  highest  negations  are  only  enunciative,  but 
some  in  a  supereminent  manner,  and  others  according  to  deficiency.  But 
each  of  the  negations  consequent  to  these  is  affirmative ;  the  one  para- 
digmatically,  but  the  other  iconically,  or  after  the  manner  of  an  image. 
But  the  middle  corresponds  to  the  order  of  soul,  for  it  is  composed  from 
affirmative  and  negative  conclusions.  But  it  possesses  negations  co-or- 
dinate to  affirmations.  Nor  is  it  alone  multiplied,  like  material  natures/ 
nor  does  it  possess  an  adventitious  one ;  but  the  one  which  it  contains, 
though  it  is  still  one,  yet  subsists  in  motion  and  multiplication,  and  in  its 
progressions  is,  as  it  were,  absorbed  by  essence.  And  such  are  the  hypo- 
theses which  unfold  all  beings,  both  separable  and  inseparable,  together 
with  the  causes  of  wholes,  as  well  exempt,  as  subsisting  in  things  them- 
selves, according  to  the  hyparxis  of  the  one. 

But  there  are  four  other  hypotheses  besides  these,  which  by  taking  away 
the  one,  evince  that  all  things  must  be  entirely  subverted,  both  beings  and 
things  in  generation,  and  that  no  being  can  any  longer  have  any  subsist- 
ence ;  and  this,  in  order  that  he  may  demonstrate  the  one  to  be  the  cause 
of  being  and  preservation,  that  through  it  ail  things  participate  of  the 
nature  of  being,  and  that  each  has  its  hyparxis  suspended  from  the  one. 
And  in  short,  we  syllogistically  collect  this  through  all  beings,  that  if  the 
one  is,  all  things  subsist  as  far  as  to  the  last  hypostasis,  and  if  it  is  not,  no 
being  has  any  subsistence.    The  one,  therefore,  is  both  the  hypostatic  and 

•  For  owfMwnjTa,  it  is  necessary  to  read 

'  Ixtitead  of  or?  a*  ra       read  tvri  w;  t«  nvKx. 


40 


ON  THE  THKOLOGY 


hook  r. 


preservative  cause  of  all  things ;  which  Parmeoides  also  himself  collects 
at  the  end  of  the  dialogue.  With  respect,  however,  to  the  hypothesis  of 
the  Parmenides,  its  division,  and  the  speculation  of  its  several  parts,  we 
have  sufficiently  treated  in  our  commentaries  on  that  dialogue  ;  so  that  it 
'  would  be  superfluous  to  enter  into  a  prolix  discussion  of  these  particulars 
at  present.  But  as  from  what  has  been  said,  it  appears  whence  we  may 
assume  the  whole  of  theology,  and  from  what  dialogues  we  may  collect 
into  one  the  theology  distributed  according  to  parts,  we  shall  in  the  next 
place  treat  about  the  common  dogmas  of  Plato,  which  are  adapted  to 
sacred  concerns,  and  which  extend  to  all  the  divine  orders,  and  shall 
evince  that  each  of  these  is  defined  by  him  according  to  the  most  perfect 
science.  For  things  common  are  prior  to  such  as  are  peculiar,  and  are 
more  known  according  to  nature. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

In  the  first  place,  therefore,  we  shall  assume  the  things  which  are  de- 
monstrated in  the  Laws,  and  contemplate  how  they  take  the  lead,  with 
respect  to  the  truth  about  the  Gods,  and  are  the  most  ancient  of  all  the 
other  mystic  conceptions  about  a  divine  nature.  Three  things,  therefore, 
are  asserted  by  Plato  in  these  writings ;  that  there  are  Gods ;  that  their 
providence  extends  to  all  things ;  and  that  they  administer  all  things  ac- 
cording to  justice,  and  suffer  no  perversion  from  worse  natures. 

That  these  then  obtain  the  first  rank'  among  all  theological  dogmas,  is 
perfectly  evident.  For  what  can  be  of  a  more  leading  nature,  than  the 
hyparxis  of  the  Gods,  or  than  boniform  providence,  or  immutable  and 
undeviating  power  ?  Through  which  they  produce  secondary  natures  uni- 
formly, preserve  themselves  in  an  undefiled  manner,  and  convert  them  to 
themselves.    But  the  Gods  indeed  govern  other  things,  but  suffer  nothing 

'  For  «pX?  ifurffa,  it  U  necessary  to  read 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII. 


OF  PLATO. 


41 


from  subordinate  natures,  nor  are  changed  with  the  variety  of  the  things 
to  which  their  providence  extends.  We  shall  learn,  however,  how  these 
things  are  defined  according  to  nature,  if  we  endeavour  to  embrace  by  a 
reasoning  process  the  scientific  method  of  Plato  about  each  of  them ;  and 
prior  to  these,  survey  by  what  irrefragable  arguments  he  proves  that  there 
are  Gods ;  and  thus  afterwards  consider  such  problems  as  are  conjoined 
with  this  dogma. 

Of  all  beings,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  that  some  should  move  only, 
but  that  others  should  be  moved  only,  and  that  the  natures  situated  be- 
tween these,  should  both  move  and  be  moved.  And  with  respect  to  these 
test  it  is  necessary,  either  that  they  should  move  others  being  themselves 
moved  by  others,  or  that  they  should  be  self-motive.  These  four  hypo- 
stases likewise,  are  necessarily  placed  in  an  orderly  series,  one  after  another; 
that  which  is  moved  only  and  suffers,  depending  on  other  primary  causes ; 
that  which  moves  others,  and  is  at  the  same  time  moved,  being  prior  to 
this ;  that  which  is  self-motive,  and  which  is  beyond  that  which  both 
moves  and  is  moved,  beginning  from  itself,  and  through  its  own  motion 
imparting  the  representation  of  being  moved,  to  other  things ;  and  that 
which  is  immoveable,  preceding  whatever  participates  either  producing 
or  passive  motion.  For  every  thing  self-motive,  in  consequence  of  pos- 
sessing its  perfection  in  a  transition  and  interval  of  life,  depends  on  an- 
other more  ancient  cause,  which  always  subsists  according  to  sameness, 
and  in  a  similar  manner,  and  whose  life  is  not  in  time,  but  in  eternity. 
For  time  is  an  image  of  eternity. 

If,  therefore,  all  things  which  are  moved  by  themselves,  are  moved  ac- 
cording to  time,  but  the  eternal  form  of  motion  is  above  tluit  which  is 
carried  in  time,  the  self-motive  nature  will  be  second  in  order,  and  not  the 
first  of  beings.  But  that  which  moves  others,  and  is  moved  by  others, 
must  necessarily  be  suspended  from  a  self-motive  nature :  and  not  this 
alone,  but  likewise  every  alter-motive  fabrication,  as  the  Athenian  guest 
demonstrates.  For  if  all  things,  says  he,  should  stand  still,  ualess  self- 
motive  natures  had  a  subsistence  among  things,  there  would  be  tin  such 
thing  as  that  which  is  first  moved.  For  that  which  is  immoveable,  is  by 
no  means  naturally  adapted  to  be  moved,  nor  will  there  then  be  that 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  F 


- 


Digitized  by  Google 


42 


OS  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  L 


which  is  first  moved  ;  but  the  alter-motive  nature  is  indigent  of  another 
moving  power.  The  self-motive  nature,  therefore,  alone,  as  beginning 
from  its  own  energy,  will  move  both  itself  and  others  in  a  secondary 
manner.  For  a  thing  of  this  kind  imparts  the  power  of  being  moved  to 
alter-motive  natures,  in  the  same  manner  as  an  immoveable  nature  im- 
parts a  motive  power  to  all  beings.  In  the  third  place,  that  which  is 
moved  only,  must  first  of  all  be  suspended  from  things  moved  by  another, 
but  moving  others.  For  it  is  necessary,  both  that  other  things,  and  the 
series  of  things  moved,  which  extends  in  an  orderly  manner  from  on  high 
to  the  last  of  things,  should  be  filled  with  their  proper  media. 

All  bodies,  therefore,  belong  to  those  things  which  are  naturally  moved 
only,  and  are  passive.  For  they  are  productive  of  nothing,  on  account 
©f  possessing  an  hypostasis  endued  with  interval,  and  participating  of 
magnitude  and  bulk ;  since  every  thing  productive  and  motive  of  others, 
naturally  produces  and  moves,  by  employing  an  incorporeal  power. 

But  of  incorporeal  natures,  some  are  divisible  about  bodies,  but 
others  are  exempt  from  such  a  division  about  the  last  of  things. 
Those  incorporeals,  therefore,  which  are  divisible  about  the  bulks  of 
bodies,  whether  they  subsist  in  qualities,  or  in  material  forms,  belong  to 
the  number  of  things  moved  by  another,  but  at  the  same  time  moving 
others.  For  these,  because  they  possess  an  incorporeal  allotment,  parti- 
cipate of  a  motive  power ;  but  because  they  are  divided  about  bodies,  are 
deprived  of  the  power  of  verging  to  themselves,  are  divided  together  with 
their  subjects,  and  are  full  of  sluggishness  from  these,  they  are  indigent 
of  a  motive  nature  which  is  not  borne  along  in  a  foreign  seat,  but  possesses 
an  hypostasis  in  itself.  Where,  therefore,  shall  \vc  obtain  that  which 
moves  itself?  For  things  extended  into  natures  possessing  bulk  and  interval, 
or  which  are  divided  in  these,  and  subsist  inseparably  about  them,  must 
necessarily  either  be  moved  only,  or  be  motive  through  others.  But  it  is 
necessary,  as  we  have  before  observed,  that  a  self-motive  nature  should 
be  prior  to  these,  which  is  perfectly  established  in  itself,  and  not  in  others, 
and  which  fixes  its  energies  in  itself,  and  not  in  things  different  from 
itself.  There  is,  therefore,  another  certain  nature  exempt  from  bodies, 
both  in  the  heavens  and  in  these  very  mutable  elements,  from  which  bo- 
dies primarily  derive  the  power  of  being  moved.  Hence,  if  it  be  requisite 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII.  OF  PLATO.  43 

to  discover  what  such  an  essence  as  this  is,  (rightly  following  Socrates, 
and  considering  what  the  end  of  things  is,)  which  by  being  present  to  alter- 
motive  natures,  imparts  to  them  a  representation  of  self-motion,  to  which 
of  the  above  mentioned  natures  shall  we  ascribe  the  power  of  things  being 
moved  from  themselves?  For  all  inanimate  natures  are  alone  alter-motive, 
and  whatever  the}'  suffer,  they  are  adapted  to  suffer,  through  a  certain  power 
externally  moving  and  compelling.  It  remains,  therefore,  that  animated 
natures  must  possess  this  representation,  and  that  they  are  self-motive  m 
a  secondary  degree,  but  that  the  soul  which  is  in  them,  primarily  moves 
itself,  and  is  moved  by  itself,  and  that  through  a  power  derived  from  itself 
as  it  imparts  life  to  bodies,  so  likewise  it  extends  to  them  from  itself  a  re- 
presentation of  being  moved  by  themselves. 

If,  therefore,  the  self-motive  essence  is  more  ancient  than  alter-motive 
matures,  but  soul  is  primarily  self-motive,  from  which  the  image  of  self- 
motion  is  imparted  to  bodies,  soul  will  be  beyond  bodies,  and  the  motion 
of  every  body,  will  be  the  progeny  of  soul,  and  of  the  motion  it  contains. 
Hence  it  is  necessary  that  the  whole  heaven  and  all  the  bodies  it  contains 
possessing  various  motions,  and  being  moved  with  these  different  motions, 
according  to  nature  (for  a  circulation  is  natural  to  every  body  of  this  kind) 
should  have  ruling  souls,  which  are  essentially  more  ancient  than  bodies, 
and  which  are  moved  in  themselves,  and  supernally  illuminate  these  with 
the  power  of  being  moved.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  these  souls 
which  dispose  in  an  orderly  manner  the  whole  world  and  the  parts  it  con- 
tains, and  who  impart  to  every  thing  corporeal  which  is  of  itself  destitute 
of  life,  the  power  of  being  moved,  inspiring  it,  for  this  purpose,  with  the 
cause  of  motion,  should  either  move  all  things  conformably  to  reason,  or 
after  a  contrary  manner,  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  assert.  But  if  indeed, 
this  world  and  every  thing  in  it  which  is  disposed  in  an  orderly  mauner, 
and  is  moved  equally  and  perpetually  according  to  nature,  as  is  demon- 
strated, partly  in  the  mathematical  disciplines,  and  partly  in  physical  dis- 
cussions, is  suspended  from  an  irrational  soul,  which  moving  itself  moves 
also  other  things,  neither  the  order  of  the  periods,  nor  the  motion  which  is 
bounded  by  one  reason,  nor  the  position  of  bodies,  nor  any  other  of  those 
things  which  are  generated  according  to  nature,  will  have  a  stable  cause, 


Digitized  by  Google 


44 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK.  I. 


and  which  is  able  to  distribute  every  thing  in  an  orderly  manner,  and  accord- 
ing to  an  invariable  sameness  of  subsistence.  For  every  tiling  irrational  is 
naturally  adapted  to  be  adorned  by  something  different  from  itself,  and  is 
indefinite  and  unadorned  in  its  own  nature.  Hut  to  commit  all  heaven  to 
a  thing  of  this  kind,  and.  a  circulation  revolving  according  to  reason,  and 
with. an  invariable  sameness,  is  by  no  means  adapted,  either  to  the  nature  of 
tilings,  or  to  our  undisciplined  conceptions.  If  however,  an  intellectual  soul, 
and  which  employs  reason,  governs  all  things,  and  if  every  thing  which  is 
moved  with  a  perpetual  lation,  is  governed  by  a  soul  of  this  kind,  and  there 
is  no  one  of  the  wholes  in  the  universe  destitute  of  soul  (for  no  body  is. 
honorable  if  deprived  of  such  a  power  as  this,  as  Theophrastus  somewhere 
says)  if  this  be  the  case,  whether  docs  it  possess  this  intellectual,  perfect, 
and  beneficent  power,  according  to  participation,  or  according  to  essence? 
For  if,  according  to  essence,  it  is  necessary  that  every  soul  should 
be  of  tliis  kind,  since  each  according  to  its  own  nature  is  self-motive. 
But  if,  according  to  participation,  there  will  be  another  intellect  subsisting 
in  energy,  more  ancient  than  soul,  which  essentially  possesses  intellection, 
and  by  its  very  being  pre-assumes  in  itself  the  uniform  knowledge  of 
wholes ;  since  it  is  also  necessary  that  the  soul  which  is  essentialized  ac» 
cording  to.  reason,  should  possess  that  which  pertains  to  intellect  through 
participation*  and  that  the  intellectual  nature  should  be  twofold ;  the 
one  subsisting  primarily  in  a  divine  intellect  itself;  but  the  other,  which, 
proceeds  from  this,  subsisting  secondarily  in.  soul.  To  which,  you  may 
add,  if  you  please,  the  presence  of  intellectual  illumination  in  body.  For 
whence  is  the  whole  of  this  heaven  either  spherical  or  moved  in  a  circle, 
and  whence  does  it  revolve  with  a  sameness  of  circulation  according  to 
one  definite  order?  For  how  could  it  always  be  allotted  the  same  idea  and 
power  immutably  according  to.  nature,  if  it  did  not  participate  of  specific 
formation  accordiug  to  intellect?  For  soul,  indeed,  is  the  supplier  of 
motion;  but  the  cause  of  a  firm  establishment,  and  that  which  reduces 
the  unstable  mutation  of  things  that  are  moved,  into  sameness,  and  also 
a  life  which  is  bounded  by  one  reason,  and  a  circulation  which  subsists 
with  invariable  sameness,  will  evidently  be  superior  to  soul. 

Body,  therefore,  and  the  whole  of  this  sensible  nature  belong  to  things 


CHAP.  XUL  OF  PLATO".  45 

which  are  alter-motive.  But  soul  is  self-motive,  binding  ro  itself  all  cor- 
poreal motions  ;  and  prior  to  this  is  intellect  which  is  immoveable.  Let 
ho  one,  however,  suppose  that  I  assert  this  immobility  of  intellect  to  re- 
semble that  which  is  sluggish,  destitute  of  life,'  and  without  respiration, 
but  that  it  is  the  leading  eause  of  all  motion,  and  the  fountain,  if  you  are 
willing  so  to  denominate  it,  of  all  life,  both  of  that  which  is- converted  to 
itself,  and  of  that  which  has  its  hypostasis  in  other  things.  Through  these 
causes  also,  the  world  is  denominated  by  Timccus,  an  animal  endued  with 
soul  and  intellect ;  being  called  by  him  an  animal  according  to  its  own 
nature,  and  the  life  pervading  to  it  from  soul,  and  which  is  distributed 
about  it,  but  animated  or  endued  with  soul,  according  to  the  presence  of 
a  divine  soul  in  it,  and  endued  with  intellect,  according  to  intellectual 
domination.  For  the  supply  of  life,  the  government  of  soul,  and  the  par- 
ticipation of  intellect  connect  and  contain  the  whole  of  heaven. 

If,  however,  this  intellect  is  essentially  intellect,  since  Timaeus  indi- 
cating that  the  essence  of  intellect  is  the  same  with  its  intellection,  deno- 
minates it  divine ;  for  he  says,  that  soul  receiving  a  divine  intellect  led  aa 
upright  and  wise  life ;  if,  therefore,  this  be  the  case,  it  is  necessary  that  the 
whole  world  should  be  suspended  from  its  divinity,  and  that  motion  in- 
deed should  be  present  to  this  universe  from  soul,  but  that  its  perpetual 
permanency  and  sameness  of  subsistence  should  be  derived  from  intellect, 
and  that  its  one  union,  the  conspiration  in  it  and  sympathy,  and  its  all- 
perfect  measure  should  originate  from  that  unity,*  from  which  intellect  is 
uniform,  soul  is  one,'  every  being  is  whole  and  perfect  according  to  its 
own  nature,  and  every  thing  secondary  together  with  perfection  in  its 
own  proper  nature,  participates  of  another  more  excellent  peculiarity, 
from  an  order  which  is  always  established  above  it.    For  that  which  is 
corporeal  being  alter-motive,  derives  from  soul  the  representation  of  self- 
motive  power,  and  is  through  it  an  animal.     But  soul  being  self-motive 
participates  of  a  life  according  to  intellect,  and  energizing  according  to 
time,  possesses  a  neverrceasing  energy,  and  an  ever-vigilant  life  from  its 

'  For  «£«»  read  a^tn. 

*  For  **<  n)f  emios,  read,  xat  core  nj$  tvafof. 

'  Eor  xai  e  vou,  ivoiiSi]  fita  xai  n  ^r/7l>  resM*»  ***  •       wu^Vt  ««  t  ^-Xl '/*"** 


Digitized  by  Google 


4C  OS  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

proximity  to  intellect.  And  intellect  possessing  its  life  in  eternity,  always 
subsisting  essentially  in  energy/  and  fixing  all  its  stable  intellection  at 
once  in  intellect,  is  entirely  deific  through  the  cause  prior  to  itself.  For 
it  has  two-fold  energies  as  Plotinus  says,  some  as  intellect,  but  others 
as  being  inebriated  with  nectar.  And  elsewhere  he  observes,  that  this  in- 
tellect, by  that  which  is  prior  to  itself  and  is  not  intellect,  is  a  god  ;  in  the 
same  manner  as  soul,  by  its  summit  which  is  above  soul,  is  intellect;  and 
as  body,  by  the  power  which  is  prior  to  body,  is  soul. 

All  things  therefore,  as  we  have  said,  are  suspended  from  the  one  through 
intellect  and  soul  as  media.  And  intellect  indeed  has  the  form  of  unity ; 
but  soul  has  the  form  of  intellect ;  and  the  body  of  the  world  is  vital. 
But  every  thing  is  conjoined  with  that  which  is  prior  to  itself.  And  of 
the  natures  posterior  to  these,  one  in  a  more  proximate,  but  the  other  in 
a  more  remote  degree,  enjoys  that  which  is  divine.  And  divinity,  indeed* 
is  prior  to  intellect,  being  primarily  carried  in  an  intellectual  nature ;  but 
intellect  is  most  divine,  as  being  deified  prior  to  other  things ;  and  soul  is 
divine,  so  far  as  it  requires  an  intellectual  medium.  But  the  body  which 
participates  of  a  soul  of  ttxis  kind,  so  far  as  body  indeed,  is  also  itself 
divine ;  for  the  illumination  of  divine*  light  pervades  supernally  as  far  as 
to  the  last  dependencies  ;  yet  it  is  not  simply  divine;  but  soul,  by  looking 
to  intellect,  and  living  from  itself,  is  primarily  divine. 

My  reasoning  is  also  the  same  about  each  of  the  whole  spheres,  and 
about  the  bodies  they  contain.  For  all  these  imitate  the  whole  heaven, 
since  these  likewise  have  a  perpetual  allotment;  and  with  respect  to  the 
sublunary  elements,  they  have  not  entirely  an  essential  mutation,  but  they 
abide  in  the  universe  according  to  their  wholenesses,  and  contain  in  them- 
selves partial  animals.  For  every  wholeness  has  posterior  to  itself  more 
partial  essences.  As,  therefore,  in  the  heavens,  the  number  of  the  stars 
proceeds  together  with  the  whole  spheres,  and  as  in  the  earth  the  multi- 
tude of  partial  terrestrial  animals  subsists  together  with  their  wholeness, 
thus  also  it  appears  to  me  to  be  necessary  that  in  the  wholes  which  have 

•  For  atxt  ivtgytta,  read,  etfi  cur  mgytia. 

*  The  sense  requires  lliat  f.MU  should  be  here  wpplied. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII. 


OF  PLATO. 


an  intermediate  subsistence,  each  element  should  be  filled  up  with  appro- 
priate numbers.  For  how  in  the  extremes  can  wholes  which  subsist  prior 
to  parts,  be  arranged  together  with  parts,  unless  there  is  the  same  analogy 
of  them  in  the  intermediate  natures  ? 

But  if  each  of  the  spheres  is  an  animal,  and  is  always  established  after 
the  same  manner,  and  gives  completion  to  the  universe,  as  possessing  life 
indeed,  it  will  always  primarily  participate  of  soul,  but  as  preserving  its 
own  order  immutable  in  the  world,  it  will  be  comprehended  by  intellect, 
and  as  one  and  a  whole,  and  the  leader  and  ruler  of  its  proper  parts,  it 
will  be  illuminated  by  divine  union.  Not  only  the  universe,  therefore, 
but  each  also  of  its  perpetual  parts  is  animated  and  endued  with  in- 
tellect, and  as  much  as  possible  is  similar  to  the  universe.'  For  each 
of  these  parts  is  a  universe  with  respect  to  its  kindred  multitude.  In 
short,  there  is  indeed  one  corporeal-formed  wholeness  of  the  universe, 
but  there  arc  many  others  under  this,  depending  on  this  one ;  there  is  one 
soul  of  the  universe,  and  after  this,  other  souls,  together  with  this  dispos- 
ing in  an  orderly  manner  the  whole  parts  of  the  universe  with  undefiled 
purity  ;  one  intellect,  and  an  intellectual  number  under  this,  participated 
by  these  souls ;  and  one  god  who  connectedly  contains  at  once  all  mun- 
dane and  supermundane1  natures,  and  a  multitude  of  other  gods,  who 
distribute  intellectual  essences,  and  the  souls  suspended  from  these,  and 
all  the  parts  of  the  world.  For  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  each  of  the 
productions  of  nature  is  generative  of  things  similar  to  itself,  but  that 
wholes  and  the  first  of  mundane  beings  should  not  in  a  much  greater 
degree  extend  in  themselves  the  paradigm  of  a  generation  of  this  kind. 
For  the  similar  is  more  allied,  and  more  naturally  adapted  to  the  reason 
of  cause  than  the  dissimilar,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  same  than  the 
different,  and  bound  than  the  infinite.  These  things,  however,  we  shall 
accurately  survey  in  what  follows.  But  we  shall  now  direct  our  attention 
to  the  second  of  the  things  demonstrated  in  the  Laws,  viz.  that  the  Gods 
providentially  attend  at  once  to  wholes  and  parts,  and  shall  summarily 

'  Instead  of  tftam  fu]  xmra.  luittftn,  it  is  necessary  to  read  k%%  xora  fc/vapir  rtf  veam  tfvm»,  ts  both, 
the  sense  of  the  whole  sentence  and  the  version  of  Portus  require. 

'  It  seems  requisite  to  supply  here  the  word  uxi'jx$&fmt>  sii  in  ill©  trails  mi  ion. 


Digitized  by  Google 


43 


OH  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  L 


discuss  the  irreprehensible  conception  of  Plato  -about  the  providence  of 
the  Gods. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Fhom  what  has  "been  said,  therefore,  it  is  evident  to  every  one,  that  the 
Gods  being  the  causes  of  all  motion,  some  of  them  are  essential  and 
vivific,  according  to  a  self-motive,  self-vital,  and  self-energetic  power.  But 
others  of  them  are  intellectual,  and  excite  by  their  very  being  all  secon- 
dary* natures  to  the  perfection  of  life,  according  to  the  fountain  and 
principle  of  all  second  and  third  progressions  of  motion.  And  others  are 
unical,  or  characterized  by  unity,  deifying  by  participation  all  the  whole 
genera  of  themselves,  according  to  a  primary,  all-perfect,  and  unknown 
power  of  energy,  and  who  are  the  leaders  of  one  kind  of  motion,  but 
are  not  the  principle  of  another.  But  again  others  supply  to  secondary 
natures  motion  according  to  place  or  quality,  but  arc  essentially  the 
causes  of  motion  to  themselves.  For  every  thing  which  is  the  cause  of 
essence  to  other  things  is  much  prior  to  this  the  cause  to  itself  of  its  own 
proper  energies  and  perfection.  Farther  still,  that  which  is  self-motive  is 
again  the  principle  of  motion,  and  being  and  life  are  imparted  by  soul  to 
every  thing  in  the  world,  and  not  local  motion  only  and  the  other  kinds 
of  motion,  but  the  progression  into  being  is  from  soul,  and  by  a  much 
greater  priority  from  an  intellectual  essence,  which  binds  to  itself  the  life 
of  self-motive  natures  and  precedes  according  to  cause  all  temporal  energy. 
And  in  a  still  greater  degree  do  motion,  being,  and  life  proceed  from  a 
unical  hy  pant  is,  which  connectedly  contains  intellect  and  soul,  is  the 
source  of  total  good,  and  proceeds  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things.  For  of 
life  iudecd,  not  all  the  parts  of  the  world  are  capable  of  participating,  nor 
of  intellect  and  a  gnostic  power ;  but  of  the  one  all  things  participate,  as  far 

•  For  bvrffw  read  fevnga. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  PLATO.  49 

as  to  matter  itself,  both  wholes  and  parts,  things  which  subsist  according  to 
nature,  and  the  contraries  to  these ;  and  there  is  not  any  thing  which  is  de- 
prived of  a  cause  of  this  kind,  nor  can  any  thing  ever  participate  of  being, 
if  it  is  deprived  of  the  one.  If,  therefore,  the  Gods  produce  all  things,  and 
contain  all  things,  in  the  unknown  comprehensions  of  themselves,  how  is 
it  possible  there  should  not  be  a  providence  of  all  things  iu  these  compre- 
hensions, pervading  supernally  as  far  as  to  the  most  partial  natures  ?  For 
it  is  every  where  fit  that  offspring  should  enjoy  the  providential  care  of 
their  causes.  But  all  alter-motive  are  the  progeny  of  self-motive  natures. 
And  things  which  subsist  in  time,  cither  in  the  whole  of  time,  or  in  a  part 
of  it,  are  the  effects  of  eternal  natures ;  because  that  which  always  is,  is  the 
cause  of  that  which  sometimes  exists.  And  divine  and  unical  genera,  as  they 
give  subsistence  to  all  multiplied  natures,  precede  them  in  existence.  In 
short,  there  is  no  essence,  or  multitude  of  powers,  which  is  not  allotted  iu 
generation  from  the  one.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  all  these  should  be 
partakers  of  the  providence  of  preceding  causes,  being  vivified  indeed  from 
the  psychical  gods,  and  circulating  according  to  temporal  periods ;  and 
participating  of  sameness  and  at  the  same  time  a  stable  condition  of  forms 
from  the  intellectual  gods  ;'  but  receiving  into  themselves  the  presence  of 
union,  of  measure,  and  of  the  distribution  of  good  from  the  first  Gods. 
It  is  necessary,  therefore,  either  that  the  Gods  should  know  that  a  provi- 
dential care  of  their  own  offspring  is  natural  to  them,  and  should  not  only 
give  subsistence  to  secondary  beings,  and  supply  them  with  life,  essence 
and  union,  but  also  previously  comprehend  in  themselves  the  primary 
cause  of  the  goods  they  contain,  or,  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  assert,  that 
being  Gods,  they  are  igooraut  of  what  is  proper  and  fit. 

For  what  ignorance  can  there  be  of  beautiful  things,  with  those  who 
are  the  causes  of  beauty,  or  of  things  good,  with  those  who  are  allotted 
an  hyparxis  defined  by  the  nature  of  the  goodf  But  if  they  are 
ignorant,  neither  do  souls  govern  the  universe  according  to  intellect, 
nor  are  intellects  carried  in  souls  as  in  a  vehicle,  nor  prior  to  these  do  the 
unities  of  the  Gods  contractedly  comprehend  in  themselves  all  know- 

1  It  is  necessary  here  to  »udt>1t  the  words,  ex  ru>  vhcm;  $r*v. 

Proc.  Vol.1.  G 


Digitized  by  Google 


50 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


ledge,  which  we  have  acknowledged  they  do  through  the  former  demonstra- 
tions. If,  therefore,  they  are  not  deprived  of  knowledge,  being  the  fathers, 
leaders  and  governors  of  every  thing  in  the  world,  and'  to  them  as  being, 
such  a  providential  care  of  the  things  governed  by,  and  following  them, 
and  generated  by  them,  pertains,  whether  shall  we  say  that  they  knowing 
the  law  which  is  according  to  nature,  accomplish  this  law,  or  that  through 
imbecility  they  arc  depri\ed  of  a  providential  attention  to  their  possessions 
or  progeny,  for  it  is  of  no  consequence  as  to  the  present  discussion  which 
of  these  two  appellations  you  are  willing  to  adopt?  For  if  through  want 
of  power  they  neglect  the  superintendence  of  wholes,  what  is  the  cause  of 
this  want  of  power  ?  For  they  do  not  move  things  externally,  nor  are  other 
tilings  indeed  the  causes  of  essence,  but  they  assume  the  government  of 
the  things  they  have  produced,  but  they  rule  over  all  things  as  if  from  the 
stern  of  a  ship,  themselves  supplying  being*  themselves  containing  the 
measures  of  life,  and  themselves  distributing  to  things  their  respective 
energies. 

W  hether  also,  are  they  unable  to  provide  at  once  for  all  things,  or  they 
do  not  leave  each  of  the  parts  destitute  of  their  providential  care  ?  And 
if  they  are  not  curators  of  every  thing  in  the  world,  whether  do  they  pro- 
videntially superintend  greater  things,  but  neglect  such  as  are  less  ?  Or 
do  they  pay  attention  to  the  less,  but  neglect  to  take  care  of  the  greater  ? 
For  if  we  deprive  them  of  a  providential  attention  to  all  things  similarly y 
through  the  want  of  power,  how,  while  we  attribute  to  them  a  greater 
thing,  viz.  the  production  of  all  things,  can  we  refuse  to  grant  that  which 
is  naturally  consequent  to  this,  a  providential  attention  to  their  produc- 
tions ?  For  it  is  the  province  of  the  power  which  produces  a  greater  thing, 
to  dispose  in  a  becoming  manner  that  which  is  less.  But  if  they  are 
curators  of  less  tilings,  and  neglect  such  as  are  greater,  how  can  this  mode 
of  providence  be  right?  For  that  which  is  more  allied,  and  more  similar 
to  any  thing,  is  more  appropriately  and  fitly  disposed  by  nature  to  the 
participation  of  the  good  which  that  thing  confers  on  it.  If,  however* 
the  Gods  think  that  the  first  of  mundane  natures  deserve  their  providen- 
tial care,  and  that  perfection  of  which  they  are  the  sources,  but  are  unable 

■  »«•  is  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIV. 


OF  PT.ATO. 


51 


to  extend  their  regard  to  the  last  of  things,  what  is  it  which  can  restrain 
the  presence  of  the  Gods  from  pervading  to  all  things  ?  What  is  it  which 
can  impede  their  unenvying  and  exuberant  energy  ?  How  can  those  who 
are  capable  of  effecting  greater  things,  be  unable  to  govern  such  as  are  less? 
Or  how  can  those  who  produce  the  essence  even  of  the  smallest  things,  not 
be  tlie  lords  of  the  perfection  of  them,  through  a  privation  of  power?  For 
all  these  things  are  hostile  to  our  natural  conceptions.  It  remains,  there- 
fore, that  the  Gods  must  know  what  is  fit  and  appropriate,  and  that  they 
must  possess  a  power  adapted  to  the  perfection  of  their  own  nature,  and 
to  the  government  of  the  whole  of  things.  But  if  they  know  that  which 
is  according  to  nature,  and  this  to  those  who  are  the  generating  causes  of 
all  things  is  to  take  care  of  all  things,  and  an  exuberance  of  power, — if 
this  be  the  case,  they  are  not  deprived  of  a  providential  attention  of  this 
kind.  Whether,  also,  together  with  what  has  been  said,  is  there  a  will  of 
providence  in  them  ?  Or  is  this  alone  wanting  both  to  their  knowledge 
and  power?  And  on  this  account  are  things  deprived'  of  their  providential 
care  ?  For  if  indeed  knowing  what  is  fit  for  themselves,  and  being  able  to 
accomplish  what  they  know,  they  are  unwilling  to  provide  for  their  own 
offspring,  they  will  be  indigent  of  goodness,  their  unenvying  exuberance 
will  perish,  and  we  shall  do  nothing  else  than  abolish  the  hyparxis  ac- 
cording to  which  they  are  essentialised.  For  the  very  being  of  the  Gods 
is  defined  by  the  good,  and  in  this  they  have  their  subsistence.  But  to 
provide  for  things  of  a  subject  nature,  is  to  confer  on  them  a  certain 
good.  How,  therefore,  can  we  deprive  the  Gods  of  providence,  without 
at  the  same  time  depriving  them  of  goodness?  And  how  if  we  subvert 
their  goodness  is  it  possible,  that  we  should  not  also  ignorantly  subvert 
their  hyparxis  which  we  established  by  the  former  demonstrations  ?  Hence 
it  is  necessary  to  admit  as  a  thing  consequent  to  the  very  being  of  the 
Gods  that  they  are  good  according  to  every  virtue.  And  again,  it  is  con- 
sequent to  this  that  they  do  not  withdraw  themselves  from  a  providential 
attention  to  secondary  natures,  either  through  indolence,  or  imbecility, 
or  ignorance.    But  to  this  I  think  it  is  also  consequent  that  there  is  with 


*  For  oTjagqrM  it  is  requisite  to  read,  xaj w*t«k 


52 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


them  the  most  excellent  knowledge,  unpolluted  power,  and  unenvying 
and  exuberant  will.  From  which  it  appears  that  they  provide  for  the 
trhole  of  things,  and  omit  nothing  which  is  requisite  to  the  supply  of 
good. 

Let,  however,  no  one  think  that  the  Gods  extend  such  a  providence 
about  secondary  things,  as  is  either  of  a  busy  or  laborious  nature,  or  that 
this  is  the  case  with  their  exempt  transcendency,  which  is  established  re- 
mote from  mortal  difficulty.  For  their  blessedness  is  not  willing  to  be  de- 
filed with  the  difficulty  of  administration,  since  even  the  life  of  good  men 
is  accompanied  with  facility,  and  is  void  of  molestation  and  pain.  But 
all  labours  and  molestation  arise  from  the  impediments  of  matter.  If; 
however,  it  be  requisite  to  define  the  mode  of  the  providence  of  the  Gods, 
it  must  be  admitted  that  it  is  spontaneous,  unpolluted,  immaterial,  and 
ineffable.  For  the  Gods  do  not  govern  all  things  either  by  investigating 
what  is  fit,  or  exploring  the  good  of  every  thing  by  ambiguous  reasonings, 
or  by  looking  externally,  and  following  their  effects  as  men  do  in  the  pro* 
vidence  which  they  exert  on  their  own  affairs  ;  but  pre-assuming  in  them- 
selves the  measures  of  the  whole  of  things,  and  producing  the  essence  of 
every  thing  from  themselves,  and  also  looking  to  themselves,  they  lead 
and  perfect  all  things  in  a  silent  path,  by  their  very  being,  and  fill  them 
with  good.  Neither,  likewise,  do  they  produce  in  a  manner  similar  to 
nature,  energizing  only  by  their  very  being,  unaccompanied  with  deli- 
berate choice,  nor  energizing  in  a  manner  similar  to  partial  souls  in  con- 
junction with  will,  are  they  deprived  of  production  according  to  essence ; 
but  they  contract  both  these  into  one  union,  and  they  will  indeed  such 
things  as  they  are  able  to  effect  by  their  very  being,  but  by  their  very 
essence  being  capable  of  and  producing  all  things,  they  contain  the  cause 
of  production  in  their  unenvying  and  exuberant  will.  By  what  busy 
energy,  therefore,  with  what  difficulty,  or  with  the  punishment  of  what 
Ixion,  is  the  providence  either  of  whole  souls,  or  of  intellectual  essences, 
or  of  the  Gods  themselves  accomplished,  unless  it  should  be  said,  that  to 
impart  good  in  any  respect  is  laborious  to  the  Gods  ?  But  that  which  is 
according  to  nature  is  not  laborious  to  any  thing.  For  neither  is  it  labo- 
rious to  fire  to  impart  heat,  nor  to  snow  to  refrigerate,  nor  in  short  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIV.  OP  PLATO.  ^ 

bodies  to  energize  according  to  their  own  proper  powers.  And  prior  to 
bodies,  neither  is  it  laborious  to  natures  to  nourish,  or  generate,  or  increase. 
For  these  are  the  works  of  natures.  Nor  again,  prior  to  these,  is  it  labo- 
rious to  souls.  For  these  indeed  produce  many  energies  from  deliberate 
choice,  many  from  their  very  being,  and  are  the  causes  of  many  motions 
by  alone  being  present.  So  that  if  indeed  the  communication  of  good  is 
according  to  nature  to  the  Gods,  providence  also  is  according  to  nature. 
And  these  things  we  must  say  are  accomplished  by  the  Gods  with  facility, 
and  by  their  very  being  alone.  But  if  these  things  are  not  according  to 
nature,  neither  will  the  Gods  be  naturally  good.  For  the  good  is  the  sup- 
plier of  good  ;  just  as  life  is  the  source  of  another  life,  and  intellect  is  the 
source  of  intellectual  illumination.  And  every  tiling  which  has  a  primary 
subsistence  in  each  nature  is  generative  of  that  which  has  a  secondary 
subsistence. 

That  however,  which  is  especially  the  illustrious  prerogative  of  the 
Platonic  theology,  I  should  say  is  this,  that  according  to  it,  neither  is  the 
exempt  essence  of  the  Gods  converted  to  secondary  natures,  through  a  pro- 
vidential care  for  things  subordinate,  nor  is  their  providential  presence  with 
all  things  diminished  through  their  transcending  the  whole  of  things  with 
undefiled  purity,  but  at  the  same  time  it  assigns  to  them  a  separate  subsist* 
ence,  and  the  being  unmingled  with  every  subordinate  nature,  and  also 
the  beipg  extended  to  all  things,  and  the  taking  care  of  and  adorning  their 
own  progeny.  For  the  manner  in  which  they  pervade  through  all  things  is 
not  corporeal,  as  that  of  light  is  through  the  air,  nor  is  it  divisible  about 
bodies,  in  the  same  manner  as  in  nature,  nor  converted  to  subordinate 
natures,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  a  partial  soul,  but  it  is  separate 
from  body,  and  without  conversion  to  it,  is  immaterial,  unmingled,  unre- 
strained, uniform,  primary  and  exempt.  In  short,  such  a  mode  of  the 
providence  of  the  Gods  as  this,  must  at  present  be  conceived.  For  it  is 
evident  that  it  will  be  appropriate  according  to  each  order  of  the  Gods. 
For  soul  indeed,  is  said  to  provide  for  secondary  natures  in  one  way,  and 
intellect  in  another.  But  the  providence  ot  divinity  who  is  prior  to  intel- 
lect is  exerted  according  to  a  transcendency  both  of  intellect  and  soul. 
And  of  the  Gods  themselves,  the  providence  of  the  sublunary  is  different 
from  that  of  the  celestial  divinities.    Of  the  Gods  also  who  are  beyond  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


£4  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

world,  there  are  many  orders,  and  the  mode  of  providence  is  different 
according  to  each. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


The  third  problem  after  these  we  shall  connect  with  the  former,  and 
survey  how  we  are  to  assume  the  unpervertible  in  the  Gods,  who  perform 
all  things  according  to  justice,  and  who  do  not  in  the  smallest  degree 
subvert  its  boundary,  or  its  undeviating  rectitude,  in  their  providential 
attention  to  all  other  things,  and  in  the  mutations  of  human  affairs.  I 
think  therefore,  that  this  is  apparent  to  every  one,  that  every  where  that 
which  governs  according  to  nature,  and  payB  all  possible  attention  to  the 
fehcity  of  the  governed,  after  this  manner  becomes  the  leader  of  that  which 
it  governs,  and  directs  it  to  that  which  is  best.  For  neither  has  the  pilot 
who  rules  over  the  sailors  and  the  ship  any  other  precedaneous  end  than 
the  safety  of  those  that  sail  in  the  ship,  and  of  the  ship  itself,  nor  does 
the  physician  who  is  the  curator  of  the  diseased,  endeavour  to  do  all  things 
for  the  sake  of  any  thing  else  than  the  health  of  the  subjects  of  his  care, 
whether  it  be  requisite  to  cut  them,  or  administer  to  them  a  purgative 
medicine.  Nor  would  the  general  of  an  army  or  a  guardian  say  that  they 
look  to  any  other  end,  than  the  one  to  the  liberty  of  those  that  are  guarded, 
and  the  other  to  the  liberty  of  the  soldiers.  Nor  will  any  other  to  whom 
it  belongs  to  be  the  leader  or  curator  of  certain  persons,  endeavour  to 
subvert  the  good  of  those  that  follow  him,  which  it  is  his  business  to  pro- 
cure, and  with  a  view  to  which  he  disposes  in  a  becoming  manner  every 
thing  belonging  to  those  whom  he  governs.  If  therefore  we  grant  that  the 
Gods  are  the  leaders  of  the  whole  of  things,  and  that  their  providence  ex- 
tends to  all  things,  since  they  are  good,  and  possess  every  virtue,  how  is 
it  possible  they  should  neglect  the  felicity  of  the  objects  of  their  provi- 
dential care?   Or  how  can  they  be  inferior  to  other  leaders  in  the  provi- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XV. 


GF  PLATO. 


65 


dence  of  subordinate  natures?  Since  the  Gods  indeed  always  look  to 
that  which  is  better,  and  establish  this  as  the  end  of  all  their  government, 
but  other  leaders  overlook  the  good  of  men,  and  embrace  vice  rather  than 
virtue,  in  consequence  of  being  perverted  by  the  gifts  of  the  depraved. 

And  universally,  whether  you  arc  willing  to  call  the  Gods  leaders,  or 
rulers,  or  guardians,  or  fathers,  a  divine  nature  will  appear  to  be  in  want 
of  no  one  of  such  names.  For  all  things  that  are  venerable  and  honor- 
able subsist  in  them  primarily.  And  on  this  account  indeed,  here  also 
some  things  are  naturally  more  venerable  and  honorable  than  others, 
because  they  exhibit  an  ultimate  resemblance  of  the  Gods.  But  what 
occasion  is  there  to  speak  further  on  this  subject  ?  For  I  think  that  we 
hear  from  those  who  are  wise  in  divine  concerns  paternal,  guardian,  ruling 
and  peeonian  powers  celebrated.  How  is  it  possible  therefore  that  the 
images  of  the  Gods  which  subsist  according  to  nature,  regarding  the  end 
which  is  adapted  to  them,  should  providentially  attend  to  the  order  of 
the  things  which  they  govern,  but  that  the  Gods  themselves  with  whom 
there  is  the  whole  of  good,  true  and  real  virtue,  and  a  blameless  life,  should 
not  direct  their  government  to  the  virtue  and  vice  of  men  ?  And  how 
can  it  be  admitted,  on  this  supposition,  that  tbey  exhibit  virtue  victorious 
in  the  universe,  and  vice  vanquished?  Will  they  not  also  thus  corrupt 
the  measures  of  justice  by  the  worship  paid  to  them  by  the  depraved, 
subvert  the  boundary  of  undeviating  science,  and  cause  the  gifts  of  vice  to 
appear  more  honorable  than  the  pursuits  of  virtue  ?  For  this  mode  of 
providence  is  neither  advantageous  to  these  leaders,  nor  to  those  that 
follow  them.  For  to  those  who  have  become  wicked,  there  will  be  no 
liberation  from  guilt,  since  they  will  always  endeavour  to  anticipate  justice, 
and  pervert  the  measures  of  desert.  But  it  will  be  necessary,  which  it  is 
not  lawful  to  assert,  that  the  Gods  should  regard  as  their  final  end  the 
vice  of  the  subjects  of  their  providence,  neglect  their  true  salvation,  and 
consequently  be  alone  the  causes  of  adumbrant  good.  This  universe  also 
«tnd  the  whole  world  will  be  filled  with  disorder  and  incurable  perturbation, 
depravity  remaining  in  it,  and  being  replete  with  that  discord  which  exists 
in  badly  governed  cities.    Though  is  it  not  perfectly  impossible  that  parts 


ON  THE  THEOLOCY 


BOOK  I. 


should  be  governed  according  to  nature  in  a  greater  degree  than  wholes, 
human  than  divine  concerns,  and  images  than  primary  causes  P 

Hence  if  men  properly  attend  to  the  welfare  of  men  in  governing  them, 
honoring  some,  but  disgracing  others,  and  every  where  giving  a  proper 
direction  to  the  works  of  vice  by  the  measures  of  virtue,  it  is  much  more 
necessary  that  the  Gods  should  be  the  immutable  governors  of  the  whole 
of  things.  For  men  are  allotted  this  virtue  through  similitude  to  the  Gods. 
But  if  we  acknowledge  that  men  who  corrupt  the  safety  and  well-being 
of  those  whom  they  govern,  imitate  in  a  greater  degree  the  providence  of 
the  Gods,  we  shall  ignorantly  at  one  and  the  same  time  entirely  subvert 
die  truth  concerning  the  Gods,  and  the  transcendency  of  virtue.  For  this 
I  think  is  evident  to  every  one,  that  what  is  more  similar  to  the  Gods  is 
more  happy  than  those  things  that  are  deprived  of  them  '  through  dissimi- 
litude aud  diversity.  So  that  if  among  men  indeed,  the  uncorrupted  and 
un deviating  form  of  providence  is  honorable,  it  must  undoubtedly  be  in  a 
much  greater  degree  honorable  with  the  Gods.  But  if  with  them,  mortal 
gifts  are  more  venerable  than  the  divine  measures  of  justice,  with  men 
also  earth-born  gifts  will  be  more  honorable  than  Olympian  goods,  and  the 
blandishments  of  vice  than  the  works  of  virtue.  With  a  view  therefore  to 
the  most  perfect  felicity,  Plato  in  the  Laws  delivers  to  us  through  these 
demonstrations,  the  hvparxis  of  the  Gods,  their  providential  care  extend- 
ing to  all  things,  and  their  immutable  energy  ;  which  things,  indeed,  are 
common  to  all  the  Gods,  but  are  most  principal  and  first  according  to 
nature  in  the  doctrine  pertaining  to  them.  For  this  triad  appears  to  per- 
vade as  far  as  to  the  most  partial  natures  in  the  divine  orders,  originating 
supernally  from  the  occult  genera  of  Gods.  For  a  uniform  hyparxis,  a 
power  which  providentially  takes  care  of  all  secondary  natures,  and  an 
undeviating  and  immutable  intellect,  are  in  all  the  Gods  that  are  prior  to 
and  in  the  world. 


'  For  mm*  it  ii  necemry  to  re*d  mrrm 


CHAP.  XV! 


OF  PLATO. 


57 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Ac  a  ix,  from  another  principle  we  may  be  able  to  apprehend  the  theo- 
logical demonstrations  in  the  Republic.  For  these  are  common  to  all  the 
divine  orders,  similarly  extend  to  all  the  discussion  about  the  Gods,  and 
unfold  to  us  truth  in  uninterrupted  connexion  with  what  has  been  before 
said.  In  the  second  book  of  the  Republic  therefore,  Socrates  describes 
certain  theological  types  for  mythological  poets,  and  exhorts  his  pupils  to 
purify  themselves  from  those  tragic  disciplines,  which  some  do  not  refuse 
to  introduce  to  a  divine  nature,  concealing  in  these  as  in  veils  the  arcane 
mysteries  concerning  the  Gods.  Socrates  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  nar- 
rating the  types  and  laws  of  divine  fables,  which  afford  this  apparent 
meaning,  and  the  inward  concealed  scope,  which  regards  as  its  end  the 
beautiful  and  the  natural  in  the  fictions  about  the  Gods, — in  the  first 
place  indeed,  thinks  fit  to  evince,  according  to  our  un perverted  concep- 
tion about  the  Gods  and  their  goodness,  that  they  are  the  suppliers  of  all 
good,  but  the  causes  of  no  evil  to  any  being  at  any  time.  In  the  second 
place,  he  says  that  they  are  essentially  immutable,  and  that  they  neither 
have  various  forms,  deceiving  and  fascinating,  nor  are  the  authors  of  the 
greatest  evil  lying,  in  deeds  or  in  words,  or  of  error  and  folly.  These 
therefore  being  two  laws,  the  former  has  two  conclusions,  viz.  that  the 
Gods  are  not  the  causes  of  evils,  and  that  they  are  the  causes  of  all  good* 
The  second  law  also  in  a  similar  manner  has  two  other  conclusions ;  and 
these  are,  that  every  divine  nature  is  immutable,  and  is  established  pure 
from  falsehood  and  artificial  variety.  All  the  things  demonstrated  there- 
fore, depend  on  these  three  common  conceptions  about  a  divine  nature, 
viz.  on  the  conceptions  about  its  goodness,  immutability  and  truth.  For 


the  first  and  ineffable  fountain  of  good  is  with  the  Gods ;  together  with 
eternity,  which  is  the  cause  of  a  power  that  has  an  invariable  sameness  of 
subsistence :  and  the  first  intellect  which  is  beings  themselves,  and  the 
truth  which  is  in  real  beings. 


Proc. 


Vol.  L 


11 


Digitized  by  Google 


.38 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I 


CHAPfER  XVII. 


That  therefore,  which  has  the  hyparxis  of  itself,  and  the  whole  of  its 
essence  defined  in  the  good,  and  which  by  its  very  being  produces  all  things, 
must  necessarily  be  productive  of  every  good,  but  of  no  evil.  For  if  there 
was  any  thing  primarily  good,  which  is  not  God,  perhaps  some  one  might 
say  that  divinity  is  indeed  a  cause  of  good,  but  that  he  does  not  impart  to 
beings  every  good.  If,  however,  not  only  every  God  is  good,  but  that 
which  is  primarily  boniforra  and  beneficent  is  God,  (for  that  which  is  pri- 
marily good  will  not  be  the  second  after  the  Gods,  because  every  where, 
things  which  have  a  secondary  subsistence,  receive  the  peculiarity  of  their 
hyparxis  from  those  that  subsist  primarily)— this  being  the  case,  it  is  per- 
fectly necessary  that  divinity  should  be  the  cause  of  good,  and  of  all  such 
goods  as  proceed  into  secondary  descents,  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things, 
lor  as  the  power  which  is  the  cause  of  life,  gives  subsistence  to  all  life,  as 
the  power  which  is  the  cause  of  knowledge,  produces  all  knowledge,  as  the 
power  which  is  the  cause  of  beauty,  produces  every  thing  beautiful,  as  well 
tl>e  beauty  which  is  in  words,  as  that  which  is  in  the  phenomena,  and  thus 
every  primary  cause  produces  all  similars  from  itself  and  binds  to  itself  the 
one  hypostasis  of  things  which  subsist  according  to  one  form,— after  the  same 
manner  I  think  the  first  and  most  principal  good,  and  uniform  hyparxis,  es- 
tablishes in  and  about  itself,  the  causes  and  comprehensions  of  all  goods  at 
once.  Nor  is  there  any  thing  good  which  does  not  possess  this  power  from 
it,  nor  beneficent  which  being  converted  to  it,  does  not  participate  of  this 
cause.  For  all  goods  are  from  thence  produced,  perfected  and  preserved  ; 
and  the  one  series  and  order  of  universal  good,  depends  on  that  fountain. 
Through  the  same  cause  of  hyparxis  therefore,  the  Gods  are  the  suppliers 
of  all  good,  and  of  no  evil.  For  that  which  is  primarily  good,  gives  subsist- 
ence to  every  good  from  itself,  and  is  not  the  cause  of  an  allotment  con- 
trary to  itself;  since  that  which  is  productive  of  life,  is  not  the  cause  of 
the  privation  of  life,  and  that  which  is  the  source  of  beauty  is  exempt 
from  the  nature  of  that  which  is  void  of  beauty  and  is  deformed,  and  from 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XVII.  OF  PLATO.  5g 

the  causes  of  this.  Hence,  of  that  which  primarily  constitutes  good,  it  is 
not  lawful  to  assert  that  it  is  the  cause  of  contrary  progeny  ;  but  the  na- 
ture of  goods  proceeds  from  thence  undefiled,  unmingled  and  uniform. 

And  the  divine  cause  indeed  of  goods  is  established  eternally  in  itself, 
extending  to  all  secondary  natures,  an  unenvying  and  exuberant  partici- 
pation of  good.    Of  its  participants,  however,  some  preserve  the  partici- 
pation with  incorruptible  purity,  receiving  their  proper  good  in  undented 
bosoms,  and  thus  through  an  abundance  of  power  possess  inevitably  an  al- 
lotment of  goods  adapted  to  them.    But  those  natures  which  are  arranged 
in  the  last  of  the  whole  of  things,  entirely  indeed  enjoy  according  to  their 
nature  the  goodness  of  the  Gods ;  for  it  is  not  possible  that  things  perfectly 
destitute  of  good  should  either  have  a  being,  or  subsist  at  first ;  but  re- 
ceiving an  efflux  of  this  kind,  they  neither  preserve  the  gift  which  pervades 
to  them,  pure  and  unmingled,  nor  do  they  retain  their  proper  good  stably, 
and  with  invariable  sameness,  but  becoming  imbecil,  partial  and  material, 
and  filled  with  the  privation  of  vitality  of  their  subject,  they  exhibit  to 
order  indeed,  the  privation  of  order,  to  reason  irrationality,  and  to  virtue, 
the  contrary  to  it,  vice.    And  with  respect  indeed  to  the  natures  which 
rank  as  wholes,'  each  of  these  is  exempt  from  a  perversion  of  this  kind, 
things  more  perfect  in  them  always  having  dominion  according  to  nature. 
But  partial  natures  through  a  diminution  of  power  always  diverging  1  into 
multitude,  division  and  interval,  obscure  indeed  the  participation  of  good, 
but  substitute  the  contrary  in  the  mixture  with  good,  and  which  is  van. 
quished  by  the  combination.  For  neither  here  is  it  lawful  for  evil  to  subsist  / 
unmingled,  and  perfectly  destitute  of  good ;  but  though  some  particular 
thing  may  be  evil  to  a  part,  yet  it  is  entirely  good  to  the  whole  and  to  the 
universe.  For  the  universe  is  always  happy,  and  always  consists  of  perfect 
parts,  and  which  subsist  according  to  nature.    But  that  which  is  preter- 
natural is  always  evil  to  partial  natures,  and  deformity,  privation  of  sym- 
metry, perversion,  and  a  resemblance  of  subsistence  are  in  these.  For 
that  which  is  corrupted,  is  indeed  corrupted  to  itself,  and  departs  from 
its  proper  perfection,  but  to  the  universe  it  is  incorruptible  and  inde- 
structible. 

'  For  aM«n  it  is  necessary  to  read  o\x*. 
1  For  rfifiaiKirrst  read  txfbuwna. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CO  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

And  every  thing  which  is  deprived  of  good,  so  fur  indeed-  as  pertains 
to  itself,  and  its  own  subsistence,  is  deprived  of  it  through  imbecility  of  na- 

\  turc ;  but  it  is  good  to  the  whole,  and  so  far  as  it  is  a  part  of  the  universe' 
For  it  is  not  possible  that  either  a  privation  of  life,  or  deformity  and  im- 

y  moderation,  or  in  short  privation  can  be  inserted  in  the  universe  ;  but  its 
whole  number  is  always  perfect,  being  held  together  by  the  goodness  of 
wholes.  And  life  is  every  where  present,  together  with  existence,  and  the 
being  perfect,  so  far  as  each  thing  gives  completion  to  the  whole.  Di. 
vinity  therefore,  as  we  have  said,  is  the  cause 1  of  good  ;  but  the  shadowy 
subsistence  of  evil  does  not  subsist  from  power,  but  from  the  imbecility 
of  the  natures  which  receive  the  illuminations  of  the  Gods.  Nor  is  evil 
in  wholes,  but  in  partial  natures,  nor  yet  in  all  these.  For  the  first  of 
partial  natures  and  partial  intellectual  genera  are  eternally  boniform. 
But  the  media  among  these,  and  which  energize  according  to  time,  con- 
necting the  participation  of  the  good  with  temporal  mutation  and  motion, 
are  incapable  of  preserving  the  gift  of  the  Gods  immoveable,  uniform  and 
simple;  by  their  variety  obscuring*  the  simplicity  of  this  gift,  by  their 
multiform  its  uniform  nature,  and  by  their  commixture  its  purity  and 
incorruptibility.  For  they  do  not  consist  of  incorruptible  first  generar 
v.ox  have  they  a  simple  essence,  nor  uniform  powers,  but  such  as  arc 
composed  of  the  contraries  to  these,  as  Socrates  somewhere  says  in  the 
Phaedrus.  And  the  last  of  partial  natures  and  which  are  also  materia),  in 
a  much  greater  degree  pervert  their  proper  good.  For  they  are  mingled 
with  a  privation  of  life,  and  have  a  subsistence  resembling  that  of  an 
image,  since  it  is  replete  with  much  of  non-entity,  consists  of  things  hostile 

I  to  each  other,  and  of  circumstances  which  are  mutable  and  dispersed 
through  the  whole  of  time,  so  that  they  never  cease  to  evince  in  every  thing 
that  they  are  given  up  to  corruption,  privation  of  symmetry,  deformity, 
and  all-various  mutations,  being  not  only  extended  in  their  energies,  like  the 
natures  prior  to  them,  but  being  replete  both  in  their  powers  and  energies 
with  that  which  is  preternatural,  and  with  material  imbecility.  For  things 
which  become  situated  in  a  foreign  place,  by  co-introducing  whole  together 

•  It  is  necessary  here  to  supply  the  word  «ru». 

'  For  .afWTMuatyvra  it  U  requisite  to  read  mftnmtfirr*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


chap.  xvir. 


OF  PLATO. 


6l 


with  form,  rule  over  the  subject  nature ;  but  again  receding  to  that  which 
is  partial,  from  their  proper  wholeness,  and  participating  of  partibHity,  im- 
becility, war  and  the  division  which  is  the  source  of  generation,  they 
are  necessarily  all-variously  changed.  Neither,  therefore,  is  every  being 
perfectly  good  ;  for  there  would  not  be  the  corruption  and  generation  of 
bodies,  nor  the  purification  and  punishment  of  soak.  Nor  is  there  any 
evil  in  wholes  :  for  the  world  would  not  be  a  blessed  god,  if  the  most 
principal  parts  of  which  it  consists  were  imperfect.  Nor  are  the  Gods 
the  causes  of  evils,  in  the  same  manner  as  they  are  of  goods ;  but  evil 
originates  from  the  imbecility  of  the  recipients  of  good,  and  a  subsistence 
in  the  last  of  things.  Nor  is  the  evil  which  has  a  shadowy  subsistence  in 
partial  natures  unmingled  with  good.  But  this  participates  of  it  in  a 
certain  respect,  by  its  very  existence  being  detained  by  good.  Nor  in 
short,  is  it  possible  for  evil  which  is  perfectly  destitute  of  all  good  to  have 
a  subsistence.  For  evil  itself  is  even  beyond  that  which  m  no  respect 
whatever  has  an  existence,  just  as  the  good  itself  fa  beyond  that  which  is 
perfectly  being.  Nor  is  the  evil  which  is  in  partial  natures  left  in  a  dis- 
ordered state,  but  even  this  is  made  subservient  to  good  purposes  by  the 
Gods,  and  on  this  account  justice  purifies  souls  from  depravity.  But 
another  order  of  gods  purifies  from  the  depravity  which  is  in  bodies. 
All  things  however  are  converted  as  much  as  possible  to  the  goodness  of 
the  Gods.  And  wholes  indeed  remain  in  their  proper  boundaries,  and 
also  the  perfect  and  beneficent  genera  of  beings.  But  more  partial  and 
imperfect  natures  are  adorned  and  arranged  in  a  becoming  manner, 
become  subservient  to  the  completion  of  wholes,  are  called  upward  to  the 
beautiful,  are  changed,  and  in  every  way  enjoy  the  participation  of  the 
good,  so  far  as  this  can.  be  accomplished  by  them. 

For  there  cannot  be  a  greater  good  to  each  of  these,  than  what  the  Gods 
impart  according  to  measures  to  their  progeny :  but  all  things,  each  sepa- 
rately, and  all  in  common,  receive  such  a  portion  of  good,  as  it  is  pos- 
sible for  them  to  participate.  But  if  some  things  are  filled  with  greater, 
and  others  with  less  goods,  the  power  of  the  recipients,  and  the  measures 
of  the  distribution  must  be  assigned  as  the  cause  of  this.  For  different 
things  are  adapted  to  different  beings  according  to  their  nature.    But  the 


62 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


Gods  always  extend  good,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sun  always  emits 
light-  For  a  different  thing  receives  this  light  differently  according  to  its 
/  order,  and  receives  the  greatest  portion  of  light  it  is  capable  of  receiving. 
For  all  things  are  led  according  to  justice,  and  good  is  not  absent  from  any 
thing,  but  is  present  to  every  thing,  according  to  an  appropriate  boundary 
of  participation.  And  as  the  Athenian  guest  says,  all  things  are  in  a 
good  condition,  and  are  arranged  by  the  Gods.  Let  no  one  therefore  sav, 
that  there  are  precedaneous  productive  principles  of  evil  in  nature,  or  in- 
tellectual paradigms  of  evils,  in  the  same,  manner  as  there  are  of  goods, 
o  or  that  there  is  a  malific  soul,  or  an  evil-producing  cause  in  the  Gods,  nor 
x  r  let  him  introduce  sedition  and  eternal  war  against  the  first  good.  For  all 
these  are  foreign  from  the  science  of  Plato,  and  being  more  remote  from 
the  truth  wander  into  barbaric  folly,  and  gigantic  mythology.  Nor  if 
certain  persqns  speaking  obscurely  in  arcane  narrations,  devise  things  of  , 
this  kind,  shall  we  make  any  alteration  in  the  apparent  apparatus  of  what 
they  indicate.  But  the  truth  indeed  of  those  things  is  to  be  investigated, 
and  in  the  mean  time,  the  science  of  Plato  must  be  genuinely  received  in 
the  pure  bosoms  of  the  soul,  and  must  be  preserved  undefiled  and  un- 
mingled  with  contrary  opinions. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

In  the  next  place,  let  us  survey  the  immutability  and  simplicity  of  the 
Gods,  what  the  nature  of  each  of  them  is,  and  how  both  these  appear  to 
be  adapted  to  the  hyparxis  of  the  Gods,  according  to  the  narration  of 
Plato.  The  Gods,  therefore,  are  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things.  But 
filling  these,  as  we  have  said,  with  good,  they  are  themselves  perfectly  good ; 
each  of  them  according  to  his  proper  order  possesses  that  which  is  most 
excellent ;  and  The  whole  genus  of  the  Gods  is  at  once  allotted  predomi- 
nance according  to  an  exuberance  of  good.    But  here  again,  we  must 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XVIII.  OF  PLATO-  6s 

oppose  those  who  interpret  in  a  divisible  manner  that  which  is  most  excel- 
lent in  the  Gods,  and  who  say,  that  if  the  first  cause  is  roost  excellent, 
that  which  is  posterior  to  the  first  is  not  so.    For  it  is  necessary,  say 
they,  that  what  is  produced  should  be  inferior  to  that  by  which  it  is  pro- 
duced.   And  this  indeed  is  rightly  asserted  by  them.    For  it  is  necessary 
in  the  Gods,  to  preserve  the  order  of  causes  unconfused,  and  to  define 
separately  their  second  and  third  progressions.    But  together  with  a  pro- 
gression of  this  kind,  and  with '  the  unfolding  into  light  of  things  secon- 
dary from  those  that  are  first,  that  which  is  most  excellent  must  also  be 
surveyed  in  each  of  the  Gods.    For  each  of  the  Gods  in  his  own  charac- 
teristic peculiarity  is  allotted  a  transcendency  which  is  primary  and  per- 
fectly good.    One  of  them  indeed,  that  we  may  speak  of  something 
known,  is  allotted  this  transcendency,  and  is  most  excellent  as  possessing 
a  prophetic  power,  another  as  demiurgic,  but  another  as  a  perfector  of 
works.    And  Timfeus  indicating  this  to  us,  continually  calls  the  first  de- 
miurgus  the  best  of  causes.    For  the  world,  says  he,  is  the  most  beautiful 
of  generated  natures,  and  its  artificer  is  the  best  of  causes  ;  though  the 
intelligible  paradigm,  and  which  is  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligibles  is  prior 
to  the  demiurgus.    But  this  is  most  beautiful  and  at  the  same  time  most 
excellent,  as  the  demiurgic  paradigm  ;  and  the  maker  and  at  the  same 
time  father  of  the  universe  is  most  excellent,  as  a  demiurgic  God.    In  the 
Republic  also,  Socrates  speaking  of  the  Gods,  very  properly  observes, 
that  each  of  them  being  as  much  as  possible  most  beautiful  and  most 
excellent,  remains  always  with  a  simplicity  of  subsistence  in  his  own  form. 
For  each  of  them  being  allotted  that  which  is  first  and  the  summit  in  his 
own  series,  does  not  depart  from  his  own  order,  but  contains  the  blessed- 
ness and  felicity  of  his  own  proper  power.    And  neither  does  he  exchange 
his  present  for  a  worse  order ;  for  it  is  not  lawful  for  that  which  possesses 
all  virtue  to  be  changed  into  a  worse  condition  ;  nor  does  he  pass  into  a 
better  order.    For  where  can  there  be  any  thing  better  than  that  which  is 
most  excellent?   But  this  is  present  with  each  of  the  divinities  according 
to  his  own  order,  as  wc  have  said,  and  also  with  every  genus  of  the  Gods. 

■  For  to  it  it  netewary  to  read  tj. 


Digitized  by  Google 


(J4  ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


It  is  necessary  therefore  that  every  divine  nature  should  he  established 
immutably,  abiding  in  its  own  accustomed  manner.  Hence  from  these 
things  the  selfcsufficiency,  undefiled  purity,  and  invariable  sameness  of  sub' 
sistence  of  the  Gods  is  apparent  For  if  they  are  nol  changed  to  a  more 
excellent  condition  of  being,  as  possessing  that  which  is  best  in  their  own 
nature,  they  are  sufficient  to  themselves,  and  are  not  in  want  of  any  good. 
Aod  if  they  are  not  at  any  time  changed  to  a  worse  condition,  they  re- 
main undefiled,  established  in  their  own  transcendencies.  If  also  they 
guard  the  perfection  of  themselves  immutably,  they  subsist  always  with 
invariable  sameness.  What  the  self-sufficiency  therefore  of  the  Gods  is, 
what  their  immutability,  and  what  tlieir  sameness  of  subsistence,  we  shall 
in  the  next  place  consider. 

The  world  then  is  said  to  be  self-sufficient,  because  its  subsistence  is  per- 
fect from  things  perfect,  and  a  whole  from  wholes ;  and  because  it  is  filled 
with  all  appropriate  goods  from  iU  generating  father.  But  a  perfection 
and  self-sufficiency  of  this  kind  is  partible,  and  is  said  to  consist  of  many 
tilings  coalescing  in  one,  and  is  filled  from  separate  causes  according  to 
participation.  The  order  of  divine  souls  also,  is  said  to  be  self-sufficient, 
as  being  full  of  appropriate  virtues,  and  always  preserving  the  measure  of 
its  own  blessedness  without  indigence.  But  here  likewise  the  self-suffi- 
ciency is  in  want  of  powers.  For  these  souls  have  not  their  intellections 
directed  to  the  same  intelligibles ;  but  they  energize  according  to  time, 
and  obtain  the  complete  perfection  of  their  contemplation  in  whole  periods 
of  time.  The  self-sufficiency  therefore  of  divine  souls,  and  the  whole- 
perfection  of  their  life  is  not  at  once  present.  Again,  the  intellectual 
world  is  said  to  be  self-sufficient,  as  having  its  whole  good  established  in 
eternity,  comprehending  at  once  its  whole  blessedness,  and  being  indigent 
of  nothing,  because  all  life  and  all  intelligence  are  present  with  it,  and 
nothing  is  deficient,  nor  does  it  desire  any  thing  as  absent.  But  this,  in- 
deed, is  sufficient  to  itself  in  its  own  order,  yet  it  falls  short  of  tho  self- 
sufficiency  of  the  Gods.  For  every  intellect  is  boniform,  yet  is  not  good- 
ness itself,  nor  primarily  good ;  but  each  of  the  Gods  is  a  unity,  hy- 
parxis  and  goodness.  The  peculiarity  however  of  hyparxis  changes  the 
progression  of  the  goodness  of  each.    For  one  divinity  is  a  perfcetwe 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XVIII. 


OF  PLATO. 


goodness,  another  is  a  goodness  connective  of  the  whole  of  things,  and 
another  is  a  collective  goodness.  But  each  is  simply  a  goodness  sufficient 
to  itself.  Or  it  may  be  said,  that  each  is  a  goodness  possessing  the  self- 
sufficient  and  the  all-perfect,  neither  according  to  participation,  nor  illumi- 
nation, but  by  being  that  very  thing  which  it  is.  For  intellect  is  sufficient 
to  itself  by  'participation,  and  soul  by  illumination,  but  this  universe,  ac- 
cording  to  a  similitude  to  a  divine  nature.  The  Gods  themselves,  however, 
are  self-sufficient  through  and  by  themselves,  filling  themselves,  or  rather 
subsisting  as  the  plenitudes  of  all  good. 

But  with  respect  to  the  immutability  of  the  Gods,  of  what  kind  shall 
we  say  it  is  ?  Is  it  such  as  that  of  a  [naturally}  circulating  body  ?  For 
neither  is  this  adapted  to  receive  any  thing  from  inferior  natures,  nor  is 
it  filled  with  the  mutation  arising  from  generation,  and  the  disorder  which 
occurs  in  the  sublunary  regions.  For  the  nature  of  the  celestial  bodies  is 
immaterial  and  immutable.  But  this  indeed  is  great  and  venerable,  as  in 
corporeal  hypostases,  yet  it  is  inferior  to  the  nature  of  the  Gods.  For 
every  body  possesses  both  its  being,  and  its  perpetual  immutability  from 
other  precedaneous  causes.  But  neither  is  the  impassive  and  the  immu- 
table in  the  Gods  such  as  the  immutability  of  souk.  For  these  commu- 
nicate in  a  certain  respect  with  bodies,  and  are  the  media  of  an  impartible 
essence,  and  of  an  essence  divided  about  bodies.  Nor  again  is  the  im- 
mutability of  intellectual  essences  equivalent  to  that  of  the  Gods.  For 
intellect  is  immutable,  impassive,  and  umuingled  with  secondary  natures, 
on  account  of  its  union  with  the  Gods.  And  so  far  iodeed  as  it  is  uniform, 
it  is  a  thing  of  this  kind  ;  but  so  far  as  h  is  manifold,  it  has  something 
which  is  more  excellent,  and  something  which  is  subordinate,  m  itself. 
But  the  Gods  alone  having  established  their  onions  according  to-this  trans- 
cendency of  beings, are  immutable  dominations,  are  primary  and  impassive. 
For  there  is  nothing  in  them  which  is  not  one  and  byparxis.  lint  as  fire 
abolishes  every  thing  which  is  foreign  to  it  and  of  a  contrary  power,  as 
light  expels  all  darkness,  and  as  lightning  proceeds  through  all  things  with- 
out defilement,  thus  also  the  unities  of  the  Gods  unite  all  multitude,  and 
abolish  every  thing  which  tends  to  dispersion  and  all-perfect  division.  But 
they  deify  every  thing  which  participates  of  them,  receiving  nothing  from 

Froc.  Vol.  I.  I 


Digitized  by  Google 


66  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

their  participants,  and  do  not '  diminish  their  owu  proper  union  by  the 
participation. 

Hence  also  the  Gods  being  present  every  where,  arc  similarly  exempt 
from  all  things,  and  containing  all  things  are  vanquished  by  no  one  of  the 
things  they  contain  ;  but  they  are  unminglod  with  all  things  and  unde- 
filed.  In  the  third  place,  this  world  indeed  is  said  to  subsist  with  inva- 
riable sameness,  so  far  as  it  is  allotted  an  order  in  itself  which  is  always 
preserved  indissoluble.  At  the  same  time  however,  since  it  possesses  a 
corporeal  form,  it  is  not  destitute  of  mutation,  as  the  Elean  guest  observes. 
The  psychical  order  likewise  is  said  to  obtain  an  essence  always  established 
iu  sameness ;  and  this  is  rightly  said.  For  it  is  entirely  impassive  accord- 
ing to  essence;  but  it  has  energies  extended  into  time,  and  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Pbaedrus,  at  different  times  it  understands  different  intelligibles, 
and  in  its  progressions  about  intellect  comes  into  contact  with  different 
forms.  Besides  these  also,  much-honored  intellect  is  said  both  to  subsist 
and  to  understand  with  invariable  and  perpetual  sameness,  establishing  at 
once  in  eternity  its  essence,  powers,  and  energies.  Through  the  multitude 
however  of  its  intellections,  and  through  the  variety  of  intelligible  species 
and  genera,  there  is  not  only  an  invariable  sameness,  but  also  a  difference  v 
of  subsistence  in  intellect.  For  difference  there  is  consubsistent  with 
sameness.  And  there  is  not  only  a  wandering  of  corporeal  motions,  and 
of  the  psychical  periods,  but  likewise  of  intellect  itself,  so  far  as  it  pro- 
duces the  intelligence  of  itself  into  multitude;  and  evolves  the  intelligible. 
For  soul  indeed  evolves  intellect,  but  intellect  the  intelligible,  as  Plotinus 
somewhere  rightly  observes,  when  speaking  of  the  intelligible  subjections. 
For  such  are  the  wanderings  of  intellect  and  which  it  is  lawful  for  it  to  make. 
If  therefore  we  should  say  that  a  perpetual  sameness  of  subsistence  is  pri- 
marily in  the  Gods  alone,  and  is  especially  inherent  in  them,  we  shall  not 
deviate  from  the  truth,  and  we  shall  accord  with  Plato,  who  says  in  tlie 
Politicus,  that  an  eternally  invariable  sameness  of  subsistence  alone  per- 
tains to  the  most  divine  of  all  things.  The  Gods,  therefore,  bind  to  them- 
selves the  causes  of  a  sameness  of  this  kind,  and  guard  with  immutable 

'  nx  is  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIX.  OF  PLATO.  ^ 

< 

sameness  their  proper  hyparxis  established  accord ing  to  the  uuknown  union 
of  themselves.  And  such  is  the  immutability  of  the  Gods,  which  is  con- 
tained in  self-sufficiency,  impassivity  and  sameness. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

I  n  the  next  place,  let  us  consider  what  power  the  simplicity  of  the 
Gods  possesses  ;  for  this  Socrates  adds  in  his  discourse  concerning  a  divine 
nature,  not  admitting  that  which  is  various,  and  multiform,  and  which 
appears  different  at  different  times,  but  referring  to  divinity  the  uniform 
and  the  simple.  Each  of  the  divinities  therefore,  as  he  says,  remains 
simply  in  his  own  form.  What  then  shall  we  conclude  respecting  this 
simplicity?  That  it  is  not  such  as  that  which  is  defined  to  be  one  in 
number.  For  a  thing  of  this  kind  is  composed  of  many  things,  and  abun- 
dantly mingled.  But  it  appears  to  be  simple  so  far  as  it  has  distinctly  a 
common  form.  Nor  is  it  such  as  the  simplicity  which  is  in  many  things 
according  to  an  arranged  species  or  genus.  For  these  are  indeed  more 
simple  than  the  individuals  in  which  they  are  inherent,  but  are  replete  with 
variety,  communicate  with  matter,  and  receive  the  diversities  of  material 
natures.  Nor  is  it  such  as  the  form  of  nature.  For  nature  is  divided 
about  bodies,  verges  to  corporeal  masses,  emits  many  powers  about  the 
composition  subject  to  it,  and  is  indeed  more  simple  than  bodies,  but  has 
an  essence  mingled  with  their  variety.  Nor  is  it  such  as  the  psychical  sim- 
plicity. For  soul  subsisting  as  a  medium  between  an  impartible  essence, 
and  an  essence  which  is  divided  about  bodies,  communicates  with  both 
the  extremes.  And  by  that  which  is  multiform  indeed  in  its  nature  it  is 
conjoined  with  things  subordinate,  but  its  head  is  established  on  high,  and 
according  to  this  it  is  especially  divine,  and  allied  to  intellect. 

Nor  again  is  the  simplicity  of  the  Gods  such  as  that  of  intellect.  For 
every  intellect  is  impartible  and  uniform,  but  at  the  same  time  it  possesses 
multitude  and  progression  ;  by  which  it  is  evident  that  it  has  a  habitude 


Digitized  by  Google 


68 


ON  TliK  THEOLOGY' 


BOOK  I. 


to  secondary  natures,  to  itself,  and  about  itself.  It  b  also  in  itself,  and  is 
not  only  uniform,  but  also  multiform,  and  as  it  is  said,  is  one  nwny.  It 
is  therefore  allotted  au  essence  subordinate  to  the  first  simplicity.  But 
the  Gods  have  their  hyparxis  defined  in  one  simplicity  alone,  being  exempt 
indeed  from  all  multitude  so  far  as  they  are  gods,  and  transcending  all  di- 
vision and  interval,  or  habitude  to  secondary  natures,  and  all  composition. 
And  they  indeed  are  in  inaccessible  places,  expanded  above  the  whole  of 
things,  and  eternally  ride  on  beings.  But  the  illuminations  proceeding 
from  them  to  secondary  natures,  being  mingled  iu  many  places  with  their 
participants  which  are  composite  and  various,  are  filled  with  a  peculiarity 
similar  to  them.  Let  no  one  therefore  wonder,  if  the  Gods  being  essentia 
alized  in  one  simplicity  according  to  transcendency,  various  phantasms  are 
hurled  forth  before  the  presence  of  them ;  nor,  if  they  being  uniform 
the  appearances  are  multiform,  as  we  have  learnt  in  the  most  perfect  of 
the  mysteries.  For  nature,  and  the  demiurgic  intellect  extend  corpo- 
real-formed images  of  things  incorporeal,  sensible  images  of  intelligible, 
and  of  tilings  without  interval,  images  endued  with  interval.  For  So- 
crates also  in  the  Phadrus  indicating  things  of  this  kind,  and  evincing 
that  the  mysteries  into  which  souls  without  bodies  are  initiated  are  roost 
blessed,  and  truly  perfect,  says,  that  they  are  initiated  into  entire,  simple 
and  immoveable  visions,  such  souls  becoming  situated  there,  and  united 
with  the  Gods  themselves,  but  not  meeting  with  the  resemblances  which 
are  emitted  from  the  Gods  into  these  sublunary  realms.  For  these  are 
more  partial  and  composite,  and  present  themselves  to  the  view  attended 
with  motion.  But  illuminated,  uniform,  simple,  and,  as  Socrates  says, 
immoveable  spectacles  exhibit  themselves  to  the  attendants  of  the  Gods, 
and  to  souls  that  abandon  the  abundant  tumult  of  generation,  and  who 
ascend  to  divinity  pure  and  divested  of  the  garments  of  mortality.  And 
thus  much  is  concluded  by  us  respecting  the  simplicity  of  the  Gods.  For 
it  is  necessary  that  the  nature  which  generates  things  multiform  should  be 
simple,'  and  should  precede  what  is  generated,  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
uniform  precedes  the  multiplied.    If,  therefore,  the  Gods  are  the  causes  of 

1  After  a»Aw»  ia.che  original,  it  U  requisite  to  insert  hvm  mi. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP  XX 


OF  PLATO. 


all  competition,  and  produce  from  themselves  the  variety  of  beings,  it  is 
certainly  neoessary  that  me  aw  of  their  nature  which  is  generative  of  the 
whole  of  tilings,  should  have  its  subsistence  in  (simplicity.  For  as  incor- 
poreal causes  precede  bodies,  immoveable  causes  things  that  are  moved, 
and  impartible  causes  all  partible  natures,  after  the  same  manner  uniform 
intellectual  powers  precede  oiuitiibrm  natures,  unmingled  powers,  things 
that  are  mingled  together,  and  simple  powers,  things  of  a  variegated  na- 
ture. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Iir  the  next  place,  let  us  speak  concerning  the  troth  which  is  in  the 
Gods  ;  for  this  in  addition  to  what  has  been  said  is  concluded  by  Socrates, 
because  a  divine  nature  is  without  falsehood,  and  is  neither  the  cause  of 
deception  or  ignorance  to  us,  or  to  any  other  beings.  We  most  under- 
stand therefore,  that  divine  truth  is  exempt  from  the  truth  which  consists 
in  words,  so  far  as  this  truth  is  composite,  and  in  a  certain  respect  is  mingled 
with  its  contrary,  and  because  its  subsistence  consists  of  things  that  are 
not  true.  For  the  first  parts  do  not  admit  of  a  truth  of  this  kind,  unless 
some  one  being  persuaded  by  what  Socrates  asserts  in  the  Cratyl  us,  should 
say  that  these  also  are  after  another  manner  true.  Divine  truth  also  is  ex- 
empt from  psychical  truth,  whether  it  is  surveyed  in  opinions  or  in  scien- 
ces^ far  as  it  is  inacertain  respect  divisible,  and  is  not  beings  themselves, 
but  is  assimilated  to  and  co-harmoniied  with  beings,  and  as  being  perfected 
in  motion  and  mutation  falls  short  of  the  truth  which  is  always  firm,  stable 
and  of  a  principal  nature.  Divine  truth  is  likewise  again  exempt  from 
intellectual  truth,  because  though  this  subsists  according  to  essence,  and 
is  said  to  be  and  is,  beings  themselves,  through  the  power  of  sameness, 
yet  again,  through  difference,  it  is  separated  from  the  essence  of  them,  and 
preserves  its  peculiar  hypostasis  unconfirmed  with  respect  to  them.  The 


70 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I 


truth  therefore  of  the  Gods  alone,  is  the  undivided  union  and  all-perfect 
communion  of  them.  And  through  this  the  ineffable  knowledge  of  the 
Gods,  surpasses  all  knowledge,  and  all  secondary  forms  of  knowledge 
participate  of  an  appropriate  perfection.  But  this  knowledge  alone  of 
the  Gods  contractedly  comprehends  these  secondary  forms  of  knowledge, 
and  all  beiogs  according  to  an  ineffable  union.  And  through  this  the 
Gods  know  all  things  at  once,  wholes  and  parte,  beings  and  non-beings, 
things  eternal  and  tilings  temporal,  not  in  the  same  manner  as  intellect  by 
the  universal  knows  a  part,  and  by  being,  non-being,  but  they  know  every 
thing  immediately,  such  things  as  are  common,  and  such  as  are  particulars, 
though  you  should  speak  of  the  most  absurd  of  all  things,  though  you 
should  speak  of  the  infinity  of  contingencies,  or  even  of  matter  itself. 

If,  however,  you  investigate  the  mode  of  the  knowledge  and  truth  of 
the  Gods,  concerning  all  things  that  have  a  subsistence  in  any  respect 
whatever,  it  is  ineffable  and  incomprehensible  by  the  projecting  energies  of 
the  human  intellect ;  but  is  alone  known  to  the  Gods  themselves.    And  1 
indeed  admire  those  Platonists  that  attribute  to  intellect  the  knowledge  of 
all  things,  of  individuals,  of  things  preternatural,  and  in  short,  of  evils, 
and  on  this  account  establish  intellectual  paradigms  of  these.    But  I 
much  more  admire  those  who  separate  the  intellectual  peculiarity  from 
divine  union.    For  intellect  is  the  first  fabrication  and  progeny  of  the 
Gods.    These  therefore  assign  to  intellect  whole  and  first  causes,  and  such 
as  are  according  to  nature,  and  to  the  Gods  a  power  which  is  capable  of 
-  adorning  and  generating  all  things.    For  the  one  is  every  where,  but  whole 
•    is  not  every  where.    And  of  the  one  indeed  matter  participates  and  every 
being;  but  of  intellect  and  intellectual  species  and  genera,  all  things  do 
not  participate.    All  things  therefore  are  alone  from  the  Gods,  and  real 
truth  is  with  them  who  know  all  things  unically.    For  on  this  account 
also,  in  oracles  the  Gods  similarly  teach  all  things,  wholes  and  parts,  things 
eternal,  and  such  as  are  generated  through  the  whole  of  time.    For  being 
exempt  from  eternal  beings,  and  from  those  that  exist  in  time,  they  con- 
tract in  themselves  the  knowledge  of  each  and  of  all  things,  according  to 
one  united  truth.    If  therefore  any  falsehood  occurs  in  the  oracles  of  the 
Gods,  we  must  not  say  that  a  thing  of  this  kind  originates  from  the  Gods, 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XX. 


OF  PLATO. 


71 


bat  from  the  recipients,  or  the  instruments,  or  the  places,  or  the  times. 
For  all  these  contribute  to  the  participation  of  divine  knowledge,  and 
when  they  are  appropriately  co-adapted  to  the  Gods,  they  receive  a  pure 
illumination  of  the  truth  which  is  established  in  them.  But  when  they 
are  separated  from  the  Gods  through  inaptitude,  and  become  discordant 
with  them,  then  they  obscure  the  truth  which  proceeds  from  them.  What 
kind  of  falsehood  therefore  can  be  said  to  be  derived  from  the  Gods,  who 
produce  all  the  species  of  knowledge?  What  deception  can  there  be  with 
those  wh«»  establish  in  themselves  the  whole  of  truth  ?  In  the  same  man- 
ner,  as  it  appears  to  me,  the  Gods  extend  good  to  all  things,  but  always 
that  which  is  willing  and  able  receives  the  extended  good,  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Phaedrus.  And  a  divine  nature  indeed  is  causeless  of  evil, 
but  that  which  departs  from  it,  and  gravitates  downward,  is  elongated 
through,  itself ;  thus  also,  the  Gods  indeed  are  always  the  suppliers  of 
truth,  but  those  natures  are  illuminated  by  them,  who  are  lawfully  their 
participants.  For  the  Elean  wise  man  says,  that  the  eye  of  the  soul  in 
the  multitude,  is  not  strong  enough  to  look  to  the  truth. 

The  Athenian  guest  also  celebrates  this  truth  which  subsists  primarily  in 
the  Gods ;  for  he  says  that  truth  is  the  leader  to  the  Gods  of  every 
good,  and  likewise  of  every  good  to  men.  For  as  the  truth  which  is  in 
souls  conjoins  them  with  intellect,  and  as  intellectual  truth  conducts  all 
tlie  intellectual  orders  to  the  one,  thus  also  the  truth  of  the  Gods  unites 
tlie  divine  unities  to  the  fountain  of  all  good,  with  which  being  conjoined, 
they  are  filled  with  all  boniform  power.  For  every  where  the  hyparxis  of 
truth  has  a  cause  which  is  collective  of  multitude  into  one  ;  since  in  the 
Republic  also,  the  light  proceeding  from  the  good,  and  which  conjoins 
intellect  with  the  intelligible,  is  denominated  by  Platp  truth.  This  cha- 
racteristic property  theref  ore,  which  unites  and  binds  together  the  natures 
that  fill  and  the  natures  that  are  filled,  according  to  all  the  orders  of  the 
Gods,  must  be  arranged  as  originating  supernally  and  proceeding  as  far 
as  to  the  last  of  things. 


7;  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

To  us  however  discussing  what  pertains  to  every  divine  nature,  what 
we  assert  will  be  known  from  those  commonly  received  truths  adduced  in 
the  Phaedrus,  and  which  we  have  before  mentioned.  Socrates  therefore 
says  that  every  thing  divine  is  beautiful,  wise,  and  good,'  and  he  indicates 
that  this  triad  pervades  to  all  the  progressions  of  the  Gods.  What  there- 
fore is  the  goodness,  what  the  wisdom,  and  what  the  beauty  of  the  Gods  ? 
With  respect  to  the  goodness  of  the  Gods  therefore,  we  have  before  ob- 
served, that  it  preserves  and  gives  subsistence  to  the  whole  of  things,  that 
it  every  where  exists  as  the  summit,  as  that  which  fills  subordinate  natures, 
and  as  pre-existing  in  every  order  analogous  to  the  fir*t  principle  of  the 
divine  orders.  For  according  to  this  all  the  Gods  are  coo  joined  with  the 
one  cause  of  all  things,  and  on  account  of  this  primarily  derive  their 
subsistence  as  Gods.  For  in  all  beings  there  is  not  any  thing  more  perfect 
than  the  good,  and  the  Gods.  To  the  most  excellent  of  l)eiiigs  therefore, 
and  which  are  in  every  respect  perfect,  the  best  and  most  perfect  of 
things  is  adapted. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Btt  in  the  Philebus,  Plato  delivers  to  us  the  three  most  principal  ele- 
ments of  the  good,  vis.  the  desirable,  the  sufficient,  and  the  perfect.  For 
it  is  necessary  that  it  should  convert  all  things  to  itself,  and  fill  all  things, 
and  that  it  should  be  in  no  respect  deficient,  and  should  not  diminish  its 
exuberance.  Let  no  one  therefore  conceive  the  desirable  to  be  such  as 
that  which  is  frequently  extended  in  sensibles  as  the  object  of  appetite. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXII.  OF  PLATO.  73 

For  such  is  apparent  beauty.    Nor  let  him  suppose  it  to  be  such  as  is  in- 
deed able  to  energize  upon  and  excite  to  itself  the  natures  which  are  able 
to  participate  it,  but  which  at  the  same  time  may  be  apprehended  by  in- 
telligence, and  is  educed  by  us  according  to  a  projecting  energy,  and  an 
adhesion  of  the  dianoetic  power.    For  it  is  ineffable,  and  prior  to  all 
knowledge  extends  to  all  beings.    For  all  things  desire  the  good,  and  are 
converted  to  it.    But  if  it  be  requisite  summarily  to  unfold  the  characte- 
ristic peculiarity  of  the  desirable,  as  the  supplier  of  light  proceeds  by  his 
rays  into  secondary  natures,  converts  the  eye  to  himself,  causes  it  to  be 
solar-form,  and  to  resemble  himself,  and  through  a  different  similitude 
conjoins  it  with  his  own  fulgid  splendour,  thus  also  I  think  the  desirable 
of  the  Gods  allures  and  draws  upward  all  things  to  the  Gods  in  an  ineff- 
able manner  by  its  own  proper  illuminations,  being  every  where  present 
to  all  things,  and  not  deserting  any  order  whatever  of  beings.    Since  even 
matter  itself  is  said  to  be  extended  to  this  desirable,  and  through  this 
desire  is  filled  with  as  many  goods  as  it  is  able  to  participate.    It  is  there- 
fore the  centre  of  all  beings,  and  all  beings,  and  all  the  Gods  have  their 
essences,  powers  and  energies  about  this.    And  the  extension  and  desire 
of  things  towards  this  is  inextinguishable.    For  all  beings  aspire  after  this 
desirable  which  is  unknown  and  incomprehensible.    Not  being  able  there- 
fore either  to  know  or  receive  that  which  they  desire,  they  dance  round 
it,  and  are  parturient  and  as  it  were  prophetic  with  respect  to  it.  But 
they  have  an  unceasing  and  never-ending  desire  of  its  unknown  and  in- 
effable nature,  at  the  same  time  that  they  are  unable  to  embrace  and 
embosom  it.    For  being  at  once  exempt  from  all  things,  it  is  similarly 
present  to  and  moves  all  things  about  itself,  and  is  at  the  same  time  by  all 
of  them  incomprehensible.    By  this  motion  also  and  this  desire  it 
preserves  all  things.    But  by  its  unknown  transcendency  through  which 
it  surpasses  the  whole  of  things,  it  preserves  its  proper  union  un mingled 
with  secondary  natures.    Such  therefore  is  the  desirable. 

But  the  sufficient  is  full  of  boniform  power,  proceeds  to  all  things,  and 
extends  to  all  beings  the  gifts  of  the  Gods.  For  we  conceive  such  a 
sufficiency  as  this  to  be  a  power  pervading  and  protending  to  the  last 
of  things,  extending  the  unenvyiug  and  exuberant  will  of  the  Gods,  and 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  K 


Digitized  by  Google 


74  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  ROOK  I. 

not  abiding  in  itself,  but  unically  comprehending  the  super-plenitude,  the 
never-failing,  the  infinite,  and  that  which  is  generative  of  good  in  the 
divine  hyparxis.    For  the  desirable  being  firmly  established,  and  surpas- 
sing the  whole  of  things,  and  arranging  all  beings  about  itself,  the  suffi- 
cient begins  the  progression  and  multiplication  of  all  good,  calls  forth  that 
which  is  primary  in  the  uniform  hyparxis  of  the  desirable,  by  its  own  pro- 
lific '  exuberance,  and  by  the  beneficent  replenishings  which  pervade  to 
all  things,  and  copiously  produces  and  imparts  it  to  every  being.    It  is 
owing  to  the  sufficient  therefore,  that  the  stability  of  divine  natures,  and 
that  which  proceeds  from  its  proper  causes  is  full  of  goodness,  and  that, 
in  short,  all  beings  are  benefited,  abiding  in,  proceeding  from,  and  being 
united  to  their  principles,  and  essentially  separated  from  them.  Through 
this  power  therefore,  the  intellectual  genera  give  subsistence  to  natures 
similar  to  themselves,  souls  desire  to  generate,  and  imitate  the  beings  prior 
to  souls,  natures  deliver  their  productive  principles  into  another  place, 
and  all  things  possess,  in  short,  the  love  of  generation.  For  the  sufficiency 
of  the  goodness  of  the  Gods,  proceeding  from  this  goodness,  is  dissemi- 
nated in  all  beings,  and  moves  all  things  to  the  unenvying  communication 
of  good ;  intellect  indeed  to  the  communication  of  intellectual,  but  soul 
of  psychical,  and  nature  of  natural  good. 

All  things  therefore  abide  through  the  desirable  of  goodness,  and  gene- 
rate and  proceed  into  second  ami  third  generations  through  the  sufficient. 
But  the  third  thing,  the  perfect,  is  convertivc  of  the  whole  of  things,  and 
circularly  collects  them  to  their  causes ;  and  this  is  accomplished  by  divine, 
intellectual,  psychical  and  physical  perfection.  For  all  things  participate 
of  conversion,  since  the  infinity  of  progression  is  through  this  again  re- 
called to  its  principles  ;  and  the  perfect  is  mingled  from  the  desirable  and 
sufficient.  For  every  thing  of  this  kind  is  the  object  of  desire,  and  is 
generative  of  things  similar  to  itself.  Or  in  the  works  of  nature  also,  are 
not  perfect  things  every  where  lovely  and  prolific  through  the  acme  fof 
their  beauty  ?  The  desirable  therefore  establishes  all  things,  and  com- 
prehends them  in  itself.    The  sufficient  excites  them  into  progressions 

1  Instead  of  pwi/i?  it  it  necessary  to  read  yw.p». 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXIII.  OF  PLATO.  75 

and  generations.  And  the  perfect  consummately  leads  progressions  to 
conversions  and  convolutions.  But  through  these  three  causes,  the  good* 
ness  of  the  Gods  fixing  the  unical  power  and  authority  of  its  proper  hy- 
postasis in  this  triad,  is  the  primary  and  most  principal  fountain  and 
vestal  seat  of  things  which  have  any  kind  of  subsistence  whatever. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

After  this,  wisdon\is  allotted  the  second  order,  being  the  intelligence  • 
of  the  Gods,  or  rather  the  hyparxis  of  their  intelligence.    For  intelligence 
indeed,  is  intellectual  knowledge ;  but  the  wisdom  of  the  Gods  is  ineffa- 
ble knowledge,  which  is  united  to  the  object  of  knowledge  and  the  intel- 
ligible union  of  the  Gods.    But  it  appears  to  me  that  Plato  especially 
surveyed  this  in  the  triad  [of  the  beautiful,  the  wise  and  the  good,]  as 
may  be  inferred  from  the  conceptions  scattered  about  it  in  many  places. 
I  say  then  that  Diotima  in  the  Banquet  is  of  opinion  that  wisdom  is  full 
of  that  which  is  known,  and  that  it  neither  seeks,  nor  investigates,  but 
possesses  the  intelligible.    Hence,  she  says,  that  no  one  of  the  Gods  phi- 
losophizes, nor  desires  to  become  wise ;  for  a  God  is  wise.    Hence  that 
which  is  philosophic  is  imperfect,  and  indigent  of  truth  ;  but  that  which 
is  wise  is  full  and  unindigent,  and  has  every  thing  present  which  it  wishes 
and  desires  nothing.    But  the  desirable  and  the  appetible  are  proposed 
to  the  philosopher.    Socrates,  however,  in  the  Republic  considers  that 
which  is  generative  of  truth  and  intellect,  as  affording  an  indication  of 
wisdom,  to  our  souls  indeed  the  ascent  to  divine  plenitude  being  accom- 
plished through  knowledge,'  but  to  the  Gods  intellect  being  present  from 
the  fulness  of  knowledge.1   For  the  progression  in  them  is  not  from  an 

'  For  ymqnots  it  is  requisite  to  read  ynxrinf. 
1  The  same  emendation  is  necessary  here  as  above. 

i 


Digitized  by  Google 


76 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


imperfect  habit  to  the  perfect ;  but  from  a  self-perfect  hyparxis  a  power 
prolific  of  inferior  natures  proceeds.  But  in  the  Theatetus  he  indicates 
that  the  perfective  of  things  imperfect,  and  that  which  calls  forth  con- 
cealed intelligence  in  souls,  pertain  to  wisdom.  For  he  says,  it  compels 
me  to  obstetrication,  but  prevents  me  from  generating.  It  is  evident 
therefore,  from  these  things,  that  the  genus  of  wisdom  is  triadic.  Hence 
it  is  full  of  being  and  truth,  is  generative  of  intellectual  truth,  and  is 
perfective  of  intellectual  natures  that  are  in  energy,  and  itself  possesses  a 
stable  power.  We  must  admit  therefore,  that  these  things  pertain  to  the 
wisdom  of  the  Gods.  For  this  wisdom  is  full  indeed  of  divine  goodness, 
generates  divine  truth,  and  perfects  all  things  posterior  to  itself. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


In  the  next  place  let  us  consider  the  beautiful,  what  it  is,  and  how 
it  primarily  subsists  in  the  Gods.    It  is  said  therefore  to  be  boniform 
beauty,  and  %telligiblc  beauty,  to  be  more  ancient  than  intellectual 
beauty,  and  to  be  beauty  itself,  and  the  cause  of  beauty  to  all  beings ; 
add  all  such  like  epithets.    And  it  is  rightly  said.    But  it  is  separate  not 
only  from  the  beauty  which  is  apparent  in  corporeal  masses,  from  the 
symmetry  which  is  in  these  from  psychical  elegance,  and  intellectual 
splendour,  but  also  from  the  second  and  third  progressions  in  the  Gods ; 
and  subsisting  in  the  intelligible  place  of  survey,  it  proceeds  from  this  to 
all  the  genera  of  the  Gods,  and  illuminates  their  superesscntial  unities, 
and  all  the  essences  suspended  from  these  unities,  as  far  as  to  the  appa- 
rent vehicles  of  the  Gods.    As  therefore  through  the  first  goodness  all 
the  Gods  are  boniform,  and  through  intelligible  wisdom  they  have  a 
knowledge  ineffable,  and  established  above  intellect,  thus  also,  I  think, 
through  the  summit  of  beauty,  every  thing  divine  is  lovely.   For  from 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXIV.  OF  PLATO.  77 

thence  all  the  Gods  derive  beauty,  and  being  filled  with  it,  fill  the 
natures  posterior  to  themselves,  exciting  all  things,  agitating  them  with 
Bacchic  fury  about  the  love  of  themselves,  and  pouring  supernally  on  all 
things  the  divine  effluxion  of  beauty. 

Such  therefore,  in  short,  is  divine  beauty,  the  supplier  of  divine  hilarity, 
familiarity  and  friendship.    For  through  this  the  Gods  are  united  to  and 
rejoice  in  each  other,  admire,  and  are  delighted  in  communicating  with 
each  other,  and  in  their  mutual  replenishings,  and  do  not  desert  the  order 
which  they  arc  always  allotted  in  the  distributions  of  themselves.  Plato 
also  delivers  three  indications  of  this  beauty,  in  the  Banquet  indeed, 
denominating  it  the  delicate ;  for  the  perfect  and  that  which  is  most 
blessed,  accedes  to  the  beautiful  through  the  participation  of  goodness. 
But  hethus  speaks  of  it  in  that  dialogue :  "That  which  is  truly  beauti- 
ful is  delicate,  perfect  and  most  blessed."   One  of  the  indications  there- 
fore of  the  beautiful,  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  viz.  the  delicate.    But  we  • 
may  assume  another  indication  of  it  from  thePhtedrus,  viz.  the  splendid. 
For  Plato  attributing  this  to  the  beautiful  says  :  "  It  was  then  that  we 
were  permitted  to  see  splendid  beauty  shining  upon  us  Sec"    And  after- 
wards he  adds :  "  And  arriving  hither  we  apprehended  it  shining  most 
manifestly  through  the  clearest  of  the  sepses."    And  at  last  he  says : 
"  But  now  beauty  alone  has  this  allotment  to  be  most  splendid  and  most 
lovely."   These  two  things  therefore  are  to  be  assumed  as  indications  of 
beauty.    Another  indication  of  beauty  is  this,  that  it  is  the  object  of  love, 
which  now  also  Plato  appears  to  me  to  have  called  most  lovely.  And 
in  many  other  places  he  shows  that  the  amatory  fury  is  conversant  with 
the  beautiful,  defining,  and  in  short,  suspending  love  from  the  monad  of 
beauty.    "  For  love,  says  he,  is  conversant  with  the  beautiful." 

Because,  therefore,  beauty  converts  and  moves  all  things  to  itself, 
causes  them  to  energize  enthusiastically,  and  recalls  them  through  love, 
it  is  the  object  of  love,  being  the  leader  of  the  whole  amatory  series, 
walking  on  the  extremities  of  its  feet,  and  exciting  all  things  to  itselr 
through  desire  and  astonishment.  But  again  because  it  extends  to 
secondary  natures  plenitudes  from  itself,  in  conjunction  with  hilarity  and 
divine  facility,  alluring,  enflaming,  and  elevating  all  things,  and  pouring  on 


Digitized  by  Google 


78  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  1. 

them  illuminations  from  on  high,  it  is  delicate,  and  is  said  to  be  so  by 
Plato.  And  because  it  bounds  this  triad,  and  covers  as  with  a  veil  the 
ineffable  union  of  the  Gods,  swims  as  it  were  on  the  light  of  forms, 
causes  intelligible  light  to  shine  forth,  and  announces  the  occult  nature 
of  goodness,  it  is  denominated  splendid,  lucid  and  manifest.  For 
the  goodness  of  the  Gods  is  supreme  and  most  united ;  their  wisdom  is 
in  a  certain  respect  now  parturient  with  intelligible  light,  and  the  first 
forms ;  but  their  beauty  is  established  in  the  highest  forms,  b  the  lumin- 
ous precursor  of  divine  light,  and  is  the  first  thing  that  is  apparent  to 
ascending  souls,  being  more  splendid  and  more  lovely  to  the  view  and  to 
embrace  than  every  luciferous  essence,  and  when  it  appears  is  received 
with  astonishment.  This  triad  therefore  filling  all  things,  and  proceeding 
through  all  things,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  the  natures  which  are 
filled  should  be  converted  to  and  conjoined  with  each  of  the  three  through 
kindred,  and  not  through  the  same  media.  For  of  different  things  that 
are  filled  by  this  triad  there  is  a  different  medium  ;  and  different  powers 
are  converted  to  a  different  perfection  of  the  Gods.  I  think  therefore, 
it  is  manifest  to  every  one,  and  it  is  frequently  asserted  by  Plato,  that 
the  cause  which  congregates  all  secondary  natures  to  divine  beauty, 
which  familiarizes  them  to  it  and  is  the  source  of  their  being  filled  with 
it,  and  of  their  derivation  from  thence,  is  nothing  else  than  love,  which 
always  conjoins  according  to  the  beautiful,  secondary  to  the  first  '  Gods, 
and  the  more  excellent  genera,  and  the  best  of  souls.  But  again,  truth  is 
certainly  the  leader  to,  and  establishes  beings  in,  divine  wisdom,  with 
which  intellect  being  filled,  possesses  a  knowledge  of  beings,  and  souls 
participating  of  this  energize  intellectually.  For  the  full  participation 
of  true  wisdom  is  effected  through  truth,  since  this  every  where  illumi- 
nates intellective  natures,  and  conjoins  them  with  the  objects  of 
intellection,  just  as  truth  also  is  tfie  first  thing  that  congregates  intellect 
and  the  intelligible.  To  those  however  who  hasten  to  be  conjoined  with 
the  good,  knowledge  and  co-operation  are  no  longer  requisite,  but  collo- 
cation, a  firm  establishment  and  quiet  are  necessary. 

'  Instead  of  wp t{  mntr  it  U  requisite  to  read  ^wrwTWf. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXV.  OF  PLATO. 


79 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


What  therefore  is  it  which  unites  us  to  the  good?  What  is  it  which  causes 
in  us  a  cessation  of  energy  and  motion  ?  What  is  it  which  establishes  all 
divine  natures  in  the  first  and  ineffable  unity  of  goodness  ?  And  how  does 
it  conic  to  pass  that  every  tiling  being  established  in  that  which  is  prior 
to  itself  according  to  the  good  which  is  in  itself,  again  establishes  things 
posterior  to  itself  according  to  cause  ?  It  is,  in  short,  the  faith  of  the  Gods, 
which  ineffably  unites  all  the  genera  of  the  Gods,  of  daemons,  and  of 
happy  souls  to  the  good.  For  it  is  necessary  to  investigate  the  good  neither 
gnostically,  nor  imperfectly,  but  giving  ourselves  up  to  the  divine  light, 
and  closing  the  eyes  of  the  soul,  after  this  manner  to  become  established 
in  the  unknown  and  occult  unity  of  beings.  For  such  a  kind  of  faith  as 
this  is  more  ancient  than  the  gnostic  energy,  not  in  us  only,  but  with  the 
Gods  themselves,  and  according  to  this  all  the  Gods  are  united,  and 
about  one  centre  uniformly  collect  the  whole  of  their  powers  and  pro- 
gressions. 

If  however  it  be  requisite  to  give  a  particular  definition  of  this  faith, 
let  no  one  suppose  that  it  is  such  a  kind  of  faith  as  that  which  is  conver- 
sant with  the  wandering  about  sensibles.  For  this  falls  short  of  science, 
and  much  more  of  the  truth  of  beings.  But  the  faith  of  the  Gods  sur- 
passes all  knowledge,  and  according  to  the  highest  union  conjoins  secon- 
dary with  first  natures.  Nor  again,  let  him  conceive  a  faith  of  a  similar 
species  with  the  celebrated  belief  in  common  conceptions ;  for  we  believe 
in  common  conceptions  prior  to  all  reasoning.  But  the  knowledge  of 
these  is  divisible,  and  is  by  no  means  equivalent  to  divine  union  ;  and  the 
science  of  these  is  not  only  posterior  to  faith,  but  also  to  intellectual 
simplicity.  For  intellect  is  established  beyond  all  science,  both  the  first 
science,  and  that  which  is  posterior  to  it.  Neither,  therefore,  must  we 
say  that  the  energy  according  to  intellect  is  similar  to  such  a  faith  as 
this.    For  intellectual  energy  is  multiform,  and  is  separated  from  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


80  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

objects  of  intellection  through  difference ;  and  in  short,  it  is  intellectual 
motion  about  the  intelligible.  But  it  is  necessary  that  divine  faith  should 
be  uniform  and  quiet,  being  perfectly  established  in  the  port  of  goodness. 
For  neither  is  the  beautiful,  nor  wisdom,  nor  any  thing  else  among  beings, 
so  credible  and  stable  to  all  things,  and  so  exempt  from  all  ambiguity, 
divisible  apprehension  and  motion,  as  the  good.  For  through  this 
intellect  also  embraces  another  union  more  ancient  than  intellectual 
energy,  and  prior  to  energy.  And  soul  considers  the  variety  of  intellect 
and  the  splendour  of  forms  as  nothing  with  respect  to  that  transcendency 
of  the  good  by  which  it  surpasses  the  whole  of  tilings.  And  it  dismisses 
indeed  intellectual  perception,  running  back  to  its  own  hyparxis  ;  but  it 
always  pursues,  investigates,  and  aspires  after  the  good,  hastens  as  it  were 
to  embosom  it,  and  gives  itself  to  this  alone  among  all  things  without 
hesitation.  But  why  is  it  necessary  to  speak  of  the  soul  ?  For  these 
mortal  animals,  as  Diotima  somewhere  says,  despise  all  other  things,  and 
even  life  itself  and  being,  through  a  desire  of  the  nature  of  the  good ;  and 
all  things  have  this  one  immoveable  and  ineffable  tendency  to  the  good ; 
but  they  overlook,  consider  as  secondary,  and  despise  the  order  of  every 
thing  else.    This,  therefore,  is  the  one  secure  port  of  all  beings. 

This  also  is  especially  the  object  of  belief  to  all  beings.  And  through 
this  the  conjunction  and  union  with  it  is  denominated  faith  by  theologists, 
and  not  by  them  only,  but  by  Plato  likewise,  (if  I  may  speak  what 
appears  tome  to  be  the  case)  the  alliance  of  this  faith  with  truth  and 
love  is  proclaimed  in  the  Laws.  The  multitude  therefore  are  ignorant, 
that  he  who  has  a  conception  of  these  things,  when  discoursing  about 
their  contraries,  infers  the  same  thing  with  respect  to  the  deviations  from 
this  triad.  Plato  then  clearly  asserts  in  the  Laws  that  the  lover  of  false- 
hood is  not  to  be  believed,  and  that  he  who  is  not  to  be  believed  is  void 
of  friendship.  Hence  it  is  necessary  that  the  lover  of  truth  should  be 
worthy  of  belief,  and  that  he  who  is  worthy  of  belief  should  be  well  adapted 
to  friendship.  From  these  things  therefore,  we  may  survey  divine  truth, 
faith  and  love,  and  comprehend  by  a  reasoning  process  their  stable  com- 
munion with  each  other.  If,  however,  you  arc  willing,  prior  to  thesp 
things  we  will  recall  to  our  memory  that  Plato  denominates  that  virtuo 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXVI. 


OF  PLATO. 


81 


fidelity  which  conciliates  those  that  disagree,  and  subverts  the  greatest  of 
wars,  I  mean  seditions  in  cities.  For  from  these  things  faith  appears 
to  be  the  cause  of  union,  communion  and  quiet.  And  if  there  is  such  a 
power  as  this  in  us,  it  is  by  a  much  greater  priority  in  the  Gods  them- 
selves. For  as  Plato  speaks  of  a  certain  divine  temperance,  justice  and 
science,  how  is  it  possible  that  faith  which  connectedly  comprehends  the 
whole  order  of  the  virtues  should  not  subsist  with  the  Gods  ?  In  short, 
there  are  these  three  things  which  replenish  divine  natures,  and  which 
are  the  sources  of  plenitude  to  all  the  superior  genera  of  beings,  viz.  good- 
ness, wisdom  and  beauty.  And  again,  there  are  three  things  which 
collect  together  the  natures  that  are  filled,  being  secondary  indeed  to  the 
former,  but  pervading  to  all  the  divine  orders,  and  these  are  faith,  truth 
and  love.  But  all  things  are  saved  through  these,  and  are  conjoined  to 
their  primary  causes ;  some  things  indeed,  through  the  amatory  mania, 
others  through  divine  philosophy,  and  others  through  theurgic  power, 
which  is  more  excellent  than  all  human  wisdom,  and  which  comprehends 
prophetic  good,  the  purifying  powers  of  perfective  good,  and  in  short,  alt 
such  things  as  are  the  effects  of  divine  possession.  Concerning  these 
things  therefore,  we  may  perhaps  again  speak  more  opportunely. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Again,  let  us,  if  you  are  willing,  from  other  dialogues  investigate  the 
common  dogmas  of  Plato  about  divine  natures.  Whence  therefore,  and 
what  dogmas  shall  we  assume,  while  we  proceed  in  our  search  according 
to  nature?  Are  you  willing  that  we  should  in  the  next  place  recall  to 
our  memory  what  is  written  in  the  Phsedo  ?  Socrates  therefore  says  in 
the  demonstrations  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  which  are  derived  from 
its  similitude  to  divinity,  that  the  essence  which  is  superior  to  the  soul, 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  L 


Digitized  by  Google 


82 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


(and  to  which  the  soul  is  naturally  similar,  and  being  similar  participates 
of  an  immortal  allotment)  is  divine  and  immortal,  intelligible  and  uniform, 
indissoluble  and  possesses  an  invariable  sameness  of  subsistence;  but  that 
the  essence  which  is  inferior  to  the  soul,  is  entirely  the  contrary,  to  which 
also  it  pertains  to  be  corrupted  and  to  be  passive.  For  a  thing  of  this 
kind  is  sensible  and  multiform,  and  is  dissoluble  because  it  is  a  composite ; 
and  he  predicates  among  these  all  such  things  as  pertain  to  a  corporeal 
subsistence.  Let  us  therefore  direct  our  attention  to  these  common  dog- 
mas, and  examine  after  what,  manner  each  of  them  pertains  to  the  Gods. 

In  the  first  place  then  what  is  that  which  we  look  to  when  we  speak 
of  that  which  is  said  to  be  divine  ?  From  what  has  been  said  therefore,  it 
is  evident  that  every  God  subsists  according  to  the  highest  union  of 
beings.  For  to  us  ascending  from  bodies,  the  Gods  have  appeared  to  be 
sujxi  essential  unities,  the  generators,  perfectors  and  measurers  of  essences, 
and  who  bind  all  first  essences  to  themselves.  But  that  which  is  divine, 
is  not  only  hyparxis  and  the  one  in  each  order  of  being,  but  at  the  same 
time  is  that  which  participates  and  that  which  is  participated  ;  of  which 
the  latter  is  a  God,  but  the  former  is  divine.  Whether  however,  prior  to 
the  participated  unities,  there  is  something  which  is  separate  and  partici- 
pated will  he  evident  in  what  follows.  But  at  present  we  shall  define 
that  which  is  divine  to  be  a  thing  of  this  kind,  viz.  being*  which  partici- 
pates of  the  one,  or  the  one  subsisting  contractedly  together  with  being. 
For  we  assume  all  things  in  the  Gods  except  the  one,  as  suspended  from 
them  and  secondary,  viz.  essence,  life  and  intellect.  For  the  Gods  do 
not  subsist  in,  but  prior  to  these,  and  they  produce  and  contain  these  in 
themselves,  but  are  not  defined  in  them.  But  it  is  necessary  not  to  be 
ignorant  that  these  are  in  reality  thus  distinguished  from  each  other.  In 
many  places,  however,  Plato  magnificently  celebrates  the  participants  of 
the  Gods  by  the  same  names,  and  denominates  them  Gods.  For  not  only 
the  Athenian  guest  in  the  Laws  calls  a  divine  soul  a  God,  but  also  Socrates 
in  the  Phsedrus.  For  he  says  "  that  all  the  horses  and  charioteers  of  the 
Gods  are  good  and  consist  of  things  good  ;"  and  afterwards  still  more 
clearly,  "  and  this  is  the  life  of  the  Gods."  But  this  is  not  yet  wonderful. 
For  is  it  not  admirable  that  he  should  denominate  those  beings  Gods  who 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXVI. 


OF  PLATO. 


S3 


arc  always  conjoined  with  the  Gods,  and  who  together  with  them  give 
completion  to  one  series  ?  For  in  many  places  he  calls  daemons  Gods, 
though  they  are  essentially  posterior  to,  and  subsist  about  the  Gods.  For 
in  the  Phaidrus  and  Timrcus,  and  in  other  dialogues,  you  will  find  him  ex- 
tending the  appellation  of  the  Gods  even  as  far  as  to  daemons.  But  what 
is  still  more  paradoxical  than  these  things,  he  does  not  refuse  to  call  cer- 
tain men  Gods;  for  in  the  Sophista  he  thus  denominates  the  Elean 
guest. 

From  all  that  has  been  said  therefore,  this  must  be  assumed,  that  with 
respect  to  a  God,  one  thing  is  simply  a  God,  another  according  to  union, 
another  according  to  participation,  another  according  to  contact,  and  an- 
other according  to  similitude.  For  of  super-essential  natures  indeed,  each 
is  primarily  a  God ;  of  intellectual  natures,  each  is  a  God  according  to 
union;  and  of  divine  souls,  each  is  a  God  according  to  participation.  But 
divine  daemons  are  Gods  according  to  contact  with  the  Gods ;  and  the 
souls  of  men  are  allotted  this  appellation  through  similitude.  Each  of 
these  however  is,  as  we  have  said,  rather  divine  than  a  God.  Since  the 
Athenian  guest  calls  intellect  itself  divine ;  but  that  which  is  divine  is 
posterior  to  the  first  deity,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  which  is  united  is 
posterior  to  the  one,  that  which  is  intellectual,  to  intellect,  and  that  which 
is  animated,  to  soul.  And  always  those  natures  that  are  more  uniform 
and  simple  have  the  precedency  ;  but  the  series  of  beings  ends  in  the  one 
itself.  Let  this,  therefore,  be  the  definition  and  distinction  of  that  which 
is  divine. 

In  the  next  place,  let  us  survey  the  immortal.  For  with  Plato  there  are 
many  orders  of  immortality,  pervading  from  on  high  as  titr  as  to  the  last 
of  things ;  and  the  last  echo,  as  it  were,  of  immortality,  is  in  those  visible 
natures  that  are  perpetual ;  which  the  Elean  guest,  in  his  discourse  about 
the  circulation  of  the  universe,  says,  are  allotted  from  the  fatlier  a  reno- 
vated immortality.  For  every  body  is  allotted  a  being  and  a  life  depen- 
dent on  another  cause ;  but  is  not  itself  naturally  adapted  to  connect,  or 
adorn,  or  preserve  itself.  The  immortality  of  partial  souls  is,  I  tlrink, 
more  manifest  and  more  perfect  than  this ;  which  Plato  evinces  by  many 
demonstrations  in  the  Phacdo,  and  in  the  10th  book  of  the  Republic. 


Digitized  by  Google 


84 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  I. 


But  I  mean  by  the  immortality  of  partial  souls,  that  which  has  a  more 
principal  subsistence,  as  containing  in  itself  the  cause  of  eternal  perma- 
nency. Wc  shall  not,  however,  err  if  prior  to  both  these  we  establish  the 
immortality  of  daemons.  For  the  genera  of  these  through  which  they 
subsist  aie  incorruptible,  and  they  neither  verge  to  mortality,  nor  are 
filled  with  the  nature  of  things  which  are  generated  and  corrupted.  But 
I  infer  that  the  immortality  of  divine  souls  is  still  more  venerable  and  es- 
sentially more  transcendent  than  that  of  daemons;  which  divine  souls  we 
say  are  primarily  self-motive,  and  are  the  fountains  and  principles  of  the 
life  divided  about  bodies,  and  through  which  bodies  obtain  a  renovated 
immortality.  If,  however,  prior  to  these  you  conceive  the  Gods  them- 
selves, and  the  immortality  in  them,  and  how  in  the  Banquet  Diotima 
does  not  attribute  an  immortality  of  this  kind  even  to  daemons,  but  defines 
it  to  subsist  in  the  Gods  alone,  such  an  immortality  as  this  will  appear  to 
you  to  be  separate,  and  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things.  For  there  eter- 
nity subsists,  which  is  the  fountain  of  all  immortality,  and  through  it  all 
things  live  and  possess  life,  some  things  indeed  a  perpetual  life,  but  others 
a  life  dispersed  into  non-being.  In  short,  therefore,  that  which  is  divine 
is  immortal  so  far  as  it  generates  and  comprehends  in  itself  a  perpetual 
life.  For  it  is  immortal,  not  as  participating  of  life,  but  as  the  supplier 
of  a  divine  life,  and  as  deifying  life  itself,  whether  you  are  willing  to  call 
such  a  life  intelligible,  or  by  any  other  name. 

In  the  next  place  let  us  direct  our  attention  to  the  intelligible.  It  is 
denominated,  therefore,  in  opposition  to  that  which  is  sensible  and  which 
is  apprehended  by  opinion  in  conjunction  with  sense.  For  the  intelligible 
is  first  unfolded  into  light  in  the  most  principal  causes.  For  soul  is  in- 
deed intelligible,  is  of  this  allotment,  is  exempt  from  sensibles,  and  obtains 
an  essence  separated  from  them.  Prior  to  soul  also  intellect  is  intelli- 
gible; for  we  rather  think  it  fit  to  arrange  soul  in  the  middle,  than  to  con- 
numerate  it  with  the  first  essences.  That  likewise  is  denominated  intelli- 
gible, which  is  more  ancient  than  intellect,  which  replenishes  intelligence, 
and  is  itself  by  itself  perfective  of  it,  and  which  Timams  arranges  prior  to 
the  demiurgic  intellect  and  intellectual  energy,  in  the  order  of  a  paradigm. 
But  beyond  these  is  the  divine  intelligible,  which  is  defined  according  to 


i 

Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.XXV1I.  OF  PLATO.  8.5 

union  itself,  aud  a  divine  hyparxis.  For  this  is  intelligible  as  the  object 
of  desire  to  intellect,  as  perfecting  and  comprehending  intellect,  and  as 
the  plenitude  of  being.  In  one  way,  therefore,  we  must  denominate  the 
intelligible  as  the  hyparxis  of  the  Gods ;  in  another  way  as  true  being 
and  the  first  essence  ;  in  another  way  as  intellect  and  all  intellectual  life ; 
and  in  another  way  as  soul  and  the  psychical  order.  It  is  likewise  neces- 
sary not  to  fashion  the  different  natures  of  things  conformably  to  names. 
Such,  therefore,  is  the  order  of  this  triad;  so  that  what  is  divine  indeed  is 
umningled  and  ranks  as  the  first ;  that  which  is  immortal  is  the  second  ; 
and  that  which  is  intelligible  the  third.  For  the  first  of  these  is  deified 
being ;  the  second  is  life  subsisting  according  to  the  immortality  of  the 
Gods;  and  the  third  is  intellect,  which  is  denominated  intelligible  in  con- 
sequence of  being  replete  with  union. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

A  fter  this,  it  follows  in  the  next  place,  that  we  should  consider  the 
uniform,  the  indissoluble,  and  that  which  has  an  invariable  sameness  of 
subsistence,  from  the  same  causes,  and  these  as  the  precursors  of,  and 
pervading  through  all  the  divine  orders.  For  the  uniform,  indeed,  has  the 
highest  subsistence,  is  present  with  the  divine  monad,  and  appears  to  lie 
especially  adapted  to  that  which  is  primarily  being,'  and  in  which  also 
every  participable  genus  of  unities  ends.  For  the  one  is  prior  to  these,  as 
will  be  evident  as  we  proceed.  But  the  indissoluble  is  the  second.  For 
it  comprehends  and  binds  the  extremes  according  to  divine  union  ;  since 
the  dissoluble  is  such  as  it  is  through  the  want  of  connexion  and  of  a 
power  which  collects  multitude  into  one.  And  that  which  has  an  invari- 
able sameness  of  subsistence  is  eternal,  and  is  full  of  the  perpetuity  of  the 

'  For  t»  o>  it  is  necewarj  to  read  ry  om. 


Digitized  by  Google 


86 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  1. 


Gods;  from  which  also  tl»e  participation  of  immortality  and  eternal  same- 
ness is  derived  to  other  things.  The  uniform,  therefore,  pertains  to  the 
same  thing  as  the  divine ;  but  the  indissoluble  to  the  same  thing  as  the 
immortal ;  and  that  which  has  an  invariable  sameness  of  subsistence  we 
must  refer  to  the  intelligible. 

And  do  you  not  see  how  these  are  severally  after  a  manner  co-adapted 
to  each  other?  For  the  first  of  tliesc,  through  the  first  unity  which  is  par- 
ticipated by  being  is,  as  it  is  fit  it  should  be,  uniform.  For  if  a  God  sub- 
sists according  to  the  one,  that  which  is  divine  will  doubtless  be  uniform. 
But  that  which  through  one  cause  of  life  is  immortal,  is  also  similarly  in- 
dissoluble. For  life  is  the  bond  of  dissoluble  natures ;  which  also  Timaeus 
indicating  to  us,  opposes  the  dissoluble  to  the  immortal:  "  for  you  are  not 
immortal,  says  the  demiurgus,  yet  you  shall  never  be  dissolved,  nor  be 
subject '  to  the  fataJity  of  death."  Every  thing  mortal,  therefore,  is  dis- 
soluble ;  but  the  immortal  is  indissoluble.  That,  however,  which  has  a 
renovated  immortality  is  for  the  same  reason  neither  indissoluble,  nor 
mortal.  For  being  in  the  middle  of  both  it  is  neither  of  the  extremes,  ac- 
cording to  each  opposition.  But  the  third  of  these  being  established  ac- 
cording to  the  plenitude  of  whole  intelligible^  subsists  at  once  and  is  in- 
variably the  same.  For  tlie  intelligible  is  the  cause  of  sameness  and  of 
eternal  permanency;  and  intellect  through  this  is  entirely  eternal.  These 
triads,  therefore,  proceed  from  the  first  and  most  principal  causes,  in  the 
same  manner  as  we  demonstrated  of  the  before-mentioned  triads.  But 
these  things,  indeed,  we  shall  consider  hereafter. 

These  things,  therefore,  being  discussed,  let  us  direct  our  attention  to 
the  uobegottcn  in  divine  natures,  and  unfold  what  we  assert  it  to  be.  For 
we  say  that  all  [true]  being  is  without  generation,  and  Socrates  demon- 
strates in  the  Phajdrus,  that  souls  are  unbegotten.  Prior  to  these,  also, 
the  Gods  themselves  are  established  above  generations  and  a  subsistence 
according  to  time.  How,  therefore,  shall  we  define  the  unbegotten  when 
applied  to  a  divine  nature,  and  according  to  what  reason  ?  Is  it  because 
divinity  is  exempt  from  all  generation,  uot  only  from  that  which  subsists 

'  For  yw-vif  read  tw£kt9«. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXVII. 


OF  PLATO. 


87 


in  the  parts  of  time,  such  as  wc  assert  the  generation  of  material  natures 
to  be,  nor  from  that  only  which  is  extended  into  the  whole  of  time,  such 
as  Timseus  demonstrates  the  generation  of  the  celestial  bodies  to  be,  but 
also  from  the  psychical  generation  ?  Since  Timseus  denominates  this  to 
be  unbegotten  according  to  time,  but  to  be  the  best  of  generated  natures. 
And  in  short,  a  divine  nature  is  exempt  from  all  division  and  essential 
separation.  For  the  progression  of  the  Gods  is  always  according  to  a 
union  of  secondary  natures,  which  are  uniformly  established  in  the  natures 
prior  to  them,  the  things  producing  containing  in  themselves  the  things 
produced.  The  indivisible,  therefore,  the  unscparated  and  the  united  are- 
in  reality  unbegotten.  So  that  if  certain  generations  of  the  Gods  are 
spoken  of  by  Plato  in  fabulous  figments,  as  m  the  fable  of  Diotima,  the 
•  generation  of  Venus  is  celebrated,  and  of  Love  at  the  birth  of  Venus,  it  is- 

necessary  not  to  be  ignorant  after  what  manner  things  of  this  kind  are  as- 
serted, and  that  they  are  composed  for  the  sake  of  symbolical  indication  v 
and  tliat  fables  for  the  sake  of  concealment  call  the  ineffable  unfolding  into 
light  through  causes,  generatioti.  For  in  the  Orphic  writings,  indeed,  the 
first  cause  is  on  this  account  denominated  Time ;  since  again,  for  another' 
reason,  it  is  thus  denominated,  in  order  that  a  subsistence  according  to 
cause  may  be  the  same  as  a  subsistence  according  to  time.  And  the  pro- 
gression of  the  Gods  from  the  liest  of  causes  is  properly  denominated  ge- 
neration according  to  time.  To  Plato,  therefore,  mythologizing,  it  is 
adapted  to  devise  things  of  this  kind  conformably  to  theologists;  but 
when  lie  is  discoursing  dialectically,  and  investigating  and  unfolding 
divine  natures  intellectually  and  not  mystically,  it  is  then  adapted  to  him 
to  celebrate  the  unbegotten  essence  of  the  Gods.  For  the  Gods  primarily 
establish  in  themselves  the  paradigm  of  non-generation.  But  an  intellec- 
tual nature  is  in  a  secondary  degree  unbegotten,  and  after  this  the  psy- 
chical essence.  And  in  bodies  there  is  an  ultimate  resemblance  of  unbe- 
gotten power;  which  some  posterior  to  Plato  perceiving,  have  indefinitely 
shown  that  the  whole  heaven  is  unbegotten.  The  Gods,  therefore,  arc 
unl>egotten.  But  there  is  an  order  in  them  of  first,  middle,  and  last  pro- 
gressions, and  a  transcendency  and  subjection  of  powers.  There  are  also 
in  them  uniform  comprehensions  of  causes ;  but  multiform  progenies  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


88  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

things  caused.  And  all  things,  indeed,  are  consubsistent  in  each  other ; 
but  the  mode  of  subsistence  is  various.  For  some  things  as  replenishing 
subsist  prior  to  secondary  natures ;  but  others,  as  being  61led  aspire  after 
more  perfect  natures,  and  participating  of  their  power  become  generative 
of  things  posterior  to  themselves,  and  perfective  of  their  hyparxis. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Looking  to  these  things,  therefore,  we  may  unfold  what  is  said  of  pa-  • 
ternal  causes,  and  of  the  prolific  powers  of  mothers  in  fables.  For  every 
where,  we  may  suppose  that  the  cause  of  a  more  excellent  and  more  uni- 
form nature  is  paternal  ;*  but  we  may  say  that  the  cause  of  a  more  sub- 
ordinate and  partial  nature  pre-exists  in  the  order  of  a  mother.  For  with 
the  Gods  a  father  is  analogous  to  the  monad,  and  the  cause  of  bound  ; 
but  a  mother,  to  the  duad,  and  to  the  infinite  power  which  is  generative 
of  beings.  The  paternal  cause,  however,  is  with  Plato  uniform,  and  is  es- 
tablished in  a  more  elevated  order  than  the  natures  which  proceed  from 
it,  and  subsists  prior  to  its  progeny  in  the  allotment  of  the  desirable. 
Again,  the  maternal  cause  has  the  form  of  the  duad  ;  and  at  one  time 
presents  itself  to  the  view  in  fables  as  more  excellent  than  its  progeny, 
but  at  another  time  as  essentially  subordinate  to  it  ;  as  in  the  Banquet, 
Plato  calls  Poverty  the  mother  of  Love.  And  this  is  not  only  the  case  in 
fabulous  figments,  but  also  in  the  philosophic  theory  of  beings,  as  is  evi- 
dent in  the  Timaeus.  For  there  Plato  calls  being  the  father,  but  matter 
the  mother  and  nurse  of  generation.  The  powers,  therefore,  which  are 
prolific  and  perfective  of  secondary  natures,  and  the  suppliers  of  life  and 
causes  of  separation  are  mothers,  being  established  above  the  natures 
produced  by  them.    But  the  powers  which  receive  the  natures  that  pro- 

•  »rfwr  is  onytted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXtX.  OF  JfLATO.  8g 

ceed  into  light,  which  multiply  their  energies,  and  extend  even  the  subor- 
dinate allotment  of  the  progeny,  are  also  themselves  called  mothers. 
Again,  however,  the  progeny  of  such  like  causes,  at  one  time  indeed,  pro- 
ceed according  to  union  from  their  proper  principles,  and  are  filled  from 
both  the  paternal  and  maternal  cause ;  but  at  another  time  they  contain 
the  bond  of  them,  being  arranged  in  the  middle,  conveying  the  gifts  of 
the  fathers  to  the  maternal  bosoms,  and  converting  the  receptacles  of  them 
to  the  completions  of  primary  causes.  But  of  the  natures  which  subsist 
from  twofold  preexisting  principles,  some  arc  assimilated  to  the  paternal 
cause  ;  and  such  like  genera  of  Gods  are  productive,  defensive,  and  com- 
prehensive. For  to  produce,  to  contain,  and  to  defend,  pertain  to  the 
cause  of  bound.  But  others  are  assimilated  to  the  maternal  cause,  and 
arc  prolific,  and  vivific,  and  the  suppliers  of  motion,  of  the  multiplication 
of  powers,  of  variety  and  progressions.  For  all  these  are  the  progeny  of 
infinity  and  the  first  multitude. 


CHAPTER  XXIX.' 

Thus  much  therefore  may  suffice  concerning  the  unbegotten  hyparxis 
of  the  Gods.  It  now  remains,  I  think,  to  speak  of  divine  names.  For 
Socrates  in  the  Cratylus  thinks  fit  to  unfold  in  a  remarkable  degree  the 
rectitude  of  names  in  divine  natures.  And  Parmenides  indeed,  in  the 
first  hypothesis,  as  he  denies  of  the  one  every  thing  else  that  is  known, 
and  all  knowledge,  so  likewise  he  denies  of  it  name  and  language.  But 
in  the  second  hypothesis,  besides  all  other  things  he  shows  that  this  one 
may  be  spoken  of  and  '  that  it  has  a  name.  In  short  therefore,  it  must 
be  admitted  that  the  first,  most  principal  and  truly  divine  names  are  es- 
tablished in  the  Gods  themselves.  But  it  must  be  said  that  the  second 
names,  which  are  the  imitations  of  the  first,  and  which  subsist  intellectu- 

'  **  it  omitted  in  the  original. 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  M 


Digitized  by  Google 


90 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  OF  PLATO. 


BOOK  I. 


ally,  are  erf"  a  demoniacal  allotment.  And  again,  we  may  say  that  those 
names  which  are  the  third  from  the  truth,  which  are  logically  devised,  and 
which  receive  the  ultimate  resemblance  of  divine  natures,  are  unfolded 
by  scienti6c  men,  at  one  time  energizing  divinely,  and  at  another  intel- 
lectually, and  generating  moving  images  of  their  inward  spectacles.  For 
as  the  demiurgic  intellect  establishes  resemblances  about  matter  of  the 
first  forms  contained  in  himself,  and  produces  temporal  images  of  things 
eternal,  divisible  images  of  things  indivisible,  and  adumbrated  images  as 
it  were  of  true  beings, — after  the  same  manner  I  think  the  science  that  is 
with  us  representing  intellectual  production,  fabricates  resemblances  of 
other  things,  and  also  of  the  Gods  themselves,  representing  that  which  is 
void  of  composition  in  them,  through  composition  ;  that  which  is  simple, 
through  variety  ;  and  that  which  is  united,  through  multitude ;  and  thus 
fashioning  names,  ultimately  exhibits  images  of  divine  natures.  For  it 
generates  every  name  as  if  it  were  a  statue  of  the  Gods.  And  as  the 
theurgic  art  through  certain  symbols  calls  forth  the  exuberant  and  unenvy- 
ing  goodness  of  the  Gods  into  the  illumination  of  artificial  statues,  thus 
also  the  intellectual  science  of  divine  concerns,  by  the  compositions  and 
divisions  of  sounds,  unfolds  the  occult  essence  of  the  Gods.  Very  pro- 
perly therefore,  does  Socrates  in  the  Pbilebus  say,  that  on  account  of  his 
reverence  of  the  Gods,  he  is  agitated  with  the  greatest  fear  respecting 
their  names.  For  it  is  necessary  to  venerate  even  the  ultimate  echos  of 
the  Gods,  and  venerating  these  to  become  established  in  the  first  para- 
digms of  them.  And  thus  much  concerning  divine  names,  which  at  pre* 
sent  may  be  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  understanding  the  theology  of 
Plato.  For  wc  shall  accurately  discuss  them  when  we  speak  of  partial 
powers. 


Digitized  by  Google 


BOOK  II. 


CHAPTER  I. 


The  most  proper  beginning  however  of  the  theory  proposed  by  us  is 
that  from  which  we  may  be  able  to  discover  the  first  cause  '  of  all  beings. 
For  being  impelled  from  this  in  a  becoming  manner,  and  having  our  con- 
ceptions purified  respecting  it,  we  shall  with  greater  facility  be  able  to  dis- 
tinguish other  things.  About  these  things  therefore  we  must  speak  from 
the  beginning  as  follows  :  It  is  necessary  that  all  beings,  and  all  the 
natures  of  beings  should  either  be  many  only,  there  being  no  one  in  them, 
neither  in  each,  nor  in  all  of  them  ;  or  that  they  should  be  one  only,  there 
being  no  multitude,  but  all  things  being  compelled  into  one  and  the  same 
power  of  existence ;  or  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  both  one  and 
many,  and  that  being  should  be  one  in  order  that  neither  multitude  itself 
by  itself  may  vanquish  beings,  nor  that  we  may  be  forced  to  bring  together 
into  the  same  thing  all  things  and  their  contraries  at  once.  These  things 
therefore  being  three,  which  of  them  shall  we  chuse  ?  And  to  which  of 
the  above  mentioned  assertions  shall  we  give  our  suffrage.  It  is  necessary 
therefore  severally  to  discuss  the  absurdities  which  attend  these  positions, 
and  thus  to  survey  after  what  manner  the  truth  subsists. 

♦ 

*  For  ewr.«r  it  u  Decenary  to  read  arnca. 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  If. 


If  then  beings  are  many,  and  in  such  a  manner  many,  as  we  have  men- 
tioned from  the  Ijcginning,  so  that  the  one  is  not  any  where  to  be  found, 
many  absurdities  will  hap|>en  to  be  the  result,  or  rather  all  the  nature  of 
beings  will  at  once  from  the  first  be  destroyed,  as  there  will  immediately 
be  nothing  which  is  capable  of  participating  the  one.  For  it  must  be 
admitted  that  every  being  is  either  one  certain  thing,  or  nothing.  And 
that  indeed  which  is  a  certain  being,  is  also  one  ;  but  that  which  is  not 
even  one  being,  has  not  any  existence  whatever.  Hence,  if  many  things 
have  a  subsistence,  each  of  the  many  is  something  or  a  certain  one.  But 
if  each  of  them  is  nothing,  or  not  even  one  thing,  neither  is  it  possible  for 
the  many  to  exist  ;  for  the  many  are  many  so  far  as  each  individual  of  the 
multitude  exists.  If,  therefore,  the  many  alone  have  a  subsistence,  and 
the  one  in  no  respect  is,  neither  will  the  many  exist.  For  things  which 
are  in  no  respect  one  have  not  any  existence  whatever.  But  if  the  one  is 
not,  by  a  much  greater  priority  neither  have  the  many  an  existence. 
For  it  necessarily  follows  that  none  of  the  things  from  which  the  many 
consist  will  have  a  subsistence. 

Farther  still,  if  the  many  aloue  have  a  subsistence  (as  has  been  said)  art 
things  will  be  infinitely  infinite ;  and  if  you  receive  any  one  of  the  in- 
finites whatever,  this  also  will  be  immediately  infinite.  And  with  respect 
to  the  things  from  which  this  consists  and  which  are  infinite,  each  of  these 
likewise  will  be  infinite.  For  let  something  of  the  many  be  assumed* 
which  we  say  is  not  one,  this  therefore  will  be  multitude  according  to  its 
own  nature,  since  it  belongs  to  beings,  but  is  not  nothing.  If  however  it 
is  multitude,  this  also  will  consist  of  many  things,  and  will  be  many. 
And  if  you  assume  something  of  these  manys,  this  will  immediately  appear 
to  you  not  to  be  one,  but  many.  There  will  likewise  be  immediately  the 
same  reasoning  in  these,  and  in  a  similar  manner  each,  (because  we  falsely 
speak  of  each)  will  be  multitude  in  energy.  And  each,  as  I  may  say, 
will  be  infinite,  or  rather  will  be  infinitely  infinite.  For  there  is  nothing 
which  will  not  be  something  of  this  kind  ;  since  a  part  is  many,  and  in  a 
similar  manner  the  part  of  a  part ;  and  this  to  infinity.  For  multitude 
proceeding  will  never  stop,  nor  infinity,  in  consequence  of  being  deprived 
of  the  nature  of  the  one.  To  make  beings  however,  to  be  infinitely  infinite, 
is  impossible  both  with  respect  to  truth,  and  to  the  thing  proposed  by  us. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  I. 


OF  PLATO 


For  if  being  is  infinitely  infinite,  being  can  neither  be  known,  nor  disco- 
vered ;  since  the  infinite  is  entirely  incomprehensible  and  unknown.  If 
also  being  is  infinitely  infinite,  there  will  be  something  more  infinite  than 
the  infinite.  But  if  that  something  is  more  infinite,  this  will  be  less  infinite. 
That,  however,  which  is  less  infinite,  since  it  is  not  perfectly  infinite,  will 
evidently  be  finite,  so  far  as  it  falls  short  of  the  nature  of  the  infinite.  If, 
therefore,  there  is  something  which  is  itself  according  to  multitude  more 
infinite  than  that  which  is  infinite  in  multitude  there  will  be  something 
more  than  the  infinite,  and  the  infinite  will  be  less,  yet  not  according  to 
multitude.  This  however  is  impossible.  Hence  there  is  not  the  infinitely 
infinite. 

Again  therefore,  according  to  this  hypothesis,  the  same  things  will  be 
according  to  the  same,  similar  and  disimilar.  For  if  all  the  manys  are 
not  one,  and  each  thing  according  to  all  things  is  not  one,  that  which  is 
not  one  will  evidently  suffer  the  same  passion  in  consequence  of  the  pri- 
vation of  the  one.  All  things  therefore  being  deprived  of  the  one,  after 
the  same  manner,  they  will  on  this  account  subsist  similarly  with  respect 
to  caeh  other.  But  things  which  subsist  similarly,  so  far  as  they  thus  sub- 
sist, are  evidently  similar  to  each  other.  Hence  the  many  will  be  similar 
to  each  other,  so  far  as  they  are  deprived  of  the  one.  They  will  likewise 
according  to  this  privation  of  the  one  be  perfectly  dissimilar.  For  it  is 
necessary  that  things  which  are  similar  should  suffer  the  same  passion ; 
so  that  things  which  do  not  suffer  any  thing  that  is  the  same,  will  not  be 
similar.  But  things  which  suffer  any  thing  that  is  the  same,  suffer  also 
one  thing.  Hence  things  which  arc  deprived  of  every  one,  will  not  suffer 
any  thing  that  is  the  same.  The  many  therefore  will  be  similar  and  dis- 
similar according  to  the  same.  But  this  is  impossible.  Hence  it  is  im- 
)K>ssible  for  the  many  to  exist  which  are  in  no  respect  one. 

Moreover,  tl>e  many  will  be  the  same  with  and  different  from  each  other 
according  to  the  same.  For  if  all  things  are  similarly  deprived  of  the 
one,  so  far  indeed  as  all  of  them  are  similarly  deprived  they  Mill  be  the 
same  according  to  this  privation;  since  things  which  subsist  after  the 
same  manner  according  to  habit  are  the  same,  and  also  things  which  are 
after  the  same  manner  deprived  according  to  privation.  Bu  t  so  far  in 


94 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  II. 


short,  as  each  of  them  is  deprived  of  every  one,  so  far  the  many  will  be 
different  from  each  other.  For  if  the  one  in  the  many  is  the  same,  that 
which  is  in  no  respect  one,  will  in  no  respect  be  the  same.  The  many 
therefore  will  be  the  same  and  not  the  same  with  each  other.  But  if  they 
are  the  same  and  not  the  same  it  is  evident  that  they  are  different  from 
each  other.  For  that  which  is  the  same  and  not  the  same,  so  far  as  it  is 
not  the  same,  is  not  the  same,  by  nothing  else  thau  the  different.  Farther 
still  therefore,  these  many  will  be  moveable  and  immoveable,  if  the  one 
is  not.  For  if  each  of  them  is  not  one,  they  will  be  immoveable  accord- 
ing to  the  privation  of  the  one.  For  if  that  which  is  not  one  should  be 
changed,  each  of  them  would  have  the  one  ;  since  privations  being  changed, 
entirely  lead  into  habits  the  things  that  are  changed.  It  is  necessary 
however  that  what  is  not  one  should  remain  immoveable  according  to 
the  privation  of  the  one,  though  this  very  thing  is  itself  impossible,  viz. 
that  the  many  should  stand  still.  For  every  thing  which  stands  still  is  in 
something  which  is  the  same,  via.  it  is  either  in  the  same  form,  or  in  the 
same  place.  But  every  thing  which  is  in  the  same,  is  in  one  thing  which 
is  the  same.  For  the  same  in  which  it  is,  is  one  thing.  Every  thing 
therefore  which  stands  still  is  in  one  thing.  The  many,  however,  do 
not  participate  of  the  one.  But  it  is  perfectly  impossible  that  things 
which  do  not  participate  of  the  one,  should  be  in  one  certain  thing.  And 
things  which  are  not  in  one  thing  cannot  stand  still,  since  things  which 
stand  still  are  entirely  in  one  and  the  same  thing.  It  is  impossible  there- 
fore, that  the  many  should  stand  still,  and  remain  immoveable.  It  has 
been  demonstrated  however,  that  the  many  must  necessarily  stand  im- 
moveable. The  same  things  therefore,  and  the  same  passion,  (I  mean 
the  privation  of  the  habit  of  the  one,)  are  moveable  and  immoveable. 
For  things  immoveable,  and  things  which  stand  still,  so  far  as  they  are 
unstable,  so  far  they  must  necessarily  appear  to  be  moveable. 

Moreover,  there  is  no  number  of  beings  if  the  one  in  no  respect  is;  but 
all  things  and  each  thing  will  be  not  one.  For  the  particle  of  number, 
the  monad,  is  one,  and  every  number  itself  is  one.  For  if  there  are  five 
monads,  there  is  also  the  pentad  ;  and  if  three  monads,  the  triad.  But 
the  triad  itself  is  a  certain  unity,  and  so  is  the  pentad.  So  that  if  there 
is  no  one,  there  will  neither  be  any  part,  nor  the  whole  of  numbers.  For 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  I 


OF  PLATO. 


95 


how  can  there  be  any  number  the  one  not  existing  ?  For  the  one  is  the 
principle  of  numbers.  But  the  principle  not  existing,  neither  is  it  pos- 
sible that  the  things  which  proceed  from  this  principle  should  exist. 
Hence  the  one  not  existing,  neither  will  there  be  any  number. 

Again,  therefore,  neither  will  there  be  any  knowledge  of  beings  if  the 
one  is  not.  For  it  will  not  be  possible  either  to  speak  or  think  of  any 
being.  For  each  thing  itself,  and  every  thing  of  which  we  can  speak,  and 
in  which  we  impress  the  nature  of  the  one,  will  have  no  existence,  because 
neither  does  the  one  exist.  Hence  neither  will  there  be  any  discourse  nor 
any  knowledge.  For  discourse  is  one  thing  consisting  of  many  things, 
if  it  is  perfect.  And  knowledge  then  exists,  when  that  which  knows  be- 
comes one  with  that  which  is  known.  .But  union  not  existing,  there  will 
at  tin;  same  time  be  no  knowledge  of  things,  and  it  will  be  impossible  to 
speak  about  things  which  we  know.  To  which  we  may  add,  that  the  in- 
explicable  in  the  several  infinites,  will  necessarily  always  fly  from  the 
bound  of  knowledge.  For  immediately  each  apparent  infinite  which  he 
who  possesses  knowledge  desires  to  understand,  will  escape  the  gnostic 
power  hastening  to  come  into  contact  with,  and  adhere  to  it,  since  it  in 
incapable  either  of  contact  or  adhesion.  If,  therefore,  the  many  alone 
have  an  existence,  the  one  having  no  subsistence  whatever,  so  many  ab- 
surdities, and  a  still  greater  number  must  necessarily  happen  to  those  who 
adopt  such  an  hypothesis. 

But  if  the  one  which  is  the  one  itself  alone  has  a  subsistence,  and  there 
is  nothing  else  (for  if  there  were  there  would  not  only  be  one  but  many 
things  ;  since  one  and  another  thing  are  more  than  one,  and  are  not  one 
thing  only)  if  this  be  the  case,  there  will  neither  be  among  all  things  either 
%  whole,  or  that  which  has  parts.  For  every  thing  which  has  parts  is  many, 
and  every  whole  has  parts.  But  the  one  is  in  no  respect  many.  Neither 
therefore  will  there  be  a  whole,  nor  that  which  has  parts.  Farther  still, 
neither  is  it  possible  that  there  should  be  a  beginning,  or  end  of  any  thing. 
For  that  which  has  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and  an  end,  is  divisible.  But  the 
one  is  not  divisible,  because  neither  has  it  any  parts.  Hence,  neither  has  it  a 
beginning,  nor  a  middle,nor  an  end.  Again,  if  the  one  alone  has  a  subsist- 
ence, no  being  will  have  figure.  For  every  thing  which  has  figure  is  either 
rectilinear  or  circular,  or  mixt  from  these.  But  if  indeed  it  is  rectilinear, 


g6  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 

it  will  have  for  its  parts,  the  middle,  and  the  extremes.  If  it  is  circular, 
there  will  be  one  thing  in  it  as  a  middle,  but  other  things  as  extremes,  to 
which  the  middle  extends.  And  if  it  is  mixed  from  the  right  and  circular 
line,  it  will  consfst  of  many  things,  and  wHl  not  be  one. 

Moreover,  neither  will  any  being  be  in  itself,  nor  in  another  thing.  For 
that  which  is  in  another  thing  is  different  from  that  in  which  it  is.  Bui 
the  one  alone  existing  and  nothing  else  (for  it  will  by  no  means  be  in 
another  thing)  there  will  be  no  being  which  is  in  another  thing.  Hut 
that  which  is  in  itself  will  at  the  same  time  comprehend  and  be  compre- 
hended ;  and  in  this,  to  comprehend  will  not  be  the  same  thing  as  to  be 
comprehended ;  nor  will  there  be  tlie  same  *  definition  of  both.  There 
will  therefore  be  two  things,  and  no  longer  the  one  alone.  Again,  neither 
will  any  being  be  moved.  For  being  moved  indeed,  it  must  necessarily 
be  changed.  But  being  changed  it  must  be  in  another  thing.  If  the  one 
however  alone  has  an  existence,  it  is  not  possible  for  any  thing  to  appear 
to  be  in  something  else.  I^ence  it  is  not  possible  for  any  being  to  be 
changed.  But  every  .thing  which  stands  still  is  necessarily  in  the  same 
thing.  And  that  which  is  in  the  same  is  in  a  certain  same  thing.  The 
one  however  is  in  no  same  thing.  For  that  which  is  in  a  certain  thing, 
is  either  in  itself,  or  in  something  else.  But  it  has  been  demonstrated, 
that  it  is  neither  in  itself,  nor  in  another.  Hence  neither  is  it  in  a  certain 
same  thing.    Neither  therefore  does  any  being  stand  still. 

Moreover,  it  is  impossible  for  any  thing  to  be  the  same  with,  or  different 
from  any  thing.  For  if  there  is  nothing  besides  the  one  itself,  there  is  not 
any  thing  which  will  be  either  the  same  with,  or  different  from  another 
thing.  For  there  will  not  be  any  other  being.  And  the  one  itself  will 
not  be  different  from  itself ;  for  it  would  be  many  and  not  one.  Nor  will 
it  be  the  same  with  itself.  For  this  thing  which  is  same  is  in  another, 
and  same  is  not  the  one  itself.  For  the  one  is  simply  one,  because  it  is 
not  many.  But  that  which  is  same  is  the  same  with  another  thing. 
Again,  neither  is  it  possible  for  any  thing  to  be  similar  or  dissimilar  to  any 
thing.    For  every  thing  similar  suffers  a  certain  same  passion ;  but  every 

'*  For  wT>i  it  1»  neceWarj  to  read 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  I. 


OF  PLATO. 


97 


thing  dissimilar  a  certain  different  passion.  The  one,  however, "cannot  suf- 
fer any  thing,  nor  can  this  he  the  case  with  any  thing  else  besides  the  one  ; 
since  no  tiling  else  has  any  existence  whatever,  if  the  one  alone  has  a  sub- 
sistence. 

Farther  still,  in  addition  to  these  things  we  say  that  neither  is  it  possible 
for  any  thing  to  be  touched,  nor  to  be  separate,  if  there  is  nothing  else 
besides  the  one.  For  how  can  things  which  have  no  existence  be  separate, 
or  conic  into  contact  with  any  thing?  But  neither  can  the  one  either  be 
separate  from  itself,  or  touch  itself.  For  it  would  thus  be  passive  to  the 
being  touched,  and  the  being  separate.  But  the  one  suffers  no  other  tlung 
besides  itself.  It  is  likewise  requisite  that  no  one  thing  should  either  be 
equal  or  unequal  to  any  thing.  For  that  which  is  equal  to  another  thing, 
is  said  to  be  so  with  reference  to  another  thing.  And  the  like  may  be 
said  of  that  which  is  unequal.  Another  thing,  however,  has  no  existence, 
if  the  one  alone  has  a  subsistence.  But  neither  can  the  one  be  equal  or 
unequal  to  itself.  For  if  unequal,  there  will  be  one  thing  in  it  as  greater, 
but  another  as  less ;  so  that  it  will  be  two  things  and  not  one.  And  if 
the  one  is  equal  to  itself,  the  one  will  measure  itself.  This  however  is  im- 
possible. For  the  one  will  measure  and  be  measured  by  itself,  so  that  it 
will  not  be  the  one  itself.  Neither  therefore  will  there  be  any  equality 
or  inequality  in  beings.  If  however  these  things  are  impossible,  neither 
can  any  being  come  into  contact  with  another,  and  be  separate,  nor  be 
similar  or  dissimilar,  nor  be  same  or  different,  nor  again,  stand  still,  or  be 
moved,  or  in  short  be  in  any  thing,  or  have  figure,  or  be  a  whole,  or  have 
parts,  if  the  om  alone  has  a  subsistence  which  is  void  of  multitude,  and 
is  without  all  these  things.  Neither  however,  i3  it  possible  for  the  many 
alone  to  have  a  subsistence,  as  was  before  demonstrated.  And  hence  it 
is  necessary  that  every  being  should  be  both  many  and  one. 

If  this  however  is  the  case,  either  the  many  must  participate  of  the  one, 
or  the  one  of  the  many,  or  both  must  participate  of  each  other,  or  neither 
of  each  other;  but  the  many  indeed  must,  be  separate,  and  the  one  must 
also  be  separate,  in  order  that  the  many  and  the  one  may  subsist,  as  reason 
evinces.  If,  therefore,  neither  the  one  participates  of  the  many,  nor  the 
many  of  the  one,  the  same  absurdities  will  ensue  as  we  brought  together  in 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  N 


93 


ON  THE  'IDEOLOGY 


HOOK  II. 


the  hypothesis  of  the  many  alone  having  a  subsistence.  For  again  there 
will  be  the  many  separate  from  the  one.  For  if  the  one  subsists  by  itself, 
and  the  many  do  not  in  any  respect  participate  of  the  one,  the  many  will  be 
infinitely  infinite,  they  will  be  similar  and  dissimilar,  same  and  different, 
moved  and  stable,  and  there  will  neither  be  any  number  nor  any  know- 
ledge of  the  many.  For  the  absence  of  the  one  compels  all  thc»e  conse- 
quences to  be  apparent  in  the  many.  It  is  impossible  therefore,  that 
neither  the  many  should  participate  of  the  one,  nor  the  one  of  the  many. 

If  however,  the  one  participates  of  the  many,  and  the  many  of  the  one, 
and  both  these  are  in  each  other,  itis  necessary  that  there  should  be  another 
nature  besides  these,  which  is  neither  one  nor  many.  For  both  these  being 
mingled  in  each  other,  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  cause  of  their 
mixture  which  conjoins  multitude  to  the  one,  and  the  one  to  multitude. 
For  it  is  necessary  that  every  thing  that  is  mingled,  should  have  a  cause  of 
the  mixture.  For  in  short,  if  the  one  and  multitude  participate  of  each 
other,  neither  the  one  is  the  cause  of  essence  to  multitude,  nor  multitude  to 
the  one,  but  a  certain  third  thing  is  the  cause  of  essence  to  both,  and 
which  is  prior  to  these.  For  what  will  that  be  which  makes  this  to  be 
multitude,  and  that  to  be  one  ?  And  what  is  the  cause  of  this  communica- 
tion and  association  with  each  other,  the  one  so  far  as  it  is  one  never  having 
any  communication  with  the  many  ?  For  the  many  so  far  as  many,  and 
the  one  so  far  as  one  arc  different  from  each  other.  And  so  far  as  neither 
is  from  neither,  they  have  no  sympathy  with  each  other.  What  therefore 
is  it  which  collects  these  into  one,  since  they  fly  from  and  are  unmingled 
with  each  other?  For  being  thus  discordant  with  each  other,  they  cannot 
desire  each  other,  or  if  they  did  their  congress  must  be  fortuitous.  For 
if  this  should  happen  to  be  the  case,  there  was  a  time  when  these  were 
separate  from  each  other,  since  now  also  they  subsist  together  casually. 
It  is  however  impossible  for  the  many  to  subsist  separate  from  the  one. 
The  mixture  therefore  is  not  casual.  But  neither  is  the  mixture  from  the. 
many,  if  neither  the  one  is  the  cause  of  the  many,  nor  the  many  of  the  one. 
What,  therefore  is  this  more  excellent  thing  [which  is  the  cause  of  the 
mixture?]  For  it  is  either  one,  or  not  one.  But  if  indeed,  it  is  the  one 
itself,  we  must  again  inquire  concerning  this,  whether  it  participates  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  I.  OF  PLATO.  99 

multitude  or  of  nothing.  For  if  this  participates,  it  is  evident  tbat  some 
other  thing  prior  to  this,  will  for  the  same  reason  present  itself  to  the  view, 
and  this  will  be  the  case  to  infinity.  But  if  a  thing  of  this  kind  is  entirely 
roid  of  multitude,  again  that  which  was  asserted  at  first  will  not  be  true, 
viz.  that  the  many  do  not  participate  of  the  one,  nor  the  one  of  the  many. 
I  mean  however  that  which  is  the  most  principal  and  primarily  one.  But 
there  is  indeed  a  certain  one  in  the  many,  and  there  is  also  the  imparticipa- 
blc  one,  and  which  is  simply  one,  and  nothing  else.  If  however  that  which 
is  prior  to  both,  is  not '  one,  it  is  necessary  that  this  not  one  should  be 
more  excellent  than  the  one.  All  things  however  arc,  and  are  gene- 
rated what  they  are,  through  the  one.  And  together  with  the  one  indeed 
every  being  is  preserved  ;  but  separate  from  the  one  proceeds  to  the  cor- 
ruption of  itself.  The  mixture  also  of  the  one  and  multitude,  which  the 
non-one  affords  to  beings,  is  communion  and  union.  The  one*  therefore, 
and  that  which  is  not  one, '  are  the  cause  of  nothing  else  to  beings  than 
of  their  being  one.  If  however  the  one  is  the  cause  of  a  thing  of  this  kind, 
that  which  is  not  one  will  not  be  the  cause  of  that  which  is  more  excellent 
[than  union.]  But  it  is  every  where  necessary  that  what  is  more  excel- 
lent should  be  the  cause  to  beings  of  another  more  excellent  thing,  accor- 
ding to  its  own  power.  For  thus  it  will  be  more  excellent  as  being  more 
good,  and  as  the  cause  from  its  own  nature  of  a  greater  and  more  excel- 
lent good  to  those  things  to  which  a  less  good  is  the  cause  of  less  good- 
ness. From  these  things  therefore  it  is  necessary,  that  the  many  should 
participate  of  the  one,  that  the  one  should  be  unmingled  with  multitude, 
and  that  nothing  should  be  better  than  the  one,  but  that  this  should  also  be 
the  cause  of  being  to  the  many.  For  every  thing  which  is  deprived  of 
the  one,  flies  immediately  into  nothing,  aud  to  its  own  corruption.  But  that 
which  is  not  mauy,  is  dot  at  one  and  the  same  time  not  many  and  nothing. 
For  to  the  one  that  which  is  nothing,  or  not  one,  is  opposed,  and  to  the 
many  that  which  is  not  many  is  opposed.    If,  therefore,  the  one  and  the 

'  Ou%  is  omitted  in  the  original. 

*  Instead  of  to  or  it  is  necessary  to  read  to  «. 

'  The  »  in  the  original  which  immediately  precedes  o«x  n  seems  to  be  superfluous,  and 
is  therefore  omitted  in  the  translation. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  II. 


many  are  not  the  same,  the  not  being  many  will  not  be  the  same  with 
nothing.  From  thus  considering  the  affair  therefore,  it  appears  that  the 
one  is  beyond  multitude,  and  is  the  cause  of  being  to  the  many. 


CHAPTER  II. 

It  is  necessary  however,  that  discussing  the  same  subject  after  another 
manner,  we  should  again  see  if  we  can  in  a  certain  respect  follow  what 
has  been  said,  and  refer  it  to  the  same  end.  It  is  necessary  therefore,  that 
there  should  either  be  one  principle,  or  many  principles  ;  or  rather,  we 
should  begin  from  hence.  And  if  there  are  many  principles,  they  must 
either  possess  sympathy  with  each  other,  or  they  must  be  divulscd  from 
each  other,  and  they  must  be  either  finite  or  infinite.  But  if  there  is  one 
principle,  this  must  either  be  not  essence,  or  essence.  And  if  it  is  essence, 
this  must  either  be  corporeal  or  incorporeal.  And  if  incorporeal,  it  must 
cither  be  separate  from,  or  inseparable  from  bodies.  And  if  separate,  it 
must  either  be  moveable  or  immoveable.  But  if  it  is  not  essence,  it  must 
either  be  inferior  to  all  essence,  or  participated  by  essence,  or  imparticipable. 
If  therefore  there  are  many  principles,  and  which  have  no  sympathy  with 
each  other,  no  being  will  originate  from  them  [conjointly,]  nor  will  they  be 
common  to  all  things,  but  each  will  produce  by  itself.  For  what  commu- 
nication can  there  be  between  things  which  are  naturally  foreign,  or  tvhat 
co-operation  between  things  which  are  entirely  of*  a  different  kind?  In 
addition  also  to  these  things,  there  will  be  the  many  which  do  not  partici- 
pate of  the  one.  For  if  there  is  a  certain  one  common  in  all  of  them,  they 
will  not  be  perfectly  separated  essentially  from  each  other.  If  therefore 
they  are  different,  and  there  is  nothing  which  is  the  same  about  them,  they 
are  alone  many  and  by  no  means  one.  But  if  there  are  many  principles, 
and  which  possess  sympathy  with  each  other,  they  will  have  something 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  II. 


OF  PLATO. 


101 


common,  which  leads  all  of  them  to  sympathy,  and  similarly  unfolds  all 
of  them  to  the  view.  For  we  call  those  things  sympathetic,  which  happen 
to  be  passive  to  the  same  thing.  But  similars  are  entirely  similar  from 
participating  one  form  and  one  nature.  If  however  this  be  the  case,  it 
is  necessary  that  that  all  [or  universal]  which  is  every  where,  and  in  all 
the  principles,  should  be  of  a  more  principal  nature  than  the  many.  This 
therefore  gives  them  the  power  to  generate  sympathy  with  each  other,  and 
affords  them  communion  according  to  nature. 

Again,  if  there  are  indeed  infinite  principles,  either  the  things  which 
proceed  from  them  are  infinite,  and  there  will  thus  be  the  infinite  twice, 
or  they  are  finite,  and  thus  all  the  principles  will  not  be  principles.  For 
things  finite  in  number,  will  entirely  proceed  from  finite  principles.  The 
principles  therefore  are  in  vain  infinite.  To  which  may  be  added,  that  in- 
finity makes  both  the  principles  to  be  unknown,  and  the  things  which 
proceed  from  them.  For  the  principles  being  unknown,  it  is  necessary 
that  the  things  which  proceed  from  them  should  be  unknown ;  since  we 
then  think  that  we  know  any  thing  when  we  know  the  causes  and  the  first 
principles  of  it.  But  if  the  principles  are  finite,  it  is  evident  that  there 
will  be  a  certain  number  of  them  :  for  we  say  that  number,  is  a  definite 
multitude.  If  however,  there  is  a  number  of  the  principles,  it  is  necessary 
that  there  should  be  a  cause  of  the  whole  number  of  them.  For  every 
number  is  from  one  ;  and  this,  viz.  the  one  is  the  principle  of  numbers. 
This  therefore  will  be  the  principle  of  principles,  and  the  cause  of  finite 
multitude,  since  number  itself  is  one,  and  the  end  in  the  many  is  one,  and 
it  bounds  the  many  by  that  which  is  one.  But  the  principle  being  one, 
and  this  being  essence,  it  is  necessary  if  this  is  admitted  to  be  cither  cor 
porcal  or  incorporeal,  that  it  must  be  acknowledged  to  be  the  principle  of 
other  things. 

If  therefore,  body  is  the  cause  of  the  generation  of  beings,  it  is  neces- 
sary indeed,  that  it  should  be  divisible  and  have  parts.  For  every  body 
is  in  its  own  nature  divisible ;  since  every  magnitude  is  a  certain  whole 
and  that  which  is  a  whole  consists  of  parts.  These  parts  therefore,  (but 
I  mean  each  of  them)  must  either  severally  participate  a  certain  one,  or 
not  participate  it.   If  therefore  they  do  not  participate  it,  they  wdl  be 


Digitized  by  Google 


102 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK.  If. 


many  alone,  and  by  no  means  one.  Hence,  neither  will  that  which  con- 
sists from  them  be  a  whole.  For  there  being  no  one,  that  which  consists 
of  all  of  them  will  not  be  one.  But  if  each  of  the  parts  participates  of 
something  of  this  kind,  and  there  is  something  which  is  the  same  in  all 
of  them,  a  thing  of  this  kind  must  necessarily  be  incorporeal,  and  impar- 
tible according  to  its  own  nature.  For  if  this  also  is  itself  corporeal,  it  is 
either  wholly  in  each  of  the  parts,  or  not  wholly.  If  therefore,  it  is  in- 
deed wholly  in  each,  it  will  itself  be  separated  from  itself.  For  the  parts 
in  which  it  is  are  separate  from  each  other.  But  if  it  is  not  wholly  in 
each  of  the  parts,  this  also  will  be  divisible,  aud  will  have  parts  after  the 
same  manner  as  the  above  mentioned  parts  ;  and  there  will  again  be  the 
same  inquiry  concerning  these,  viz.  whether  in  these  also  there  is  something 
common,  or  nothing ;  since  if  there  is  nothing  common,  we  shall  place 
the  many  separate  from  the  one. 

Let  us  however  consider  the  whole ;  for  every  body  is  a  whole,  and  has 
parts.  What  therefore  will  that  be  which  is  connective  of  the  parts,  since 
they  are  many  ?  For  it  is  necessary  to  say  either  that  the  whole  is 
unific  of  the  parts,  or  the  parts  of  the  whole,  or  that  some  third  thing 
prior  to  both,  which  is  neither  a  whole,  nor  has  any  part,  connects  and 
unites  the  whole  with  its  parts,  and  the  parts  with  the  whole.  But  if  the 
whole  indeed  is  connective  of  the  parts,  the  whole  will  be  incorporeal  and 
impartible.  For  if  it  is  a  body,  this  also  will  be  partible,  and  will  be  in- 
digent of  a  nature  which  is  capable  of  connecting  the  parts ;  and  this 
will  be  the  case  to  infinity.  But  if  the  parts  are  connective  of  the  whole, 
how  can  the  many  be  connective  of  'Ac  one ;  and  things  divided,  of  that 
which  consists  from  them?  For  on  the  contrary,  it  is  necessary  that  the 
one  should  have  the  power  of  uniting  the  many,  and  not  the  many  of  uni- 
ting the  one.  And  if  that  which  connects  both,  is  neither  a  whole  nor 
has  parts,  it  will  be  perfectly  impartible.  But  being  impartible,  itis  also 
necessarily  without  interval.  For  every  thing  which  has  interval  has 
parts,  and  is  divisible.  But  being  without  interval  it  is  incorporeal ; 
for  every  body  possesses  interval. 

Farther  still,  it  is  necessary  that  the  principle  should  be  perpetual  ;  for 
every  being  is  perpetual  or  corruptible.  Hence  it  must  be  admitted  that  the 
principle  of  beings  is  perpetual  or  corruptible.  But  if  we  should  grant  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  II.  OF  PLATO.  103 

this  may  be  corrupted,  there  will  be  no  beiug  incorruptible.  For  the  princi- 
ple being  destroyed,  it  will  neither  be  itself  generated  from  any  tiling,  nor 
will  another  thing  be  generated  from  it.  For  it  can  neither  be  able  to  ge- 
nerate itself  (since  it  is  not,  if  it  is  not  perpetual)  nor  can  another 
thing  be  abje  to  generate  it,  if  it  is  the  principle  of  all  things.  But  if  it 
is  incorruptible,  it  will  have  the  power  of  not  being  corrupted,  and  this* 
power  will  be  infinite,  in  order  that  it  may  exist  to  infinity  through  the 
whole  of  time.  For  every  finite  power  of  existence  pertains  naturally  to 
that  which  is  corruptible.  But  an  infinite  power  pertains  to  perpetual 
natures,  the  existence  of  which  continues  to  infinity.  This  infinite  there- 
fore, I  mean  the  infinite  according  to  power,  is  either  impartible  or  partible. 
But  if  it  is  partible  indeed,  there  will  be  the  infinite  in  a  finite  body.  For 
the  principle  is  finite  ;  since  if  it  were  infinite,  there  will  be  nothing  else 
besides  itself.  But  if  it  is  impartible,  the  power  of  infinitely  existing 
will  be  incorporeal.  And  the  principle  of  beings  is  incorporeal,'  so  far 
as  it  is  this  power  through  which  the  subject  of  it  always  is.  That  it  is 
impossible  therefore,  the  principle  of  beings  can  be  corporeal  is  from  these 
things  evident. 

If  however  it  is  incorporeal,  it  must  either  be  separate,  or  inseparable 
from  bodies.  But  if  inseparable  indeed,  it  will  have  all  its  energies  in 
bodies,  and  subsisting  about  them.  For  that  is  inseparable  from  body 
which  is  not  any  where  naturally  adapted  to  energize  except  in  and  with 
bodies.  But  if  the  principle  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  it  is  evidently  ne- 
cessary that  none  of  the  things  which  subsist  according  to  it  should  be 
more  powerful,  or  possess  greater  authority  than  the  principle  of  all  beings. 
If  however,  nothing  is  more  excellent  in  bodies  than  the  power  which 
subsists  in  and  energizes  about  bodies,  and  a  corporeal  essence,  there  will 
not  any  where  be  intellect  and  the  power  which  energizes  according  to  in- 
tellect. For  every  such  like  motion,  [i,  e.  energy]  proceeds  from  a  power, 
which  is  entirely  in  its  energies  independent  of  body.  But  it  neither  was, 
nor  is  lawful  for  generated  natures  to  surpass  the  power  of  their  causes. 
For  every  thing  which  is  in  the  things  begotten  is  from  primary  natures, 

'  The  words  aavyjrtoi  i<rn  are  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


104 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  II. 


and  the  latter  are  the  lords  of  the  essence  of  the  former.  If  therefore, 
the  principle  of  beings  is  able  to  generate  intellect  and  wisdom,  how  is  it 
possible  it  should  not  generate  it,  on  account  of  and  in  itself  ?  For 
one  of  two  things  is  necessary,  either  that  intellectual  perception  per- 
tains in  no  respect  to  beings,  or  that  it  is  inferior  to  them ;  and  that  if 
•it  exists  it  acts  in  bodies  only.  These  things  however,  it  is  impossible 
to  assert.  But  if  that  which  is  the  first  of  beings,  and  which  is  the  prin- 
ciple of  all  things  is  separate  from  bodies,  it  is  perfeotly  necessary  to  ad- 
mit that  it  is  either  immoveable  or  moved.  And  if  indeed  it  is  moved, 
there  will  be  something  else  prior  to  it,  about  which  it  is  moved.  For 
every  thing  which  is  moved,  is  naturally  adapted  to  be  moved  about  some- 
thing else  which  is  permanent.  And  farther  still,  besides  this,  it  is  moved 
through  desire  of  another  thing.  For  ift  is  necessary  indeed  that  it  should 
be  moved  in  consequence  of  desiring  a  certain  thing ;  because  motion 
itself  by  itself  is  indefinite.  But  the  end  of  it  is  that  for  the  sake  of  which 
it  subsists.  It  desires  however,  either  something  else,  or  itself.  But  every 
thing  which  desires  itself  is  immoveable.  For  why  should  any  thing  that 
is  present  with  itself  want  to  be  in  another  thing?  For  of  things  which 
are  moved,  the  motion  of  that  is  less  to  which  the  good  is  nearer,  but  the 
motion  is  greater  of  that  to  which  the  good  is  more  remote.  But  that 
which  possesses  good  in  itself,  and  for  the  sake  of  which  it  subsists,  will 
be  immoveable  and  .stable ;  siuce  being  always  in  itself,  it  is  in  good. 
That  however  which  is  in  itself  is  in  same ;  for  each  thing  is  the  same 
with  itself.  But  of  that  which  is  in  itself  we  say  indeed  that  it  stands 
still  and  is  immoveable ;  while  that  which  is  not  immoveable,  is  not  in 
itself  but  in  another,  is  moved  towards  another  thing,  and  is  perfectly  in- 
digent of  good.  If  therefore  the  principle  of  beings  is  moved,  but  every 
thing  which  is  moved  is  moved  through  the  want  of  good,  and  towards 
another  thing  which  is  the  object  of  desire  to  it,  there  will  be  something 
else  which  is  desirable  to  the  principle  of  beings  besides  itself,  and  about 
which  possessing  a  sameness  of  subsistence,  wc  must  say  it  is  moved. 
This  however  is  impossible.  For  the  principle  is  that  for  th<-  sake  of  which 
all  thiugs  subsist,  which  all  things  desire,  and  which  is  indige  nt  ol  nothing. 
For  if  it  were  in  want  of  something,  it  would  be  entirely  subordinate  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  II. 


OF  PLATO. 


105 


that  of  which  it  is  iu  want,  and  to  which  ib  energy  is  directed  as  the  ob- 
ject of  desire.  But  if  the  principle  is  immoveable  (for  this  is  what  re- 
mains,) it  is  necessary  that  it  should  be  one  incorporeal  essence,  possessing 
an  eternal  sameness  of  subsistence.  After  what  manner,  however,  docs  it 
possess  the  one  ?  And  how  is  it  one  essence  I  For  if  essence  and  the  one 
are  the  same,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  principle  of  beings  is  essence. 
But  if  essence  is  different  from  the  one,  it  must  be  granted  that  to  be  the 
one  is  not  the  same  thing  as  to  be  essence.  And  if,  indeed,  essence  is 
better  than  the  one,  according  to  this  it  must  be  said  to  be  with  the  prin- 
ciple. But  if  the  one  is  better  than  essence  and  beyond  it,  the  one  is  also 
the  principle  of  essence.  And  if  they  are  co-ordinate  to  each  other,  the 
many  will  be  prior  to  the  one.1  This,  however,  is  impossible  as  we  have 
before  demonstrated.  It  is  evident,  indeed,  that  essence  is  not  the  same 
as  the  one.  For  it  is  not  one  and  the  same  thing  to  say  one,  and  that  es- 
sence is  one ;  but  the  former  is  not  yet  a  sentence,  and  the  latter  is.  To 
which  may  be  added,  that  if  essence  and  the  one  are  the  same,  multitude 
will  be  the  same  as  that  which  has  no  existence,  and  which  is  not  essence. 
This,  however,  is  impossible.  For  in  essence  the  many  are  contained, 
and  in  tliat  which  is  not  essence  is  the  one.  But  if  essence  and  the  one 
arc  not  the  same,  they  will  not  be  co-ordinate  to  each  other ;  for  if  they 
were  co-ordinate  there  will  be  some  other  tiling  prior  to  them,  if  ii  is  ne- 
cessary that  all  things  should  subsist  from  one  principle.  And  if  one  of 
these  is  better  than  the  other,  either  the  one  is  prior  to  essence,  or  essence 
is  prior  to  the  one.  But  if  the  one  indeed  is  prior  to  essence,  this  and  not 
essence  is  the  principle  of  all  things.  For  it  is  necessary  that  nothing 
should  be  better  than  the  principle.  And  if  essence  is  prior  to  the  onet 
the  one  will  be  passive  to  essence,  and  not  essence  to  the  one.  But  if  the 
one  is  passive  to  essence,  it  is  necessary  that  the  one  and  essence  should  be 
every  thing,  and  that  all  such  things  as  arc  one  should  be  essence,  but  not 
that  all  such  things  as  arc  essence  should  be  one.  There  will,  therefore, 
be  a  certain  essence  deprived  of  the  one.    If,  however,  this  be  the  case,  it 

■ 

'  For  essence  and  the  one  being  two  things  will  participate  of  the  many,  i.  e.  of  the  firtt  mauy, 
or  two. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  O 


106 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  n. 


will  be  nothing.   For  that  which  is  deprived  of  the  one  is  nothing.  Hence 
the  one  is  prior  to  essence. 

But  if  that  which  is  first  is  something  which  is  not  essence,  it  is  absurd 
to  assert  that  it  is  subordinate  to  essence.  For  the  principle  is  that  which 
has  the  greatest  power  and  the  most  absolute  authority,  and  is  most  suffi- 
cient to  itself,  and  is  not  that  which  is  most  ignoble,  and  indigent  of  the 
many.   And,  in  short,  it  is  necessary  that  no  secondary  nature  should  be 
belter  than  the  principle ;  for  it  is  requisite  that  beings  should  not  be 
governed  badly.    But  if,  indeed,  the  principle  has  an  order  subordinate  to 
the  things  which  proceed  from  it,  and  the  things  proceeding  from  it  are 
better  than  it,  all  things  will  be  badly  confounded,  nor  will  the  principle 
according  to  nature  be  any  thing  else  than  something  which  is  not  the 
most  excellent  of  things,  nor  will  things  which  proceed  from  the  principle 
possess  from  it  a  power  of  ruling  over  their  principle.   The  principle  of 
beings,  therefore,  will  indeed  be  fortuitous,  and  also  the  beings  which' arc 
its  progeny.    But  this  is  impossible.    For  things  which  are  fortuitous  (if 
to  have  a  fortuitous  subsistence  is  this,  not  to  exist  according  to  intellect, 
nor  with  a  view  to  a  definite  end)  are  disorderly,  infinite,  and  indefinite, 
and  are  all  of  them  things  which  have  a  less  frequency  of  subsistence.  But 
the  principle  is  invariably  principle,  and  other  things  proceed  from  it.  If 
however,  that  which  is  not  essence  is  better  than  all  essence,  it  will  either 
be  participated  by  it,  or  it  will  be  entirely  imparticipable.    If,  however, 
essence  participates  of  the  principle,  of  what  will  it  be  the  principle  ?  And 
how  will  it  be  the  principle  of  all  beings?    For  it  is  necessary  that  the 
principle  of  beings  should  be  no  one  of  beings ;  since  if  it  were  any  one 
of  them,  it  is  necessarily  not  the  principle  of  all  beings.    But  every  thing 
which  is  participated  by  another  thing  is  said  to  be  that  by  winch  it  is 
participated,  and  in  which  it  primarily  is.    The  principle,  however,  is  se- 
parate, and  belongs  in  a  greater  degree  to  itself  than  to  other  things.  Be- 
sides, every  thing  which  is  participated  proceeds  from  another  more  ex- 
cellent cause;  since  that  which  is  imparticipable  is  better  than  that  which 
is  participate.   It  is  not,  however,  possible  to  conceive  any  thing  better 
than  that  which  is  most  excellent,  and  which  we  call  the  principle.  For 
it  is  not  lawful  to  assert  that  things  secondary  to  the  principle,  and  which 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  III. 


OF  PLATO. 


107 


proceed  from  it,  arc  in  auy  respect  better  than  tlieir  principle.  The  cause 
therefore  of  all  beings  is  above  all  essence,  is  separate  from  every  essence, 
and  is  neither  essence,  nor  has  essence  as  an  addition  to  its  nature.  For 
such  an  addition  as  this  is  a  diminution  of  simplicity,  and  of  that  which  is 
one. 


CHAPTER  III. 


See,  therefore,  the  third  argument  after  these,  leading  us  to  the  same 
conclusion  with  the  former  arguments.  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  cause 
of  all  beings  should  be  that  of  which  all  beings  participate,  to  which  they 
refer  the  subsistence  of  themselves,  and  which  separates  itself  from  nothing 
that  in  any  respect  whatever  is  said  to  have  an  existence.  For  this  alone 
is  the  object  of  desire  to  beings,  which  primarily,  or  in  some  other  way,  is 
itself  the  cause  of  their  subsistence.  And  it  is  necessary  that  every  thing 
which  is  produced  with  reference  to,  and  on  account  of  it,  should  have  a 
certain  habitude  with  relation  to  it,  and  through  this  also,  a  similitude  to 
it.  For  every  habitude  of  one  thing  towards  another,  is  predicated  in  a 
two-fold  respect,  either  from  both  participating  of  one  thing,  which  affords 
to  the  participants  a  communion  with  each  other ;  or  from  one  of  them 
participating  of  the  other;  of  which,  indeed,  the  one  as  being  more  excel- 
lent, imparts  something  to  that  which  is  subordinate  to  itself ;  but  the 
other,  as  being  inferior,  is  assimilated  to  the  more  excellent  nature,  so  far 
as  it  participates  of  it.  Hence  it  is  necessary,  if  all  sensible  natures  pos- 
sess a  habitude  to  that  which  is  first,  aspire  after,  and  subsist  about  it, 
cither  that  there  should  be  a  certain  third  thing  the  cause  of  the  habitude, 
or  that  the  principle  should  impart  to  the  natures  posterior  to  itself,  a 
tendency  to  itself,  and  that  desire,  through  which  every  thing  is  preserved, 
and  exists.  Nothing  else,  however,  is  more  excellent  than  that  which  is 
first    Hence,  the  habitude  of  beings,  their  existence,  and  their  tendency 


Digitized  by  Google 


108  ON  Tilt:  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 

to  the  first,  are  derived  from  thence.  And  all  tilings  participate  of  the 
principle  of  themselves,  if  it  is  necessary  that  this  which  is  participated, 
should  from  thence  become  apparent  in  all  beings,  since  it  is  the  principle 
of  all  things,  and  deserts  no  being  whatever.  What,  therefore,  will  this 
nature  be,  which  is  every  where,  and  in  all  beings?  Is  it  life  and  motion? 
But  there  are  indeed  many  things  which  are  deprived  of  these.  Is,  there- 
fore, permanency  every  where,  and  in  all  things?  But  neither  is  this  true. 
For  motion,  so  far  as  it  is  motion,  will  not  participate  of  permanency.  Is 
much-honoured  intellect,  therefore,  so  far  as  it  is  intellect,-participated  by 
all  beings?  But  this  also  is  impossible.  For  all  beings  would  have  intel- 
lectual perception,  and  no  being  would  be  deprived  of  intellect. 

Shall  we  say,  therefore,  that  being  itself  and  essence  are  participated  by 
all  things  that  in  any  respect  whatever  have  a  subsistence?  But  how  is 
this  possible?  For  that  which  is  in  generation,  or  passing  into  existence, 
is  said  to  be,  and  is  destitute  of  essence.  Nor  must  we  wonder,  if  it  also, 
since  it  ranks  among  beings,  should  now  participate  of  essence.  For  so 
far  as  it  is  in  generation,  it  is  not;  but  it  ends  in  existence  and  essence  when 
it  is  now  actually  generated,  and  is  no  longer  rising  into  existence.  All 
things,  therefore,  that  have  in  any  respect  whatever  a  subsistence,  do  not 
participate  of  essence.  What  then  will  that  be  which  is  every  where  and 
by  all  things  participated?  Let  us  consider  every  being,  and  see  what 
that  is  to  which  all  beings  are  passive,  and  what  it  is  which  is  common  in 
all  of  them,  as  in  essence,  sameness,  difference,  permanency,  and  motion. 
Can  we  say,  therefore,  that  each  of  these  is  any  thing  else  than  one  thing, 
and  not  only  separately,  but  this  is  also  the  case  with  the  things  which 
subsist  from  them  ;  and  in  short,  it  is  not  possible  in  a  certain  respect  to 
speak  otherwise  of  all  things,  than  this,  that  all  things,  and  each  thing  is 
one.  For  if  any  thing  should  be  deprived  of  the  one,  though  you  should 
speak  of  parts,  or  of  beings,  immediately,  that  which  becomes  destitute  of 
the  one,  will  be  altogether  nothing.  Or  with  what  intention  do  we  say 
that  a  thing  which  is  not  is  perfectly  nothing,  [or  not  even  one  thing]  un- 
less the  one  is  the  last  thing  which  deserts  beings?  This  it  is,  therefore, 
to  become  that  which  in  no  respect  is,  and  to  be  perfectly  deprived  of  the 
one.    For  it  is  possible  for  that  which  is  not  moved  to  be,  aud  for  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  I  If. 


OF  PLATO. 


which  has  no  being  to  have  an  hyparxis ;  but  that  which  is  not  even  one 
thing,  and  which  is  destitute  of  the  one  itself,  will  be  entirely  nothing. 
Hence  the  one  is  present  with  all  beings;  and  though  you  should  speak  of 
multitude  itself,  it  is  necessary  that  this  also  should  participate  of  the  one; 
for  if  it  docs  not  become  one  thing,  it  is  not  possible  for  it  to  subsist. 
And  if  even  you  divide  the  whole  to  infinity,  immediately  nothing  else 
than  one  occurs.  For  either  that  which  is  divided  does  not  subsist,  or  be- 
coming to  be,  or  subsisting  something  else,  it  will  be  immediately  one.' 
The  one,  therefore,  which  is  every  where  apparent,  and  is  in  all  beings, 
and  which  deserts  no  being  whatever,  is  either  derived  from  the  one  which 
is  simply  one,  or  from  that  which  is  more  excellent  than  the  one.  For  it 
is  not  possible  for  the  one  to  be  otherwise  passive,  [i.  e.  to  be  consubsistent 
with  something  else]  than  from  the  first  one,  to  which  the  one  is  no  longer 
present,  but  which  is  the  one  itself,  or  nothing  else  tlian  one. 

Again,  therefore,  from  another  principle  we  may  arrive  at  the  same  con- 
clusion, by  speaking  as  follows :  It  is  necessary  either  that  the  causes  of 
beings  and  things  caused  should  proceed  to  infinity,  and  that  there  should 
be  nothing  first  or  last  in  beings ;  or  that  there  should  be  no  first,  but  that 
there  should  be  the  last  of  things,  infinity  existing  in  one  part  only.  Or 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  necessary  that  beings  should  proceed  to  infinity  from 
a  definite  principle,  or  that  there  should  be  a  certain  first  and  last,  and  a 
boundary  of  beings  each  way.  And  if  there  are  boundaries  of  beings, 
things  either  proceed  from  each  other,  and  the  generation  of  beings  is  in  a 
circle ;  or  if  they  are  not  from  each  other,  either  one  of  them  is  from  an- 
other, or  the  first  indeed  is  one,  but  the  last  not  one,  or  the  contrary,  or 
both  are  one,  or  each  is  not  one.  If,  therefore,  first  things,  and  the  causes 
of  beings  are  infinite,  each  tiling  will  consist  of  infinites.  For  that  which 
proceeds  from  a  certain  principle,  must  necessarily  participate  of  that 
principle  from  which  it  proceeds.  But  that  which  derives  its  subsistence 
from  many  causes,  will  be  in  its  own  nature  multiform,  as  participating  of 
many  powers.  And  that  which  is  produced  from  infinites  prior  to  itself, 
will  have  infinite  peculiarities  derived  from  the  principles,  and  adapted  to 

■ 

*  For  t>  it  is  necessary  to  read  n. 


'  Digitized  by  Google 


no 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  II. 


itself.  Every  being,  therefore,  being  infinite,  and  consisting  of  infinites, 
will  render  all  things  infinitely  infinite,  and  there  will  neither  be  a  know- 
ledge of  any  being,  nor  any  evolution  of  powers.  For  the  power  of  the 
infinite  is  perfectly  uuknown,  and  incomprehensible,  by  those  natures  to 
whom  it  is  infinite. 

But  if  things  are  infinite  in  a  descending  progression,  whether  is  each 
of  them  infinite  always  proceeding  most  downward,  in  the  same  manner 
as  we  say  all  things  do,  or  is  each  whole  indeed  finite,  but  the  beings 
which  arc  produced  from  these  are  infinite?  For  if  every  being  according 
to  the  beginning  of  itself  is  definite,  but  according  to  its  end  is  infinite, 
there  will  neither  be  in  parts  nor  in  wholes,  a  conversion  of  beings  to  their 
proper  principle,  nor  will  that  which  is  second  in  order  ever  have  a  sub- 
sistence so  as  to  be  assimilated  to  the  extremity  of  a  pre-existent  order; 
though  as  we  frequently  say,  the  summits  of  inferiors  are  conjoined  with 
the  boundaries  of  superiors.  For  where  there  is  no  last,  by  what  contriv- 
ance can  such  a  similitude  of  progression  as  this,  and  such  a  mutual  cohe- 
rence of  beings  be  left,  according  to  which  secondary  things  are  always 
conjoined  to  the  natures  prior  to  them  ?  But  if  all  things  alone  ha\e  an 
infinity  of  this  kind,  each  being  bounded  by  that  which  is  posterior  to  it- 
self, wholes  will  be  subordinate  to  parts,  and  the  parts  of  beings  will  be 
naturally  more  perfect  [than  wholes.]  For  wholes,  indeed,  will  be  without 
conversion  to  the  principle  prior  to  themselves;  but  parts  will  be  con- 
verted to  it  after  their  progression.  By  how  much  the  more,  however, 
every  being  hastens  to  conjunction  with  that  which  is  more  perfect  than 
itself,  by  so  much  the  more  must  it  necessarily  excel,  as  it  appears  to  me. 
And  if  this  whole  proceeding  to  infinity  is  not  couvolvcd  to  the  summit  of 
itself,  and  circularly  converted  and  perfected  according  to  such  a  conver- 
sion [it  will  not  desire  its  proper  good.]  If,  however,  we  admit  that  there 
is  an  infinity  both  ways  these  things  must  necessarily  happen. 

In  addition  to  these  things,  also,  there  will  be  no  common  object  of 
desire  to  all  beings,  nor  any  union  nor  sympathy  of  them.  For  things 
which  are  perfectly  infinite  have  not  that  which  is  first  in  them  ;  but  not 
having  a  first,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  say  what  is  the  common  end  of 
beings,  and  why  some  things  are  more  excellent,  but  others  are  allotted  a 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  III. 


OF  PLATO. 


Ill 


subordinate  nature.  For  we  call  one  thing  better  and  another  less  excel* 
lent,  from  proximity  to  that  which  is  best,  just  as  we  define  the  more  and 
the  less  hot  from  communion  with  that  which  is  hot  in  the  first  degree. 
And  in  short,  we  form  a  judgment  of  the  more  and  the  less  from  a  refer- 
ence to  that  which  is  a  maximum.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  the 
boundary  in  beings  should  be  that  which  is  first  and  that  which  is  last.  • 

But  if,  indeed,  these  are  from  each  other,  the  same  thing  will  be  older 
and  younger,  cause  and  at  the  same  time  the  thing  caused,  and  each  thing 
will  be  first  and  last.  For  it  makes  no  difference,  whether  these  are  from 
each  other,  or  the  things  which  subsist  between  these.  For  the  extremes 
being  indifferent,  how  is  it  possible  that  a  mutation  according  to  essence 
should  intervene?  But  if  the  one  is  from  the  other,  whether  is  the  first 
derived  from  the  last,  as  some  say,  who  generate  things  more  excellent 
from  things  subordinate,  and  things  more  perfect  from  such  as  are  more 
imperfect?  In  this  case,  however,  must  not  that  which  is  allotted  the 
power  of  generating  and  producing  the  perfect,  by  a  much  greater  priority 
perfect  and  adorn  itself  by  its  present  power?  And  how  is  it  possible 
that  leaving  itself  to  be  of  an  inferior  allotment  it  should  definitely  assign 
a  more  excellent  order  to  another  thing?  For  every  thing  aspires  after  its 
proper  perfection,  and  simply  desires  good  ;  though  not  every  thing  is 
able  to  participate  of  a  thing  of  this  kind.  If,  therefore,  it  has  the  power 
of  producing  this  most  perfect  thing,  that  which  is  last  will  energize  on 
account  of  itself  prior  to  other  things,  and  the  whole  of  good,  and  all  per- 
fection, will  be  first  established  in  itself. 

But  if  that  which  is  last  is  produced  from  that  which  is  first,  and  the 
most  imperfect  from  that  which  is  most  perfect,  whether,  is  each  of  them 
one,  or  is  this  one,  but  that  not  one  ?  If,  however,  that  which  is  first,  or 
that  which  is  last,  is  not  one,  neither  of  them  will  be  first  or  last.  For,  as 
there  will  be  multitude  in  each,  each  of  them  will  have  the  better  and  the 
worse ;  and  neither  will  that  which  is  best  be  unmingled  with  that  which 
is  inferior  to  it,  nor  that  which  is  the  most  obscure  of  all  things  according 
to  being,  have  so  great  a  subjection  entirely  deprived  of  a  more  perfect 
nature;  but  there  will  be  something  more  extreme  than  that  which  is  last, 
and  something  more  perfect  than  tlis^t  which  is  first.    For  every  where, 


Digitized  by  Google 


\ 


H2  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 

that  which  is  best  if  it  receives  another  addition  through  that  which  is  in- 
ferior will  be  more  perfect  than  that  which  docs  not  abide  in  the  best, 
[through  not  receiving  this  very  addition.]  If,  therefore,  we  rightly  assert 
these  things,  the  one  is  the  principle  of  all  things,  and  the  last  of  beings  is 
one.  For  it  is  necessary,  I  think,  that  the  end  of  the  progression  of  beings 
•  should  be  assimilated  to  the  principle,  and  that  as  far  as  to  this,  the  power 
of  the  first  should  proceed. 

Summarily,  therefore,  recapitulating  what  we  have  said,  it  is  necessary 
either  that  the  first  principle  should  be  one,  or  that  there  should  be  alone 
many'  first  principles,  or  one  containing  multitude  in  itself,  or  many  par- 
ticipating of  one.  But  if  there  are  many  first  principles  only,  there  will 
not  be  one  thing  from  them.  For  what  will  make  one  and  a  whole,  if 
there  are  many  principles,  and  there  is  nothing  which  produces  one  ?  For 
it  is  certainly  necessary  that  things  posterior  to  the  principles  should  be 
assimilated  to  them.  Either,  therefore,  there  will  not  be  the  one  in  any 
being,  or  it  will  not  be  from  these  principles ;  *o  that  each  of  the  things 
which  in  any  respect  whatever  have  a  subsistence  will  be  divided  multi- 
tude alone.  And  again  each  of  the  parts  of  any  being  will  be  a  tiling  of 
this  kind,  and  we  shall  in  no  way  whatever  stop,  dividing  into  minute 
parts  essence  and  existence.  For  all  things  will  be  many,  and  the  one 
will  be  no  where  in  the  universality  of  things,  nor  will  either  wholes  or 
parts  be  apparent.. 

But  if  it  is  necessary,  indeed,  that  there  should  be  many  principles,  and 
that  they  should  participate  of  the  one,  the  one  will  be  co-ordinated  in  the 
many.  Again,  however,  it  is  necessary,  that  the  unco-ordinated  should 
every  where  be  more  ancient  than  the  co-ordinated,  and  the  exempt  than 
the  participated.  For  how  is  the  one  in  each  of  the  many  except  from 
one  principle  which  co-arranges  the  multitude,  and  converts  it  to  itself  ac- 
cording to  the  communion  of  the  one?  Again,  if  the  first  one  were  multi- 
plied, the  one  will  be  passive  ;  for  at  the  same  time  it  will  be  one  and  not 
one,  and  will  not  be  that  which  is  one  [only.]  It  is  necessary,  however, 
in  each  genus  of  things,  that  there  should  be  that  which  is  unminglcd  with 

'  in,  which  are  multitude  only  without  any  participation  of  the  one. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IV. 


OF  PLATO. 


113 


an  inferior  nature,  in  order  that  there  may  be  that  which  is  mingled,  in 
the  same  manner  as  we  say  respecting  forms.  For  from  the  equal  itself, 
things  which  are  equal  in  these  sublunary  realms,  appear  indeed  as  equal, 
though  they  are  filled  with  a  contrary  nature ;  and  from  that  which  is 
primarily  being,  that  which  is  mingled  with  non-being  is  derived,  and 
which  presents  itself  to  the  view  as  being.  And  in  short  every  where  th6 
simple  unmingled  subsistence  of  each  thing  precedes  those  things  which 
through  remission  are  mingled  with  the  privations  of  themselves.  The  one 
therefore  is  by  itself  exempt  from  all  multitude ;  and  that  which  is  one, 
and  at  the  same  time  not  one,  is  not  the  first  one,  but  is  suspended '  from 
that  which  is  primarily  one ;  through  the  principle,  indeed,  participating 
of  the  one,  but  through  the  diminution  arising  from  multitude,  now  mani- 
festly exhibiting  in  itself  the  cause  of  separation. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

• 

That  the  one  therefore  is  the  principle  of  all  things,  and  the  first  cause, 
and  that  all  other  things  are  posterior  to  the  one,  is  I  think  evident  from 
what  has  been  said.  I  am  astonished  however  at  all  the  other  interpre- 
ters of  Plato,  who  admit  the  existence  of  the  intellectual  kingdom,  but  do 
not  venerate  the  ineffable  transcendency  of  the  one,  and  its  hyparxis 
which  surpasses  the  whole  of  things.  I  particularly,  however,  wonder 
that  tliis  should  have  been  the  case  with  Origen,  who  was  a  partaker  of 
the  same  erudition  with  Plotinus.  For  Origen  ends  in  intellect  and 
the  first  being,  but  omits  the  one  which  is  beyond  every  intellect  and  every 
being.  And  if  indeed  he  omits  it,  as  something  which  is  better  than  all 
knowledge,  language  and  intellectual  perception,  we  must  say  that  he  is 
neither  discordant  with  Plato,  nor  with  the  nature  of  things.    But  if  he 

1  For  c£]pi|T«i  it  U  necessary  to  read  ffcymrraj.  The  punctuation  also  of  the  text  in  this  place, 
tnust  be  altered  agreeably  to  the  translation. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  P 


114 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  If. 


omits  it  because  the  one  is  perfectly  unhyparctic,  and  without  any  sub- 
sistence, and  because  intellect  is  the  best  of  things,  and  that  which  is 
primarily  being  is  the  same  as  that  which  is  primarily  one,  we  cannot  as- 
sent to  him  in  asserting  these  things,  nor  will  Plato  admit  him,  and  con- 
numerate  him  with  his  familiars.  For  I  think  that  a  dogma  of  this  kind 
is  remote  from  the  philosophy  of  Plato,  and  is  full  of  Peripatetic  innova- 
tion. If  you  are  willing,  however,  we  will  adduce  some  arguments  against 
this  dogma,  and  against  all  others  who  are  the  patrons  of  this  opinion,  and 
we  will  strenuously  contend  for  the  doctrine  of  Plato,  and  show  that  ac- 
cording to  him  the  first  cause  is  beyond  intellect,  and  is  exempt  from  all 
beings,  as  Plotinus  and  Porphyry,  and  all  those  who  have  received  the 
philosophy  of  these  men,  conceive  him  to  assert.  * 

We.  shall  begin,  therefore,  from  the  Republic  ;  for  here  Socrates  clearly 
shows  that  the  good  is  established  above  being,  and  the  whole  intellectual 
order,  following  the  analogy  of  the  first  goodness  to  the  sun.  For  if,  as 
the  sovereign  sun  is  to  generation,  to  every  thing  visible,  and  to  all  visive 
natures  according  to  the  power  generative  of  light,  so  it  is  necessary  the 
good  should  be  with  reference  to  intellect  and  intelligibles,  according  to  a 
cause  productive  of  truth, — if  this  be  the  case,  we  must  say  that  the  sun  is 
exempt  at  one  and  the  same  time  from  visive  and  visible  natures,  and 
must  admit  that  the  good  transcends  the  natures  which  are  always  intel- 
lective, and  also  those  which  are  eternally  intelligible.  It  is  better,  how- 
ever, to  hear  the  Platonic  words  themselves:  "  You  may  say  that  the  sun 
not  only  imparts  the  power  of  being  seen  to  visible  natures,  but  also  that 
he  is  the  cause  of  their  generation,  increase,  and  nutriment,  not  being  him- 
self generation.  Certainly.  We  may  say,  therefore,  that  things  which  are 
known,  have  not  only  this  from  the  good  that  they  are  known,  but  like- 
wise that  their  being  and  essence  are  thence  derived,  whilst  the  good  itself 
is  not  essence,  but  beyond  essence,  transcending  it  both  in  dignity  and  in 
power."  Through  all  these  things,  therefore,  it  is  evident  how  the  good 
and  the  first  principle  are  defined  by  Plato  to  be  expanded  above  not  only 
the  intellectual,  but  also  the  intelligible  extent,  and  essence  itself,  accord- 
ing to  union,  in  the  same  manner  as  it  is  inferred  the  sun  surpasses  all 
visible  natures,  and  perfects  and  generates  all  things  by  his  light.  How, 


CHAP.  IV. 


OF  PLATO. 


115 


therefore,  following  Plato,  can  we  admit  that  intellect  is  the  best  of  things, 
and  the  cause  of  all  things  ?  How  can  we  assert  that  being  itself*  and 
essence  are  the  same  with  the  principle  which  is  the  leader  of  all  the  di- 
vine progressions  ?  For  essence  and  intellect  are  said  to  subsist  primarily 
from  the  good,  to  have  their  hyparxis  about  the  good,  to  be  filled  with  the 
light  of  truth  proceeding  from  thence,  and  to  obtain  the  participation 
which  is  adapted  to  them  from  the  union  of  this  light,  which  is  more  di- 
vine than  intellect  itself  and  essence,  as  being  primarily  suspended  from 
the  good,  and  affording  in  beings  a  similitude  to  that  which  is  first  For 
the  light  which  is  emitted  from  the  sun  causes  every  thing  visible  to  be 
solar-form.  And  the  participation  of  the  light  of  truth  renders  that  which 
is  intelligible  boniform  and  divine.  Intellect,  therefore,  is  a  god  through 
a  light  which  is  more  ancient  than  intellectual  light  and  intellect  itself, 
and  that  which  is  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  participates 
of  a  divine  hyparxis  through  a  plenitude  of  this  light  being  appropriately 
imparted  to  it.*  And  in  short,  every  divine  nature  is  that  which  it  is  said 
to  be,  on  account  of  this  light,  and  is  through  it  united  to  the  cause  of  all 
beings.  By  no  means,  therefore,  is  the  first  good  to  be  considered  as  the 
same  with  intellect,  nor  must  it  be  admitted  that  the  intelligible  is  more 
ancient  than  all  the  hyparxis  of  the  whole  of  things,  since  it  is  even  sub- 
ordinate to  the  light  proceeding  from  the  good,  and  being  perfected  by 
this  light,  is  conjoined  according  to  its  own  order  with  the  good  itself.  For 
we  must  not  say  that  the  intelligible  is  united  to  the  first  after  the  same 
manner  as  the  light  [of  truth ;]  but  the  latter  through  continuity  with  the 
good  is  established  in  it  without  a  medium ;  while  the  former,  through  this 
light,  participates  of  a  vicinity  to  the  good ;  since  in  sensibles  also,  the 
solar  light  is  primarily  connascent  with  the  circulation  of  the  sun,  ascends 
as  far  as  to  the  centre  of  the  whole  sphere,  and  subsists  on  all  sides  about 
it.  But  all  sensible  natures  through  this  obtain  a  similitude  to  the  sun, 
each  of  them  according  to  its  own  nature  being  filled  with  solar-form  illu- 
mination.  These  things,  therefore,  will  be  sufficient  to  recall  into  the 

1  For  wno  to  i,  it  is  necessary  to  read  aim  to  or. 

*  This  sentence  is  very  erroneous  in  the  original,  m  will  be  evident  from  comparing  it  with  the 
above  translation. 


110 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IT. 


memory  of  those  who  love  the  contemplation  of  truth,  the  conceptions  of 
Plato  on  this  subject,  and  to  evince  that  the  order  of  intellect  is  secondary 
to  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the  one. 

If,  however,  it  is  requisite  to  evince  the  same  thing  through  many  testi- 
monies, let  us  survey  what  the  Elean  guest  in  the  Sophista  determines 
concerning  these  things.  He  says,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  that  the  mul- 
titude of  all  beings,  whether  they  are  contraries  or  not,  should  be  sus- 
pended from  the  one  being,  [i.  e.  from  being  characterized  by  the  one ;] 
but  that  the  one  being  itself  should  be  suspended  from  the  one.  For  when 
we  call  the  hot  or  the  cold,  or  permanency  or  motion,  being,  we  do  not 
denominate  each  of  these  as  the  same  with  being  itself.  For  if  perma- 
nency were  being  itself,  motion  would  not  be  being ;  or,  if  motion  were 
such  like  being,  permanency  would  not  participate  of  the  appellation  of 
being.  But  it  is  evident  that  being  accedes  to  permanency,  to  motion, 
and  to  every  multitude  of  beings  from  one  thing  which  is  primarily  being. 
This  very  thing,  therefore,  which  is  the  cause  of  essence  to  all  things,  and 
which  is  participated  by  all  other  things,  is  a  participant  of  this  one,  and 
on  this  account,  as  it  is  being  alone,' so  also  it  is  primarily  being.'  It  is, 
however,  being  itself  indeed,  and  is  not  allotted  to  &e,  from  participation ; 
but  it  is  one  according  to  participation,  and  on  this  account  it  is  passive  to 
the  one.  But  it  is  being*  primarily.  If,  therefore,  Plato  gives  to  the  one 
a  subsistence  beyond  being,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  which  is  first  in 
wholes  is  supposed  by  him  to  transcend  beings,  how  is  it  possible  that 
being  should  not  be  posterior  to  the  owe,  since  it  participates  of  it,  and  on 
this  account  is  denominated  one  ? 

Moreover,  Socrates  in  the  Philebus  clearly  demonstrates  the  same  thing 
to  those  who  arc  able  to  know  wholes  from  parts,  viz.  that  intellect  has 
not  the  same  order  as  the  first  cause  of  all.  Investigating,  therefore,  the 
good  of  the  human  soul  and  its  end,  of  which  participating  in  every  re- 
spect sufficiently  it  will  reap  the  fruits  of  a  felicity  adapted  to  its  nature, 
he -in  the  first  place  removes  pleasure  from  an  end  of  this  kind,  and  after 
this  intellect,  because  neither  is  this  replete  with  all  the  elements  of  the 

•  For  it  it  is  necessary  to  read  «». 

*  Here  also  o»  must  be  substituted  for  n. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IV.  OF  PLATO.  ll7 

r 

good.  If,  therefore,  the  intellect  which  is  in  us  is  an  image  of  the  first  in- 
tellect, and  the  good  of  the  whole  of  our  life  is  not  to  be  defined  accord- 
ing to  this  alone,  is  it  not  necessary  that  in  wholes  also,  the  cause  of  good 
must  be  established  above  intellectual  perfection  ?  For  if  that  which  is 
primarily  good  subsisted  according  to  total  intellect,  in  us  also  and  all 
other  [intellectual  natures,]  self-sufficiency  and  appropriate  good  would 
be  present  through  the  participation  of  intellect.  Our  intellect,  indeed,  is 
disjoined  from  the  good,  and  is  indigent,  and  on  this  account  requires 
pleasure  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  human  perfection.  But  a  divine 
intellect  always  participates  of  the  good,  and  on  this  account  is  divine. 
For  it  is  boniform  through  the  participation  of  good ;  but  divine,  as 
being  suspended  from  the  first  deity.  It  is  the  same  reasoning,  therefore, 
which  infers  that  the  good  is  exempt  from  the  first  intellect,  and  which 
defines  felicity  to  consist  not  in  intelligence  only,  but  in  the  all-perfect 
presence  of  the  gootl.  For  the  intellectual  form  of  energy  is  itself  by  it- 
self defective  with  respect  to  blessedness.  And  why  is  it  requisite  to  be 
prolix?  For  Parmenides  teaches  us  most  clearly  the  difference  of  the  one 
from  essence  and  being,  and  shows  that  the  one  is  exempt  from  all  other 
things  and  from  essence ;  for  this  he  evinces  of  the  one  at  the  end  of  the 
first  hypothesis.  But  how  is  it  possible  that  the  cause  of  essence,  and 
which  is  exempt  from  it  through  supreme  transcendency,  should  not  also 
be  beyond  the  intellectual  order?  For  intellect  is  essence.  But  if  in  in- 
tellect there  is  permanency  and  motion,  and  Parmenides  demonstrates 
that  the  one  transcends  both  these,  does  he  not  immediately  bring  us  to 
the  ineffable  cause  of  all  things,  which  is  prior  to  every  intellect?  And  if 
every  intellect  is  converted  to  itself,  and  is  in  itself,  but  the  one  is  demon- 
strated to  be  neither  in  itself,  nor  in  another,  how  can  we  any  longer  con- 
sider intellect  as  the  same  with  the  first  cause  of  all  ?  In  what  respect, 
also,  will  the  one  which  is  prior  to  being  differ  from  the  one  being,  which 
is  the  subject  of  the  second  hypothesis,  if  intellect  is  the  best  of  things, 
and  the  first  principle  of  all  ?  For  the  one  being  participates  of  the  one  ; 
but  that  which  participates  is  secondary  to  that  which  is  participated. 
That  the  one,  however,  is  according  to  Plato  more  ancient  than  intellect 
and  essence,  is  through  what  has  been  said  recalled  to  our  memory. 


Digitized  by  Google 


118 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  II. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Ik  the  next  place,  if  the  one  is  neither  intelligible  nor  intellectual,  nor 
in  short  participates  of  the  power  of  being,  let  us  survey  what  will  be  the 
modes  of  leading  us  to  it,  and  through  what  intellectual  conceptions 
Plato  unfolds  as  far  as  he  is  able,  to  his  familiars,  the  ineffable  and  un- 
known transcendency  of  the  first.    I  say  then,  that  at  one  time  he  unfolds 
it  through  analogy,  and  the  similitude  of  secondary  natures ;  but  at  an- 
other time  he  demonstrates  itg  exempt  transcendency,  and  its  separation 
from  the  whole  of  things,  through  negations.  For  in  the  Republic,  indeed, 
he  indicates  the  ineffable  peculiarity  and  hyparxis  of  the  good,  through 
analogy  to  the  sun  ;  but  in  the  Parmenides,  he  demonstrates  the  differ- 
ence of  the  one  with  respect  to  all  things  posterior  to  it  through  negations. 
But  he  appears  to  me  through  one  of  these  modes  to  unfold  the  progres- 
sion from  the  first  cause  of  all  other  things,  and  prior  to  other  things,  of 
the  divine  orders.    For  on  this  account  the  first  cause  is  exempt  from  all 
the  natures  produced  by  it,  because  every  where  cause  is  established 
above  its  effects  ;  and  on  this  account  the  first  is  nothing  of  all  things, 
because  all  things  proceed  from  him.  For  he  is  the  principle  of  all  things, 
both  of  beings,  and  at  the  same  time  of  non-beings.    But  again,  accord- 
ing to  the  other  of  these  modes,  he  adumbrates  the  conversion  to  the  first 
of  the  things  which  have  proceeded  from  it.    For  in  each  order  of  beings, 
through  similitude  to  it  there  is  a  monad  analogous  to  the  good,  which  has 
the  same  relation  to  the  whole  series  conjoined  with  it,  that  the  good  has 
to  all  the  orders  of  the  Gods.    The  cause,  however,  of  this  similitude  is 
entirely  the  conversion  of  the  whole  of  things  to  the  good.    These,  there- 
fore, proceed  from  thence  and  are  converted  to  it.    And  the  progression 
indeed  of  all  things  demonstrates  to  us  the  ascent  to  the  first  through  ne? 
gations ;  but  the  conversion  of  all  things  demonstrates  this  to  us  through 
analogies.    Let  not,  however,  any  one  considering  these  negations  to  be 
such  things  as  privations  despise  such  a  mode  of  discussion,  nor  defining 


Di. 


CHAP.  V.  OF  PLATO.  1 19 

the  sameness  in  words  analogously,  and  words  in  habitudes,  endeavour  to 
calumniate  this  anagogic  progression  to  the  first  principle.  For  negations, 
as  it  appears  to  me,  extend  a  triple  peculiarity  in  things.  And  at  one 
time,  indeed,  being  more  primogenial  than  affirmations,  they  are  procrea- 
tive  and  perfective  of  the  generation  of  them.  But  at  another  time,  they 
are  allotted  an  order  co-ordinate  to  affirmations,  and  negation  is  then  in 
no  respect  more  venerable  than  affirmation.  And  again,  at  another  time, 
they  are  allotted  an  order  subordinate  to  affirmations,  and  are  nothing  else 
than  the  privations  of  them.  For  with  respect  to  non-being  itself,  with 
which  there  is  also  a  negation  of  beings,  at  one  time  considering  it  as  be- 
yond being,  we  say  that  it  is  the  cause  and  the  supplier  of  beings  ;  but  at 
another  time  we  evince  that  it  is  equivalent  to  being ;  just  as  I  think,  the 
Elean  guest  demonstrates  [in  the  Sophista]  that  non-being  is  in  no  respect 
less,  if  it  be  lawful  so  to  speak,  than  being ;  and  at  another  time  we  leave 
it  as  a  privation  of,  and  indigent  of  being.  For  indeed,  according  to  this 
mode,  we  call  every  generation,  and  matter  itself,  non-being. 

Analogies,  however,  are  assumed  for  the  purpose  alone  of  indicating  the 
similitude  of  secondary  natures  to  the  first  principle.  And  neither  any 
reason,  nor  habitude,  nor  communion  of  this  principle  with  things  pos- 
terior to  it,  becomes  apparent  from  these.  For  its  exempt  nature  is  not 
of  such  a  kind  as  is  beheld  in  the  second  and  third  orders  of  beings ;  but 
the  good  transcends  the  whole  of  things  in  a  much  greater  degree  than 
intellect  surpasses  the  natures  posterior  to  itself,  whether  it  be  the  demi- 
urgic intellect,  or  the  intellect  of  the  whole  world,  or  some  other  intellect 
from  among  the  number  of  those  that  are  called  divine.  Every  intellect 
however,  and  every  god,  is  allotted  a  transcendency  with  respect  to  subor- 
dinate natures,  and  those  things  of  which  it  is  the  cause,  inferior  to  that 
which  the  first  principle  has  to  every  being  ;  for  this  principle  similarly 
transcends  all  things,  and  not  some  in  a  greater,  but  others  in  a  less  de- 
gree ;  since  thus  we  should  introduce  a  greater  and  less  habitude  of  it  to 
secondary  natures.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to  preserve  it  without  habi- 
tude to  all  things,  and  similarly  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things.  But 
of  other  natures,  some  are  indeed  nearer,  and  others  are  more  remote 
from  it.    For  each  thing  proceeds  from  it,  since  it  produces  all  things 


Digitized  by  Google 


■ 


130  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK.  II. 

according  to  one  cause.  And  different  things  are  indeed  converted  to  it 
in  a  different  manner,  this  principle  in  the  mean  time,  receiving  no  habi- 
tude or  communion  with  things  posterior  to  itself. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Tiie  mode  of  demonstration,  therefore,  pertaining  to  the  one  is,  as 
we  have  said,  twofold.  For  again,  Plato  delivers  to  us  twofold  names 
of  the  ineffable  cause.  In  the  Republic  indeed  he  calls  it  the  good,  and 
demonstrates  it  to  be  the  fountain  of  the  truth  which  unites  intellect 
and  intelligibles.  But  in  the  Parmenides,  he  denominates  such  a  prin- 
ciple as  this  the  one,  and  shows  that  it  gives  subsistence  to  the  divine 
unities.  Again  therefore,  of  these  names,  the  one  is  the  image  of  the 
progression  of  the  whole  of  things,  but  the  other  of  their  conversion. 
For  because  indeed  all  things  derive  their  subsistence  and  proceed  from 
the  first  principle,  on  this  account  referring  the  one  to  it,  we  demonstrate 
that  it  is  the  cause  of  all  multitude  and  every  progression.  For  whence 
is  multitude  unfolded  into  light  except  from  the  one*  But  because 
again  the  progressions  from  it  are  naturally  converted  to  it,  and  de- 
sire its  ineffable  and  incomprehensible  hyparxis,  we  denominate  it  the 
good.  For  what  else  is  that  which  converts  all  things,  and  which  is  ex- 
tended to  all  beings  as  the  object  of  desire,  but  the  good  f  For  all  other 
things  subsist  distrihutedly,  and  are  to  some  beings  honourable,  but  to 
others  not.  And  every  thing  which  in  any  respect  whatever  is  said  to 
have  a  subsistence  aspires  after  some  things,  and  avoids  others.  But  Me 
good  is  the  common  object  of  desire  to  all  beings,  and  all  things  accord- 
ing to  their  nature  verge  and  are  extended  to  this.  The  tendency  however 
of  desiring  natures  is  every  where  to  the  appropriate  object  of  desire. 
The  good  therefore  converts,  but  the  one  gives  subsistence  to  all  secondary 
natures.    Let  not,  however,  any  one  suppose  that  the  ineffable  can  on  this. 


Digitized  by  GdOgle 


CHAP.  VI-  OF  PLATO.  12! 

account  be  named,  or  that  the  cause  of  all  union  is  doubled.  For  here 
indeed  we  transfer  to  it  names,  looking  to  that  which  is  posterior  to  it,  and 
to  the  progressions  from,  or  the  circular  conversions  to  it.  Because,  in- 
deed, multitude  subsists  from  it,  we  ascribe  to  it  the  appellation  of  the 
one ;  but  because  all  things  even  as  far  as  to  things  that  have  the  most 
obscure  existence,  are  converted  to  it,  we  denominate  it  the  good. 

We  endeavour  therefore  to  know  the  unknown  nature  of  the  first  prin- 
ciple, through  the  things  which  proceed  from,  and  are  converted  to  it ; 
and  we  also  attempt  through  the  same  things  to  give  a  name  to  that  which 
is  ineffable.  This  principle,  however,  is  neither  known  by  beings,  nor  is 
efiable  by  any  one  of  all  things ;  but  being  exempt  from  all  knowledge, 
and  all  language,  and  subsisting  as  incomprehensible,  it  produces  from 
itself  according  to  one  cause  all  knowledge,  every  thing  that  is  known, 
all  words,  and  whatever  can  be  comprehended  by  speech.  But  its 
uuical  nature,  and  which  transcends  all  division,  shines  forth  to  the  view 
dyadically  in  the  natures  posterior  to  it,  or  rather  triad ically.  For 
all  things  abide  in,  proceed  from,  and  are  converted  to  the  one.  For  at 
one  and  the  same  time,  they  are  united  to  it,  are  in  subjection  to  its  union 
which  is  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things,  and  desire  the  participation  of 
it.  And  union  indeed  imparts  a  stable  transcendency  to  all  secondary 
natures,  and  which  subsists  in  unproceeding  conjunction  with  the  cause 
of  them.  But  subjection  defines  the  progression  of  beings,  and  their  se- 
paration from  the  imparticipable  and  first  unity.  \nd  desire-perfects  the 
conversion  of  the  subsisting  natures,  and  their  circular  tendency  to  the 
ineffable.  First  natures  therefore,  being  always  entirely  united,  [to  the 
ineffable]  some  more  remotely,  but  others  more  proximately,  and  receiv- 
ing through  this  union  their  hyparxis,  and  their  portion  of  good,  we  en- 
deavour to  manifest  through  names  the  progression  and  conversion  of  the 
whole  of  things.  But  with  respect  to  their  stable  comprehension,  if  it 
be  lawful  so  to  speak,  in  the  first,  and  their  union  with  the  ineffable,  this 
as  being  incomprehensible,  and  not  to  be  apprehended  by  knowledge, 
those  who  were  wise  in  divine  concerns  were  unable  to  indicate  it  by 
words.  But  as  the  ineffable  is  primarily  concealed  in  inaccessible  places, 
and  isexemptfrom  all  beings,  thus  also  the  union  of  all  things  with  it  isoc- 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  Q 


Digitized  by  Google 


122 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  II. 


cult,  ineffable,  and  unknown  to  all  beings.  For  every  being  is  united  to  it, 
neither  by  intellectual  injection,  [or  projection]  nor  the  energy  of  essence ; 
since  things  which  are  destitute  of  knowledge  are  united  to  the  first,  and 
things  deprived  of  all  energy,  participate  according  to  their  order  of  a 
conjunction  with  it.  That  which  is  unknown  therefore  in  beings  according 
to  their  union  with  the  first,  wc  neither  endeavour  to  know,  nor  to  ma- 
nifest by  names,  but  being  more  able  to  look  to  their  progression  and 
conversion,  we  ascribe  indeed  to  the  first  two  names,  which  we  derive  as 
resemblances  from  secondary  natures.  We  also  define  two  modes  of 
ascent  to  the  first,  conjoining  that  mode  which  is  through  analogy  with 
the  appellation  of  the  good,  but  that  which  is  through  negations  with  the 
appellation  of  the  one  ;  which  Plato  also  indicating,  in  the  Republic  in- 
deed calls  the  first  the  good,  and  at  the  same  time  makes  a  regression  to  it 
through  analogy  ;  but  in  the  Parmenides  establishing  it  as  the  one  Uaelf,  he 
unfolds  the  transcendency  of  it  which  is  exempt  from  beings,  through 
negative  conclusions.  According  to  both  these  modes  therefore,  the  first 
principle  transcends  both  gnostic  powers,  and  the  parts  of  speech  ;  but 
all  other  things  afford  us  the  cause  of  knowledge  and  of  appellation. 
And  the  first  principle  indeed  unically  gives  subsistence  to  all  the  unions 
and  hyparxes  of  secondary  natures ;  but  the  things  posterior  to  this 
cause  participate  of  it  in'a  divided  manner.  These  also,  as  we  have  before 
observed,  become  multiplied  by  abiding,  proceeding  and  returning ;  but  the 
one  is  at  once  perfectly  exempt  from  all  the  prolific  progressions,  conver- 
tive  powers,  and  uniform  hypostases  in  beings.  What  the  modes  there- 
fore are  of  the  doctrine  about  the  first,  and  through  what  names  Plato  en- 
deavours to  indicate  it,  and  whence  the  names  and  the  modes  of  this  indica- 
tion which  is  unknown  to  all  things  are  derived,  is,  I  think,  through  what 
has  been  said  sufficiently  manifest. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  VII.  OF  PLATO.  m 


CHAPTER  VII. 

It,  however,  it  be  requisite  to  survey  each  of  the  dogmas  about  it 
which  are  scattered  in  the  writings  of  Plato,  and  to  reduce  them  to  one 
science  of  theology,  let  us  consider,  if  you  are  willing,  prior  to  other 
things,  what  Socrates  demonstrates  in  the  6th  book  of  the  Republic, 
conformably  to  the  before  mentioned  mode,  and  how  through  analogy 
he  teaches  us  the  wonderful  transcendency  of  the  good  with  respect  to 
all  beings,  and  the  summits  of  the  whole  of  things.  In  the  first  place 
therefore,  he  distinguishes  beings  from  each  other,  and  establishing  some 
of  them  to  he  intelligibles,  but  others  sensibles,  he  defines  science  by  the 
knowledge  of  beings.  But  he  conjoins  sense  with  sensibles,  and  giving  a 
twofold  division  to  all  things,  he  places  one  exempt  monad  over  intelli- 
gible multitude,  and  a  second  monad  over  sensible  multitude,  according 
to  a  similitude  to  the  former  monad.  Of  these  monads  also,  he  shows 
that  the  one  is  generative  of  intelligible  light,  but  the  other  of  sensible 
light.  And  he  evinces  that  by  the  intelligible  light  indeed,  all  intelligibles 
are  deifomi,  and  boniform,  according  to  participation  from  the  first  God ; 
but  that  by  the  sensible  light,  according  to  the  perfection  derived  from  the 
sun,  all  sensible  natures  are  solarform,  and  similar  to  their  one  monad.  In 
addition  also  to  what  has  been  said,  he  suspends  the  second  monad  from 
that  which  reigns  in  the  intelligible.  And  thus  he  extends  all  things,  both 
the  first  and  the  last  of  beings,  I  mean  intelligibles  and  sensibles,  to  the 
good.  Such  a  mode  of  reduction  to  the  first  as  this,  appears  to  me  to 
be  most  excellent,  and  especially  adapted  to  theology  ;  viz.  to  congregate 
all  the  Gods  in  the  world  into  one  union,  and  suspend  them  from  their 
proximate  monad ;  but  to  refer  the  supermundane  Gods  to  the  intellec- 
tual kingdom  ;  to  suspend  the  intellectual  Gods  from  intelligible  union  ; 
and  to  refer  the  intelligible  Gods  themselves,  and  all  beings  through  these, 
to  that  which  is  first.  For  as  the  monad  of  mundane  natures  is  super- 
mundane, as  the  monad  of  supermundane  natures  is  intellectual,  and  of 
intellectual  natures  intelligible,  thus  also  it  is  necessary  that  first  intelli- 


Digitized  by  Google 


124  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 

gibles  should  be  suspended  from  the  monad  which  is  above  intelligible* 
and  perfected  by  it,  and  being  filled  with  deity,  should  illuminate  secon- 
dary natures  with  intelligible  light.  But  it  is  necessary  that  intellectual 
natures  which  derive  the  enjoyment  of  their  being  from  intelligibles,  but 
of  good  and  a  uniform  hyparxis  from  the  first  cause,  should  connect  su- 
permundane natures  by  intellectual  light.  And  that  the  genera  of  the 
Gods  prior  to  the  world,  through  receiving  a  pure  intellect  from  the  in- 
tellectual Gods,  but  intelligible  light  from  the  intelligible  Gods,  and  a 
unical  light  from  the  father  of  the  whole  of  things,  should  send  into  this 
apparent  world  the  illumination  of  the  light  which  they  possess.  On  this 
account,  the  sun  being  the  summit  of  mundane  natures,  and  proceeding 
from  the  etherial  profundities,  imparts  to  visible  natures  supernatural 
perfection,  and  causes  these  as  much  as  possible  to  be  similar  to  the  su- 
pcrcelestial  worlds.  These  things  therefore  we  shall  afterwards  mpre 
abundantly  discuss. 

The  present  discourse,  however,  suspends  all  things  after  the  above 
mentioned  manner  from  the  good,  and  the  first  unity.  "For  if  indeed  the 
sun  connects  every  thing  sensible,  but  the  good  produces  and  perfects 
every  thing  intelligible,  and  of  these,  the  second  monad  [i.  e.  the  sun] 
is  denominated  the  offspring  of  the  good,  and  on  this  account  causes 
that  which  is  sensible  to  be  splendid,  and  adorns  and  fills  it  with  good, 
because  it  imitates  the  primogeuial  cause  of  itself, — if  this  be  the  case, 
all  things  will  thus  participate  of  the  good,  and  will  be  extended  to  this 
one  principle,  intelligibles  indeed,  and  the  most  divine  of  beings  without 
a.medium,  but  sensibles  through  their  monad  [the  sun.] 

Again  therefore,  and  after  another  manner,  Plato  narrates  to  us  in  this 
extract  from  the  Republic  the  analysis  to  the  first  principle.  For  he  sus- 
pends all  the  multitudes  in  the  world  from  the  intelligible  monads,  as  for 
instance,  all  beautiful  things  from  the  beautiful  itself,  all  good  things  from 
the  good,  and  all  equal  things  from  the  equal  itself.  And  again,  he  con- 
siders some  things  as  intelligibles,  but  others  as  sensibles  ;  but  the  sum- 
mits of  them  ait;  uniformly  established  in  intelligibles.  Again,  from  these 
intelligible  forms  he  thinks  fit  to  ascend  still  higher,  and  venerating  in  a 
greater  degree  the  goodness  which  is  beyond  intelligibles,  he  apprehends 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  VII. 


OF  PLATO. 


125 


that  nil  intelligibles,  and  the  monads  which  they  contain,  subsist  and  are 
perfected  through  it.  For  as  we  refer  the  sensible  multitude  to  a  monad 
-  uncoordinated  with  sensibles,  and  we  think  that  through  this  monad  the 
multitude  of  sensibles  derives  its  subsistence,  so  it  is  necessary  to  refer  the 
intelligible  multitude  to  another  cause  which  is  not  connumerated  with  in- 
telligibles, and  from  which  they  are  allotted  their  essence  and  their  divine 
hyparxis. 

IiCt  not,  however,  any  one  fancy  that  Plato  admits  there  is  the  same 
order  of  the  good  in  intelligible  forms,  as  there  is  prior  to  intelligibles. 
But  the  good  indeed,  which  is  coordinated  with  the  beautiful,  must  be 
considered  as  essential,  and  as  one  of  the  forms  which  are  in  intelligibles. 
For  the  first  good,  which  by  conjoining  the  article  with  the  noun  we 
are  accustomed  to  call  royals*  or  the  good,  is  admitted  to  be  something 
superessential,  and  more  excellent  than  all  beings  both  in  dignity  and 
power ;  since  Socrates  also,  when  discussing  the  beautiful  and  the  good, 
calls  the  one  the  beautiful  itself  and  the  other  the  good  itself,  and  thus 
says  he  we  must  denominate  all  the  things  which  we  then  very  properly 
considered  as  many.  Again,  particularly  considering  each  thing  as  being 
one,  we  denominate  each  thing  that  which  it  is,  and  thus  Socrates  leading 
us  from  sensible  tilings  that  arc  beautiful  and  good,  and  in  short  from 
things  that  are  participated,  subsist  in  other  things,  and  are  multiplied, 
to  the  superessential  unities  of  intelligibles  and  the  first  essences,  from 
these  again,  he  transfers  us  to  the  exempt  cause  of  every  thing  beautiful 
and  good.  For  in  forms,  the  beautiful  itself  is  the  leader  of  many  beau- 
tiful things,  and  the  good  itself  of  many  goods,  and  each  form  alone  gives 
subsistence  to  things  similar  to  itself.  But  the  first  good  is  not  only  the 
cause  of  what  is  good,  but  similarly  of  things  beautiful,  as  Plato  else- 
where says  ;  and  "  all  things  are  for  its  sake,  and  it  is  the  cause  of  every 
thing  beautiful." 

For  again,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  said,  the  good  which  is  in 
forms  is  intelligible  and  known,  as  Socrates  himself  teaches;  but  the 
good  prior  to  forms  is  beyond  beings,  and  is  established  above  all  know- 
ledge. And  the  former  is  the  source  of  essential  perfection  ;  but  (he 
latter  is  the  supplier,  of  good  to  the  Gods  so  far  as  they  arc  Gods,  and  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 


generative  of  goods  which  are  prior  to  essences.  We  must  not  therefore 
apprehend  that  when  Socrates  calls  the  first  principle  the  good,  from  the 
name  of  idea,  that  he  dkectly  calls  it  the  intelligible  goodness  ;  but  though 
the  first  principle  is  superior  to  all  language  and  appellation,  we  permit 
Socrates  to  call  it  the  cause  of  every  thing  beautiful  and  good,  transfer- 
ring through  the  things  which  are  proximately  filled  by  it,  appellations 
to  it.  For  this  I  think  Socrates  indicating  asserts  in  all  that  he  says 
about  the  good,  that  it  is  beyond  knowledge  and  things  that  are  known, 
and  likewise  beyond  essence  and  being,  according  to  its  analogy  to  the 
,un.  And  after  a  certain  admirable  manner  be  presents  us  with  an  epi- 
tome of  the  negations  of  the  one  in  the  Parmeaides.  For  the  assertion 
that  the  good  is  neither  truth,  nor  essence,  nor  intellect,  nor  science,  at  one 
and  the  same  time  separates  it  from  the  supereaseotial  unities,  and  every 
s  of  the  Gods,  and  from  the  intellectual  and  intelligible  orders,  and 
from  every  psychical  subsistence.  But  these  axe  the  first  things,  and 
through  the  first  hypothesis  of  the  Parmenides,  these  are  taken  away  from 
the  principle  of  the  whole  of  things. 

Moreover,  neither  when  he  celebrates  the  good  the  leader  of  the  divine 
orders  as  the  most  splendid  of  being,  does  he  denominate  it  most  splendid 
as  participating  of  light.    For  the  first  light  proceeds  from  it  to  intelligi- 
bles  and  intellect,  but  he  gives  it  this  appellation  as  the  cause  of  the  light 
which  is  every  where  diffused,  and  as  the  fountain  of  every  intelligible,  or 
intellectual,  or  mundane  deity.    For  this  light  is  nothing  else  than  the 
narticipation  of  a  divine  hyparxis.    For  as  all  things  become  boniform 
through  participating  of  the  good,  and  are  filled  with  the  illuminat.on  pro. 
ceeding  from  thence,  thus  also  the  natures  which  are  pnmanly  beings  are 
deiform  •  and  as  it  is  said,  intelligible  and  intellectual  essences  become 
divine  through  the  participation. of  deity.    Looking  therefore  to  all  that 
has  been  said,  we  shall  preserve  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the  good 
with  reference  to  all  beings  and  the  divine  orders    Bu  aga.n  ,n  each 
order  of  beings,  we  must  grant  that  there  is  a  monad  analogous  to  it,  not 
onlv  in  sensibles,  as  Plato  says  the  sun  is,  but  likewise  in  supermundane 
natures  and  in  the  genera  of  Gods  arranged  from  the  good  prior  to  these. 
For  it  is  evident  that  the  natures  which  are  nearer  to  the  first  cause  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  VII. 


OF  PLATO. 


which  participate  of  it  in  a  greater  degree,  possess  a  greater  similitude  to  it. 
And  as  that  is  the  cause  of  all  beings,  so  these  establish  monads  which  are 
the  leaders  of  more  partial  orders.  And  Plato  indeed  arranges  the  multi- 
tudes under  the  monads  ;  but  extends  all  the  monads  to  the  exempt  prin- 
ciple of  the  whole  of  things,  and  establishes  them  uniformly  about  it.  It 
is  necessary  therefore  that  the  theological  science  should  be  unfolded  con- 
formably to  the  divine  orders,  and  that  our  conceptions  about  it  should 
be  transcendent,  and  unmingled  and  unconnected  with  other  things.  And 
we  should  survey  indeed  all  secondary  natures,  subsisting  according  to 
and  perfected  about  it ;  but  we  should  establish  it  as  transcending  all  the 
monads  in  beings,  according  to  one  excess  of  simplicity,  and  as  unitfclly 
arranged  prior  to  the  whole  orders  [of  Gods.]  Pot  as  the  Gods  themselves 
enact  the  order  Which  is  in  them,  thus  also  it  is  necessary  that  the  truth 
concerning  them,  the  precedancoUs  causes  of  beings,  and  the  second  artd 
third  progeny  of  these  should  be  definitely  distinguished. 

This,  therefore,  is  the  one  truth  concerning  the  first  principle,  and  which 
possesses  one  reason  remarkably  conformable  to  the  Platonic  hypothesis, 
viz.  that  this  principle  subsists  prior  to  the  whole  orders  in  the  Gods,  that 
it  gives  subsistence  to  the  boniform  essence  of  the  Gods,  that  it  is  the 
fountain  of  superessential  goodness,  and  that  all  things  posterior  to  it  being 
extended  towards  it,  are  filled  with  good,  after  an  ineffable  manner  are 
united  to  it,  and  subsist  uniformly  about  it.  For  its  unical  nature  is  not 
Uftprolific,  but  it  is  by  so  much  the  more  generative  of  other  things,  as  it 
pre-eftablishes  a  union  exempt  from  the  things  which  have  a  subsistence- 
Nor  does  its  fecundity  tend  to  multitude  and  division  ;  but  it  abides  with 
undented  purity  concealed  in  inaccessible  places.  For  in  the  natures  also 
which  are  posterior  to  it,  we  every  where  see  that  what  is  perfect  desires 
to  generate,  and  that  what  is  full  hastens  to  impart  to  other  things  its 
plenitude.  In  a  much  greater  degree  therefore  it  is  necessary  that  the 
nature  which  contains  in  one  all  perfections,  and  which  is  not  a  certain 
good,  but  good  itself,  and  super-full,  (if  it  be  lawful  so  to  speak)  should 
be  generative  of  the  Whole  of  things,  and  give  subsistence  to  them  ;  pro- 
ducing all  things  by  being  exempt  from  all  things,  and  by  beitig  imparti- 
cipable,  similarly  generating  the  first  and  the  last  of  beings. 


Digitized  by  Google 


128  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  ,11. 

You  must  not,  however,  suppose  that  tlus  generation  and  progression 
is  emitted  in  consequence  of  the  good  either  being  moved,  or  multiplied, 
or  possessing  a  generative  power,  or  energizing;  since  all  these  are  secon- 
dary to  the  singleness  of  the  first.  For  whether  the  good  is  moved,  it  will 
not  be  the  good;  since  the  good  itself,  and  which  is  nothing  else,  if  it  were 
moved  would  depart  from  goodness.  How,  therefore,  can  that  which  is 
the  source  of  goodness  to  beings,  produce  other  things  when  deprived  of 
good  ?  Or  whether  the  good  is  multiplied  through  imbecility,  there  will 
be  a  progression  of  the  whole  of  things  through  a  diminution,  but  not 
through  an  abundance  of  goodness.  For  that  which  in  generating  departs 
from  its  proper  transcendency,  hastens  to  adorn  inferior  natures,  not 
through  prolific  perfection,  but  through  a  diminution  and  want  of  its  own 
power.  But  if  the  good  produces  all  things  by  employing  power,  there 
will  be  a  diminution  of  goodness  about  it.  For  it  will  be  two  things  and 
not  one,  viz.  it  will  be  good  and  power.  And  if  indeed  it  is  in  want  of 
power,  that  which  is  primarily  good  will  be  indigent.  But  if  to  be  the 
good  ittelf  is  sufficient  to  the  perfection  of  the  things  produced,  and  to 
the  plenitude  of  all  things,  why  do  we  assume  power  as  an  addition?  For 
additions  in  the  Gods  are  ablations  of  transcendent  unions.  Let  the  good 
therefore  alone  be  prior  to  power,  and  prior  to  energy.  For  all  energy  is 
the  progeny  of  power.  Neither,  therefore,  does  the  good  energizing  give 
subsistence  to  all  things  through  energy,  nor  being  in  want  of  power  docs 
it  fill  all  thiugs  with  powers,  nor  being  multiplied  do  all  things  participate 
of  good,  nor  being  moved  do  all  beings'  enjoy  the  first  principle.  For 
the  good  precedes  all  powers,  and  all  energies,  and  every  multitude  and 
motion  ;  since  each  of  these  is  referred  to  the  good  as  to  its  end.  The  good 
therefore  is  the  most  final  of  all  ends,  and  the  centre  of  all  desirable  na- 
tures. All  desirable  natures,  indeed,  impart  an  end  to  secondary  beings ; 
but  that  which  pre-subsisls  uncircumscribed  by  all  things  is  the  first 
good. 

'  For  tmtix  rufevr*,  I  read  wmrrm  t«  sit*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CUAP.  VIII.  OF  PLATO. 


129 


CHAPTER  V11L 

After  these  things,  however,  let  us  direct  our  attention  to  the  concep- 
tions about  the  first  principle  in  the  epistle  [of  Plato]  to  Dionysius,  and 
survey  the  manner  in  which  he  considers  its  ineffable  and  immense  tran- 
scendency. But  perhaps  some  one  may  be  indignant  with  us  for  rashly 
drawing  to  our  own  hypotheses  the  assertions  of  Plato,  and  may  say  that 
the  three  kings  of  which  he  speaks  are  all  of  them  intellectual  Gods ;  but 
that  Plato  docs  not  think  fit  to  co-arrange  or  connumerate  the  good  with 
secondary  natures.  For  such  a  connumeration  ought  not  to  be  considered 
as  adapted  to  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the  good  with  respect  to  other 
things,  nor  in  short,  must  it  be  said  that  the  good  contributes  as  the  first 
with  reference  to  another  second  or  third  cause  to  the  completion  of  a 
triad  in  conjunction  with  other  natures ;  but  that  it  in  a  greater  degree 
precedes  every  triad  and  every  number,  than  the  intelligible  precede  the 
intellectual  Gods.  How,  therefore,  can  we  connumerate  with  other  kings 
the  good  which  is  at  once  exempt  from  all  the  divine  numbers,  and  co- 
arrange  one  as  the  first  [king,]  another  as  the  second,  and  another  as  the 
third  ?  Some  one  may  also  adduce  many  other  things,  indicating  the 
transcendency  of  the  first  principle  with  respect  to  every  thing  divine. 
Such  a  one,  however,  in  thus  interpreting  the  words  of  Plato  will  remark- 
ably accord  with  us  who  assert  the  good  to  be  im participate,  to  transcend 
all  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  genera,  and  to  be  established  above  all 
the  divine  monads. 

That  Plato,  indeed,  admits  the  first  God  to  be  the  king  of  all  things, 
and  says  that  all  things  arc  for  his  sake,  and  that  he  is  the  cause  of  all 
beautiful  things,  does  not  I  think  require  much  proof  to  those  who  consi- 
der his  words  by  themselves  apart  from  their  own  conjectures,  by  intro- 
ducing which  they  violently  endeavour  to  accord  with  Plato.  But  that 
we  do  not  assert  these  things  connumeratiug  [the  first  God  with  secondary 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  R 


- 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


jgQ  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II, 

natures,]  Plato  himself  manifests,  neither  calling  the  first  king  the  first,, 
but  alone  the  king  of  all  things,  nor  asserting  that  some  things  are  about 
him,  as  he  says  that  second  things  are  about  that  which  is  second,  and 
third  things  about  that  which  is  third,  but*  he  says,  in  short,  that  alt 
things  are  about  him.    And  to  the  other  kings,  indeed,  he  introduces 
number  and  a  divided  kingdom ;  but  to  the  king  of  all  things  he  neither 
attributes  a  part  of  number,  nor  a  distribution  of  dominion  opposite  to- 
that  of  the  others.  Such  a  mode  of  words,  therefore,  neither  connumerates 
the  king  of  all  things  with  the  other  kings*  nor  co-arranges  him  as  the 
leader  of  a  triad  with  the  second  and  third  power.    For  of  a  triad ic  divi- 
sion the  first  monad,  indeed,  is  the  leader  of  first  orders,  and  which  are 
co-ordinate  with  itself ;  but  the  second  of  second  ;  and  the  third  of  third 
orders.   If,  however,  some  one  should  apprehend  that  the  first  monad  is- 
the  leader  of  all  things,  so  as  to  comprehend  at  once  both  second  and 
third  allotments ;  yet  the  cause  which  subsists  according  to  comprehen- 
sion is  different  from  that  which  similarly  pervades  to  all  things.   And  to 
the  king  of  all  things,  indeed,  all  things  are  subject  according  to  one  reaV 
son  and  one  order ;  but  to  the  first  of  the  triad,  things  first  are  subjected 
according  to  the  same  order ;  and  it  is  necessary  that  things  second  and 
third  should  be  subservient  according  to  their  communion  with  the  remain- 
ing kings.    Does  not,  therefore,  what  is  here  said  by  Plato  remarkably 
celebrate  the  exempt  nature  of  the  first  cause,  and  his  un-coordinatioa 
with  the  other  kingdoms  of  the  Gods  ?    Since  he  says  that  this  cause  si- 
milarly reigtis  over  all  things,  that  all  things  subsist  about  biro,  and  that 
for  his  sake  essence  and  energy  are  inherent  in  all  things. 

If  also  Socrates  in  the  Republic  clearly'  teaches  that  the  sun  reigns 
over  the  world  analogous  to  the  good,  let  no  one  dare  to  accuse  this  ana- 
logy as  connumerating  the  good  with  the  king  of  mundane  natures.  For 
unless*  together  with  the  similitude  of  secondary  causes  to  the  first 
principles,  we  think  fit  to  preserve  that  exempt  dominion  [of  the  first 


1  For  x<u  here,  it  it  necessary  to  read  aXXmi 

*  For  <ro$at{,  it  is  necessary  to  read 

*  In  the  original  ^  is  wanting  after  »u. 


Digitized  by  Google 


chap.  vm. 


OF  PLATO. 


131 


cause]  it  will  be  impossible  for  us  to  evince  that  the  super-mundane  kings 
have  their  allotment  analogous  to  the  first  cause,  who  subsists  prior  to  the 
whole  of  things  according  to  one  transcendency.  But  what  occasion  is 
there  to  be  prolix  ?  For  Plato  indeed  calls  the  first  God  king;  but  he 
does  not  think  fit  to  give  the  others  the  same  appellation,  not  only  in  the 
beginning  of  what  he  says  about  the  first,  but  shortly  after,  he  adds : 
"  About  the  king  himself  and  the  natures  of  which  I  have  spoken  there 
is  nothing  of  this  kind."  The  first  God,  therefore,  alone  is  called  king. 
But  he  is  called  not  only  the  king  of  things  first,  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  second  of  things  second,  and  the  third  of  things  third,  but  as  the 
cause  at  once  of  all  being  and  all  beauty.  Hence  the  first  God  precedes 
the  other  causes  in  an  exempt  and  uniform  manner,  and  according  to  a 
transcendency  of  the  whole  of  things,  and  is  neither  celebrated  by  Plato 
as  co-ordinated  with  them,  nor  as  the  leader  of  a  triad. 

That  these  things,  however,  are  asserted  by  Plato  about  the  first  God 
we  shall  learn  by  recurring  a  little  to  the  preceding  words,  which  are  as 
follow :  "  You  say,  that  I  have  not  sufficiently  demonstrated  to  you  the 
particulars  respecting  the  first  nature.  I  must  speak  to  you,  therefore,  in 
enigmas,  that  in  case  the  letter  should  be  intercepted,  either  by  .land  or 
sea,  he  who  reads  it  may  not  understand  this  part  of  its  contents.  All 
things  are  situated  about  the  king  of  all ;  and  all  things  are  for  his  sake ; 
and  he  is  the  cause  of  every  thing  beautiful."  In  these  words,  therefore, 
Plato  proposing  to  purify  our  conceptions  about  the  first  principle  through 
enigmas,  celebrates  the  king  of  all  tilings,  and  refers  to  him  the  cause  of 
the  whole  of  things  beautiful  and  good.  Who,  therefore,  is  the  king  of 
all  things,  except  the  unical  God  who  is  exempt  from  all  things,  who  pro- 
duces all  things  from  himself,  and  is  the  leader  of  all  orders  according  to 
one  cause  ?  Who  is  he  that  converts  all  ends  to  himself,  and  establishes 
them  about  himself?  For  if  you  call  him,  for  whose  sake  all  things  sub- 
sist, the  end  of  all  ends,  and  the  primogenial  cause,  you  will  not  deviate 
from  the  truth  concerning  him.  Who  is  he  that  is  the  cause  of  all  beauti- 
ful things,  shining  upon  them  with  divine  light,  and  who  encloses  that 
which  is  deformed  and  without  measure,  and  the  most  obscure  of  all 
things  in  the  extremity  of  the  universe? 


Digitized  by  Google 


132 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  It, 


If  you  are  willing  also  from  the  words  of  Plato  that  follow  the  prece- 
ding, we  will  show  that  to  be  the  recipient  neither  of  language  nor  of 
knowledge  is  adapted  to  the  first  principle.  For  the  words  :  "  This  your 
inquiry  concerning  the  cause  of  all  beautiful  things  is  as  of  a  nature  en- 
due I  with  a  certain  quality,"  are  to  be  referred  to  this  principle.  For 
it  is  not  possible  to  apprehend  it  intellectually,  because  it  is  unknown,  nor 
to  unfold  it,  because  it  is  uncircumscribed ;  but  whatever  you  may  say 
of  it,  you  will  speak  as  of  a  certain  thing ;  and  you  will  speak  indeed 
about  it,  but  you  will  not  speak  it.  For  speaking  of  the  things  of  which  it  is 
the  cause,  we  are  unable  to  say,  or  to  apprehend  through  intelligence  what 
it  is.  Here  therefore,  the  addition  of  quality,  and  the  busy  energy  of  the 
soul,  remove  it  from  the  goodness  which  is  exempt  from  all  things,  by  the 
redundancy  of  its  conceptions  about  it.  This  likewise  draws  the  soul 
down  to  kindred,  connate,  and  multiform  intelligiblcs,  and  prevents  her 
from  receiving  that  which  is  characterized  by  unity,  and  is  occult  in  the 
participation  of  the  good.  And  it  is  not  only  proper  that  the  human  soul 
should  be  purified  from  things  co-ordinate  with  itself  in  the  union  and 
communion  with  that  which  is  first,  and  that  for  this  purpose  it  should 
leave  all  the  multitude  of  itself  behind,  and  exciting  its  own  hyparxia, 
approach  with  closed  eyes,  as  it  is  said,  to  the  king  of  all  things,  and  par- 
ticipate of  his  light,  as  much  as  this  is  lawful  for  it  to  accomplish  ;  but 
intellect  also,  which  is  prior  to  us,  and  all  divine  natures,  by  their  highest 
unions,  superessential  torches,  and  first  hyparxes  are  united  to  that  which 
is  first,  and  always  participate  of  its  exuberant  fulness  ;  and  this  not  so 
far  as  they  are  that  which  they  are,  but  so  far  as  they  are  exempt  from 
things  allied  to  themselves,  and  converge  to  the  one  principle  of  all.  For 
the  cause  of  all  disseminated  in  all  things  impressions  of  his  own  all-per- 
fect transcendency,  and  through  these  establishes  all  things  about  himself, 
and  being  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things,  is  ineffably  present  to  all 
things.  Every  thing  therefore,  entering  into  the  ineffable  of  its  own  nature, 
finds  there  the  symbol  of  the  father  of  all.  All  tilings  too  naturally  vene- 
rate him,  and  are  united  to  him,  through  an  appropriate  mystic  impres- 
sion, divesting  themselves  of  their  own  nature,  and  hastening  to  become 
his  impression  alone,  and  to  participate  him  alone,  through  the  desire  of 


CHAP.  IX. 


OF  PLATO. 


133 


his  unknown  nature,  and  of  the  fountain  of  good.  Hence,  when  they 
have  run  upwards  as  far  as  to  this  cause,  tlicy  become  tranquil,  and  are 
liberated  from  the  parturitions  and  the  desire  which  all  things  naturally 
possess  of  goodness  unknown,  ineffable,  imparticipable,  and  transcen- 
dent] v  full.  But  that  what  is  here  said  is  concerning  the  first  God,  and 
that  Plato  in  these  conceptions  leaves  him  uncoordinated  with  and  exempt 
from  the  other  causes,  has  been,  I  think,  sufficiently  evinced. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Let  us  in  the  next  place  consider  each  of  the  dogmas,  and  adapt  them 
to  our  conceptions  concerning  cause,  that  from  these  we  may  comprehend 
by  a  reasoning  process,  the  scope  of  the  whole  of  Plato's  theology.  Let 
then  one  truth  concerning  the  first  principle  be  especially  that  which 
celebrates  his  ineffable,  simple,  and  all-transcending  nature ;  which  esta- 
blishes all  things  about  him,  but  does  not  assert  that  he  generates  or  pro* 
duces  any  thing,  or  that  he  presubsists  as  the  end  of  things  posterior  to 
himself.  For  such  a  form  of  words  neither  adds  any  thing  to  the  unknown, 
who  is  exempt  from  all  things,  nor  multiplies  him  who  is  established  above 
all  union,  nor  refers  the  habitude  and  communion  of  things  secondary  to 
him  who  is  perfectly  imparticipable.  Nor  in  short,  does  it  announce  that 
it  teaches  any  thing  about  him,  or  concerning  his  nature,  but  about  the 
second  and  third  natures  which  subsist  after  him. 

Such  then  being  this  indication  of  the  first  God,  and  such  the  manner 
in  which  it  venerates  the  ineffable,  the  second  to  this  is  that  which  con- 
verts all  the  desires  of  things  to  him,  and  celebrates  him  as  the  object  of 
desire  to  and  common  end  of  all  things,  according  to  one  cause  which 
precedes  all  other  causes.  For  the  last  of  things  subsists  only  for  the 
sake  of  something  else,  but  the  first  is  that  only  for  the  sake  of  which  all 
other  things  subsist :  and  all  the  intermediate  natures  participate  of  these 


t 

Digitized  by  Google 


134 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  U. 


two  peculiarities.  Hence  they  genuinely  adhere  to  the  natures  which 
surpass  them,  as  objects  of  desire,  but  impart  the  perfection  of  desires  to 
subordinate  beings. 

The  third  speculation  of  the  principle  of  things  is  far  inferior  to  tlie 
preceding,  considering  him  as  giving  subsistence  to  all  beautiful  things. 
For  to  celebrate  him  as  the  supplier  of  good,  and  as  end  preceding  tlie 
two  orders  of  things,  *  not  very  remote  from  the  narration  which  says, 
that  all  causes  are  posterior  to  him,  and  derive  their  subsistence  from  him, 
as  well  those  which  ace  paternal,  and  the  sources  of  good,  as  those  that 
are  the  suppliers  of  prolific  powers.    But  to  ascribe  to  him  a  producing 
and  generative  cause,  is  still  more  remote  from  the  all-perfect  union  of  the 
first.    For  as  it  cannot  be  known  or  discussed  by  language,  by  secondary 
natures,  it  must  not  he  said  that  it  is  the  cause,  or  that  it  is  generative  of 
beings,  but  we  should  celebrate  in  silence  this  ineffable  nature,  and  this 
perfectly  causeless  cause  which  is  prior  to  all  causes.    If,  however,  as  we 
endeavour  to  ascribe  to  him  the  good  and  the  one,  we  in  like  manner  at- 
tribute to  him  cause,  and  that  which  is  fin*l  or  paternal,  we  must  pardon 
the  parturition  of  the  soul  about  this  ineffable  principle,  aspirin?  to  per- 
ceive hkn  with  the  •eye  of  intellect,  and  to  speak  about  him  ;  but,  at  the 
same  time,  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the  one  which  is  immense,  must  be 
considered  as  surpassing  an  indication  of  this  kind.    From  these  things 
therefore,  we  may  receive  the  sacred  conceptions  of  Plato,  and  an  order* 
adapted  to  things  themselves.    And  we  may  say  that  the  first  part  of  this 
sentence  sufficiently  indicates  the  simplicity,*  transcendency,  ami  in  short 
the  uncoordination  with  all  things  of  the  king  of  alL    For  the  assertion 
that  all  things  -subsist  about  him,  unfolds  the  hyparxis  of  things  second, 
but  leaves  that  which  is  beyond  all  things  without  any  connexion  with 
things  posterior  to  it    But  the  second  part  celebrates  the  cause  of  all 
the  Gods*  as  prearranged  in  the  order  of  end.    For  that  which  is  the 
highest  of  aU  causes,  is  immediately  conjoined  with  that  which  is  prior  to 
cause;  but  of  this  kind  is  the  final  cause,  and  that  for  the  sake  of  which 

•  For  *fa$ iv,  k  is  necessary  to  read  t«£ w. 
'  For  t>)(  aiXffTi^r»{  I  read  T^t  ««Xvn]ra. 
3  For  tw  liov,  it  is  necessary  to  read  tmf  9»«r. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IX. 


OF  PLATO. 


all  things  subsist  This  part  therefore  is  posterior  to  the  otW,  and  is 
woven  together  with  the  order  of  things,  and  the  progression  of  the  Pla- 
tonic doctrine. 

Again,  the  third  part  asserts  him  to  be  productive  of  all  beautiful  things, 
and  thus  adds  to  him  a  species  of  cause  1  inferior  to  the  final.  Whence 
also  Plotmus,  I  think,  does  not  hesitate  to  call  the  first  God  the  fountain 
of  the  beautiful.  It  is  necessary  therefore  to  attribute  that  which  is  best 
to  the  best  of  all  things,  that  he  may  be  the  cause  of  all,  and  in  reality 
prior  to  cause.  But  this  is  the  good.  This  too,  which  is  an  admirable 
circumstance,  may  be  seen  in  the  words  of  Plato,  that  the  first  of  these 
three  divine  dogmas,  neither  presumes  to  say  any  thing  about  the  good, 
and  this  ineffable  nature,  nor  does  it  permit  us  to  refer  any  species  of 
eause  to  it.  But  the  second  dogma  leaves  indeed  the  good  ineffable,  as  it 
Is  fit  it  should,  but  from  the  habitude  of  things- posterior  to  it,  enables  us 
to  collect  the  final  cause  :  for  it  does  not  refuse  to  call  it  that  for  the  sake 
of  which  all  things  subsist.  But  when  it  asserts  that  all  things  are  for  the 
sake  of  the  goodr  it  excites  in  us  the  conception  of  the  communion  andi 
co-ordination  of  that  which  is  the  object  of  desire  with  the  desiring  na- 
tures. And  the  third  dogma  evinces  that  the  good  is  the  cause  of  alh 
beautiful  things.  But  this  to  say  something  concerning  it,  and  to  add 
to  the  simplicity  of  the  first  cause,  and-  not  to  abide  in  the  conceptions  of 
the  end,  but  to  conjoin  with  it  the  producing  principle  of  things  second. 
And  it  appears  to  me  that  Plato  here  indicates  the  natures  which  are 
proximately  unfolded  into  light  after  the  first.  Pork  is  not  possible  to  say 
any  thing  concerning  it  except  at  one  time  being  impelled  to  this  from' 
all  things,  and  at  another  from  the  best  of  things :  for  it  is  the  cause  of 
hyparxis  to  all  things,  and  unfolds  its  own  separate  union  through  the 
peculiarities  of  these.  We  ascribe  to  it  therefore  the  one  and  the  good, 
from  the  donation  which  pervades  to  all  things  from  it.  For  of  those' 
things  of  which  all  participate,  we  say  there  is  no  other  cause  than  that 
which  is  established  prior  to  all  these.    But  the  about  which  (™  npi «,)  the 

'  For  muty  it  u  ocewwry  to  rtad  «ur»<j. 


Digitized  by  Google 


■ 


!36  ON  THE  THEOIX)GY  BOOK  II. 

on  account  of  which  (to  h,  o  *),  and  the  from  which  (n  a^'ov,)  particularly 
subsist  in  the  intelligible  Gods :  and  from  these  they  are  ascribed  to  the 
first  God.  For  whence  can  we  suppose  the  unical  Gods  derive  their  pe- 
culiarities, except  from  that  which  is  prior  to  them  ?  To  this  summit  of 
intelligibles  therefore  the  term  about  is  adapted,  because  all  the  divine 
orders  occultly  proceed  about  this  summit  which  is  arranged  prior  to  them. 
But  the  term  on  account  of  which  pertains  to  the  middle  order  of  intelli- 
gibles :  for  all  things  subsist  for  the  sake  of  eternity  and  an  hyparxis  per- 
fectly entire.  And  the  term  from  which  is  adapted  to  the  extremity  of 
intelligibles :  for  this  first  produces  all  things,  and  adorns  them  uniformly. 
These  things,  therefore,  we  shall  indeed  make  more  known  in  the  doctrine 
which  will  shortly  follow  concerning  the  intelligible  Gods. 


CHAPTER  X. 

In  the  next  place,  let  us  finish  the  discussion  concerning  the  first  God, 
with  the  theory  of  Parmcnidcs,  and  unfold  the  mystic  conceptions  of  the 
first  hypothesis  as  far  as  pertains  to  the  present  purpose.  For  we  shall 
refer  the  reader  for  the  most  perfect  interpretation  of  them  to  our  com- 
mentaries on  that  dialogue.  In  the  first  place  therefore,  it  is  requisite  to 
determine  this  concerning  the  first  hypothesis,  that  it  comprehends  as 
many  conclusions  negatively,  as  the  hypothesis  which  follows  it  does  af- 
firmatively. For  this  latter  demonstrates  all  the  orders  proceeding  from 
the  one  ;  but  the  former  evinces  that  the  one  is  exempt  from  all  the  divine 
genera.  From  both  these  hypotheses  however,  it  is  obvious  to  every  one 
how  it  is  necessary  that  the  cause  of  the  whole  of  things  should  transcend 
his  productions.    For  because  the  one  is  the  cause  of  all  the  Gods,  he 

•  For  fc-  du  it  is  necessary  to  read  If  o  i  since  the  former  denotes  the  inttrumtntal,  but  the  latter 
HbgJhuU  cause. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  X. 


OF  PLATO. 


137 


transcends  all  things.  And  because  he  is  exempt  from  them  through 
transcendency,  on  this  account  he  gives  to  all  things  their  hypostases. 
For  through  being  expanded  aboveaall  things  he  causes  all  things  to  subsist. 
Since  in  the  second  and  third  orders  also  of  beings,  causes  which  are  en- 
tirely exempt  from  their  effects,  more  perfectly  generate  and  connect  their 
progeny  than  those  causes  do  which  are  coordinate  with  their  effects.  And 
the  one  by  ineffably  producing  all  the  divine  orders,  appears  to  be  unically 
established  above  all.  For  in  the  productions  posterior  to  it,  cause  is  every 
where  different  from  the  things  caused.  And  on  this  account  nature 
indeed  being  incorporeal,  is  a  cause  which  transcends  bodies ;  but  soul 
being  perfectly  perpetual,  is  the  cause  of  things  generated ;  and  intellect 
being  immoveable  is  the  cause  of  every  thing  that  is  moved.  If,  there- 
fore, according  to  each  progression  of  beings  effects  are  denied  of  their 
causes,  it  is  certainly  necessary  to  take  away  all  things  similarly  from  the 
cause  of  all. 

In  the  second  place,  I  think  it  is  necessary  that  the  order  of  the  nega» 
tions  should  be  defined  by  those  who  receive  theology  according  to  the 
intention  of  Parmenides  ;  and  that  it  should  be  admitted  that  they  pro- 
ceed indeed  from  the  monads  which  subsist  primarily  in  the  divine  genera, 
and  that  Parmenides  takes  away  from  the  one  all  second  and  third  natures, 
according  to  an  order  adapted  to  each.  For  that  which  transcends  more 
principal  causes  must  in  a  much  greater  degree  subsist  prior  to  those  that 
are  subordinate.  Parmenides,  however,  does  not  begin  his  negations  from 
the  Gods  that  are  united  to  the  first:  for  this  genus  is  with  difficulty  dis- 
tinguished from  the  one  :  because  being  arranged  naturally  [immediately] 
after  it,  it  is  most  unical  and  occult,  and  transcendency  similar  to  its  pro* 
ducing  cause.  Parmenides  therefore  beginning  where  prior  to  all  other 
things  division  and  multitude  are  apparent,  and  proceeding  regularly 
through  all  the  second  orders  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  again  returns 
to  the  beginning,  and  shows  how  the  one  differs  from  the  Gods  that  are 
most  similar  to  it,  and  which  primarily  participate  of  it,  according  to  one 
ineffable  cause. 

In  the  third  place,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  said,  I  determine  con- 
cerning the  mode  of  negations,  that  they  are  not  privative  of  their  sub- 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  S 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  II. 


jects,  but  generative  of  things  which  are  as  it  were  their  opposites.  For 
because  the  first  principle  is  not  many,  the  many  proceed  from  it,  and  be- 
cause it  is  not  a  whole,  wholeness  proceeds  from  it,  and  in  a  similar  man- 
ner in  other  things.    And  in  thus  determining,  I  speak  conformably  to 
Plato,  who  thinks  it  proper  to  abide  in  negations,  and  to  add  nothing  to 
the  one.    For  whatever  you  add,  you  diminish  the  one,  and  afterwards 
evince  that  it  is  not  the  one,  but  that  which  is  passive  to  [or  participates] 
the  one.  For  it  is  thus  not  one  only,  but  in  addition  to  this  possesses  some- 
thing else  also  by  participation.    This  mode  therefore  of  negations  is 
exempt,  unical,  primary,  and  is  a  departure  from  the  whole  of  things,  in  an 
unknown  and  ineffable  transcendency  of  simplicity.    It  is  likewise  neces- 
sary, having  attributed  such  a  mode  as  this  to  the  first  God,  again  to 
exempt  him  from  the  negations  also.    For  neither  does  any  discourse,  nor 
any  name  belong  to  the  one,  says  Parmenides.  But  if  no  discourse  belongs 
to  it,  it  is  evident  that  neither  does  negation  pertain  to  it.    For  all  things 
are  secondary  to  the  one,  things  knowable  and  knowledge,  and  the  in- 
struments of  knowledge,  and  after  a  manner  that  which  is  impossible 
presents  itself  at  the  end  of  the  hypothesis.    For  if  nothing  whatever  can 
be  said  of  the  one,  neither  is  this  discussion  itself  adapted  to  the  one.  Nor 
is  it  at  all  wonderful  that  the  discourse  of  those  who  wish  to  know  the 
ineffable  by  words  should  terminate  in  that  which  is  impossible ;  since  all 
knowledge  when  conjoined  with  an  object  of  knowledge  which  does  not 
at  all  pertain  to  it  loses  its  power.    For  sense,  if  we  should  say  that  it  per- 
tained to  that  which  is  the  object  of  science  would  subvert  itself ;  and 
this  would  be  the  case  with  science  and  every  kind  of  knowledge  if  we 
should  say  that  they  belonged  to  that  which  is  intelligible ;  so  that  lan- 
guage when  conversant  with  that  which  is  ineffable,  being  subverted  about 
itself,  has  no  cessation,  and  opposes  itself. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  PLATO. 


139 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Let  us  now  therefore,  if  ever,  abandon  multiform  knowledge,  exter- 
minate from  ourselves  all  the  variety  of  life,  and  in  perfect  quiet  approach 
near  to  the  cause  of  all  things.  For  this  purpose,  let  not  only  opinion 
and  phantasy  be  at  rest,  nor  the  passions  alone  which  impede  our  anago- 
gic  impulse  to  the  first,  be  at  peace ;  but  let  the  air  be  still,  and  the  uni- 
verse itself  be  still.  And  let  all  things  extend  us  with  a  tranquil  power  to 
communion  with  the  ineffable.  Let  us  also,  standing  there,  having  trans- 
cended the  intelligible  (if  we  contain  any  thing  of  this  kind,)  and  with 
nearly  closed  eyes  adoring  as  it  were  the  rising  sun,  since  it  is  not  lawful 
for  any  being  whatever  intently  to  behold  him — let  us  survey  the  sun 
whence  the  light  of  the  intelligible  Gods  proceeds,  emerging,  as  the  poets 
say,  from  the  bosom  of  the  ocean;  and  again  from  this  divine  tranquillity 
descending  into  intellect,  and  from  intellect,  employing  the  reasonings  of 
the  soul,  let  us  relate  to  ourselves  what  the  natures  are  from  which,  in  this 
progression,  we  shall  consider  the  first  God  as  exempt.  And  let  us  as  it 
were  celebrate  him,  not  as  establishing  the  earth  and  the  heavens,  nor  as 
giving  subsistence  to  souls,  and  the  generations  of  all  animals  ;  for  he 
produced  these  indeed,  but  among  the  last  of  things ;  but,  prior  to  these, 
let  us  celebrate  him  as  unfolding  into  light  the  whole  intelligible  and  intel- 
lectual genus  of  Gods,  together  with  all  the  supermundane  and  mundane 
divinities — as  the  God  of  all  Gods,  the  unity  of  all  unities,  and  beyond 
the  first  adyta,1 — as  more  ineffable  than  all  silence,  and  more  unknown 
than  all  essence, — as  holy  among  the  holies,  and  concealed  in  the  intelligi- 
ble Gods.  And  again  after  these  things  descending  into  a  reasoning  pro- 
cess from  an  intellectual  hymn,  and  employing  the  irreprehensible  science 

1  For  a&MXTon,  it  is  necessary  to  read  aXinat.  For  the  occult  and  invisible  order  of  Night  and 
Phanea  is  called  by  Orpheus  the  adytum.  So  that  by  the  Jint  adyta,  Proclus  means  the  highest 
order  of  intelligible*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


140 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  11. 


of  dialectic,  let  us,  following  the  contemplation  of  first  causes,  survey  the 
manner  in  which  the  first  God  is  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things.  And 
let  our  descent  be  as  far  as  to  this.  But  opinion  and  phantasy  and  sense, 
prevent  us  indeed  from  partaking  of  the  presence  of  the  Gods,  and  draw 
us  down  from  Olympian  goods  to  earth-born  motions,  Titannically  divide 
the  intellect  that  is  in  us,  and  divulse  us  from  an  establishment  in  wholes 
to  the  images  of  beings. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

What  therefore  will  be  the  first  conception  of  the  science  proceeding 
from  intellect,  and  unfolding  itself  into  light  ?  What  other  can  we  assert 
it  to  be  than  that  which  is  the  most  simple  and  the  most  known  of  all  the 
conceptions  contained  in  this  science  ?  What  therefore  is  this  ?  «  The  one, 
says  Parmenides,if  it  is  the  one  will  not  be  many."  For  it  is  necessary  that 
the  many  should  participate  of  the  one ;  but  the  one  does  not  participate 
of  the  one,  but  is  the  one  itself.  Neither  is  that  which  is  primarily  one  par- 
ticipate. For  it  would  not  be  purely  one  if  mingled  with  the  many,  nor 
that  which  is  one,  if  it  received  the  addition  of  that  which  is  subordinate. 
The  one  therefore  is  exempt  from  the  many.  The  many  however  subsist  pri- 
marily in  the  summit  of  the  first  intellectual  Gods,  and  in  the  intelligible 
place  of  survey,  as  we  are  taught  in  the  second  hypothesis.  The  one,  there- 
fore, entirely  transcends  an  order  of  this  kind,  and  is  the  cause  of  it.  For 
the  not  many,  is  not  privation,  as  we  have  said,  but  the  cause  of  the  many. 
This,  therefore,  Parmenides  does  not  think  it  requisite  to  demonstrate,  but 
as  a  thing  most  manifest  to  every  one,  he  first  evinces  this,  through  the 
opposition  as  it  were  of  the  many  to  the  one.  But  employing  this  he  takes 
away  that  which  follows ;  and  he  takes  away  that  which  is  posterior  to  this 
by  employing  the  conclusions  prior  to  it,  and  this  he  always  does,  after  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XII.  OP  PLATO.  141 

same  manner.  And  at  one  time  indeed,  he  assumes  the  elements  of  the 
demonstrations  from  proximate  conclusions,  but  at  another  time  from 
those  that  are  more  remote.  For  after  this  intelligible  order  of  Gods,  as 
we  have  said,  he  gives  subsistence  to  that  order  which  connectedly  con- 
tains and  bounds  the  extent  of  them,  from  their  exempt  cause.  But  this 
order  is  called  by  him  in  the  second  hypothesis  parts  and  a  whole.  These 
therefore  he  denies  of  the  one  employing  the  many  for  the  purpose  of 
distinguishing  the  subjects  and  the  one.  For,  as  he  says,  that  which  is 
a  whole  and  has  parts  is  many  ;  but  the  one  is  beyond  the  many.  If, 
therefore,  the  one  transcends  the  intelligible  simplicity,  but  whole  and  that 
which  has  parts  proceed  from  it  in  order  to  become  the  bond  of  the  whole 
of  this  distribution,  is  it  not  necessary  that  the  one  should  neither  be  a 
whole,  nor  be  indigent  of  parts  ?  And  I  think  it  is  through  this  trans- 
cendency that  the  one  presubsists  as  the  cause  of  this  order  of  Gods,  and 
that  it  produces  this  order,  but  in  an  exempt  manner. 

In  the  third  place  after  these,  we  may  survey  the  order  which  is  allotted 
the  boundary  of  the  intellectual  and  at  the  same  time  intelligible  Gods, 
proceeding  from  Me  one,  and  may  behold  the  one  perfectly  expanded  above 
it.  For  this  order  indeed  subsists  from  the  second  genera,  and  from  the 
intellectual  wholeness  of  the  genera.  But  the  one,  as  has  been  demon- 
strated, is  exempt  according  to  cause  from  this  wholeness.  The  one  there- 
fore has  neither  beginning,  or  middle,  or  end,  nor  has  it  extremes,  nor  does 
it  participate  of  any  figure.  For  through  these  Gods,  the  before  men- 
tioned order  of  Gods  becomes  apparent.  Whether  therefore,  there  be  a 
perfective  summit,  or  what  is  celebrated  as  the  middle  centre  in  these 
Gods,  or  a  termination  converting  the  end  of  these  divinities  to  their  be- 
ginning, the  one  is  similarly  beyond  every  triple  distribution.  For  the 
one  would  have  parts,  and  would  be  many,  if  it  participated  of  things  of 
this  kind.  But  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  one  unically  subsists 
prior  to  the  many,  and  to  wholeness  together  with  its  parts,  as  the  cause 
of  them.  And  you  see  how  Parmenides  indeed  exhibits  to  us  one  nega- 
tion of  the  highest  order,  but  two  negations  of  the  middle,  and  three  of 
the  last  order.    Besides  this  also,  he  shows  that  the  one  has  no  extremity. 


Digitized  by  Google 


142 


ON  THE  THLOLOGY 


BOOK  11. 


But  the  infinite  is  a  thing  of  this  kind.  And  separately  from  this  he  like- 
wise shows  that  the  one  is  unreceptive  of  all  figures. 

Again  therefore,  after  these  triple  orders  we  must  direct  our  attention  to 
the  intellectual  Gods  subsisting  from  these,  and  receiving  a  tripartite  di- 
vision, and  must  demonstrate  that  the  one  transcends  these  also.  For 
such  is  the  one,  says  Parmenides,  since  it  is  neither  in  itself,  nor  in  another. 
For  if  it  were  in  another,  it  would  be  on  all  sides  comprehended  by  that 
in  which  it  is,  and  would  every  where  touch  that  which  comprehends  it. 
But  in  this  case,  it  would  have  a  figure,  would  consist  of  parts,  and  on 
this  account  would  be  many  and  not  one.  And  if  it  were  in  itself  * it 
would  entirely  comprehend  itself  in  itself.  But  comprehending  and  at 
the  same  time  being  comprehended,  it  will  be  two,  and  will  be  no  longer 
primarily  one.  The  discourse  therefore  proceeds  to  the  same  conclusion, 
and  evinces  that  the  one  will  not  be  one,  by  the  summit  of  the  intellectual 
order,  if  any  one  endeavours  to  mingle  it  with  other  things.  Hence  the  one 
being  perfectly  exempt  from  this  summit  also,  gives  subsistence  to  it,  this 
summit  at  one  and  the  same  time  participating  of  the  third  of  the  Gods 
placed  above  it,  but  being  produced  from  the  second  of  these  Gods,  and 
being  perfected  from  the  first,  and  entirely  established  in  it. 

Moreover,  the  one  likewise  generates  the  second  intellectual  order,  being 
unmingled  with  it.  For  the  one  neither  stands  still,  nor  is  moved.  It 
participates  therefore  of  neither  of  these ;  but  being  similarly  exempt 
from  both,  it  at  the  same  time  transcends  the  middle  orders  of  the  intel- 
lectual progression  of  the  Gods.  For  if  it  were  moved,  it  would  be 
moved  in  a  twofold  respect,  viz.  either  according  to  a  change  in  quality, 
or  local  motion.  But  it  is  not  possible  that  the  one  can  be  changed  in 
quality ;  for  being  thus  changed  it  will  be  not  one,  and  will  fall  off  from 
a  unical  hyparxis.  Nor  can  it  be  locally  moved.  For  it  is  impossible 
that  it  should  be  moved  in  a  circle,  because  it  would  have  parts,  viz.  middle 
and  extremes.  And  if  it  changed  one  place  for  another  it  would  be  par- 
tible. For  it  would  be  necessary  that  it  should  neither  be  wholly  in  that 
place  to  which  it  is  moved,  nor  in  that  whence  it  begins  to  be  moved. 
For  if  it  were  wholly  in  either  of  them,  it  would  be  immoveable,  in  con- 
sequence of  partly  not  yet  being  moved,  and  partly  having  now  ceased 


CHAP.  XII.  OP  PLATO.  143 

its  motion.  But  if  the  one  stands  still,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  it 
should  abide  in  the  same  thing.  But  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the 
one  is  no  where.  Hence  it  is  neither  in  itself,  nor  in  another  thing.  In 
no  respect  therefore  is  the  one  moved,  or  does  it  stand  still,  which  things 
[viz.  motion  and  permanency]  particularly  belong  to  the  middle  order  of 
intellectuals,  as  will  be  evident  from  the  second  hypothesis.  For  the  first 
God  produces  this  order  also,  being  exempt  from  it. 

In  the  third  place,  we  may  survey  through  what  next  follows,  the  last 
order  of  intellectuals,  proceeding  from  the  one,  and  subordinate  to  it.  For 
in,this  order  sameness  and  difference  subsist  unitedly.  But  at  the  same 
time  the  one  subsists  prior  to  both  these.  For  different  is  said  to  be  dif- 
ferent both  from  itself  and  from  other  things.  And  in  a  similar  manner 
same  is  the  same  with  itself,  and  with  other  things.  But  the  one  is  not 
indeed  different  from  itself,  because  that  which  is  different  from  the  one 
will  be  not  one.  And  it  is  not  the  same  with  other  things,  lest  becoming 
the  same  with  them,  it  should  latently  pass  into  their  nature.  Moreover, 
neither  is  the  one  different  from  other  things.  For  it  would  be  at  the  same 
time  one,  and  would  have  as  an  addition  the  power  of  difference.  For 
so  far  as  it  is  different  it  will  not  be  one;  since  difference  is  not  the  one. 
Hence  being  one  and  different,  it  will  be  many  and  not  the  one.  Nor 
is  the  one  the  same  with  itself.  For  if  the  one  and  the  same  differ  only  in 
name,  the  many  will  not  be  in  consequence  of  participating  of  sameness 
with  each  other.  For  it  is  impossible  that  the  many  should  become  one 
by  participating  of  the  many.  But  if  the  one  and  sameness  are  essentially 
different,  that  which  is  primarily  one  does  not  participate  of  sameness, 
lest  by  receiving  sameness  in  addition  to  the  one,  it  should  become  a  pas- 
sive one,  and  not  that  which  is  primarily  one.  If  however  the  extremity 
of  intellectuals  is  characterized  by  this  tetrad,  it  is  evident  that  the  one  exist- 
ing beyond  this  also  supernally  unfolds  it  into  light,  and  places  over  the 
wholes  of  the  universe  a  tetradic  monad,  the  source  of  ornament  to  all 
secondary  natures.  For  from  hence  other  things  primarily  receive  a  com- 
munication with  the  one  which  are  also  indeed  produced  and  connectedly 
contained  by  the  one. 

But  after  the  intellectual  Gods,  the  ineffable  transcendency  of  the  one 


Digitized  by  Google 


144 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  If. 


arranges  the  extent  of  the  supermundane  divinities,  the  one  in  the  mean 
time,  being  occultly  exempt  from  its  supermundane  progeny.  And  this 
extent  indeed  proximately  subsists  from  the  intellectual  Gods,  but  uni- 
formly receives  its  hyparxis  from  the  first  God.  This,  therefore,  Parmen- 
ides  produces  through  similitude  and  dissimilitude,  from  the  deity  which 
encloses  the  boundary  of  the  intellectual  monads.  For  the  similar  is  that 
which  is  passive  to  sameness,  in  [the  same  manner  as  dissimilitude  is 
that  which  is  passive  to  difference.  Parmenides  therefore  demonstrates 
that  the  one  transcends  according  to  one  simplicity  such  a  peculiarity  of 
the  Gods  also  as  this.  For  that  which  is  established  above  the  power  of 
same  and  different,  in  a  much  greater  degree  transcends  the  genera  which 
are  allotted  a  subsistence  according  to  similitude  and  dissimilitude. 

What  therefore  remains  after  this  ?  Is  it  not  evident  that  it  is  the  mul- 
titude of  the  mundane  Gods  ?  But  this  also  is  twofold,  the  one  being 
celestial,  but  the  other  sublunary.  Of  these,  therefore,  the  genus  which 
revolves  in  the  heavens,  proceeds  together  with  the  equal,  the  greater  and 
the  less.  But  in  the  sublunary  genus  the  equal  is  allotted  a  difference  in 
multitude  from  the  celestial  equality,  but  the  unequal  is  again  divided  by 
the  power  of  the  more  and  the  less.  According  to  another  genus  there* 
fore  of  the  divine  orders,  there  will  be  a  monad  and  a  duad,  but  above 
indeed,  they  are  allied  to  the  one  and  to  sameness,  and  beneath  to  multii 
tude,  and  the  intellectual  cause  of  difference.  Hence  the  one  transcends 
all  these.  For  the  equal  indeed  every  where  consists  of  the  same  parts. 
By  what  contrivance  therefore  is  it  possible  that  the  nature  which  at  one 
and  the  same  time  is  exempt  from  sameness,  and  the  difference  which  is 
associated  with  it,  should  participate  of  equality  and  inequality  ? 

Besides  all  these  divine  orders  therefore  we  must  intellectually  survey 
the  genera  of  deified  souls,  and  which  are  distributed  about  the  Gods, 
For  in  each  of  the  divine  progressions  and  in  the  progressions  also  of  souls, 
the  first  genus  presents  itself  to  the  view  connascent  with  the  Gods  ;  since 
both  in  the  heavens,  and  in  the  sublunary  region  divine  souls  receive  the 
division  of  the  Gods  into  the  world,  as  the  Athenian  Guest  in  a  certain 
place  demonstrates.  The  psychical  extent  therefore,  is  characterized  by 
time,  and  by  a  life  according  to  time,    But  the  peculiarity  of  divine  souls. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XII. 


OF  PLATO. 


145 


is  shown  by  Pannenides  to  consist  in  their  being  younger  and  at  the  same 
time  older  both  than  themselves  and  other  things.  For  revolving  always 
according  to  the  same  time,  and  conjoining  the  beginning  with  the  end,  as 
at  one  and  the  same  time  proceeding  to  the  end  of  the  whole  period  they 
become  younger,  but  as  at  the  same  time  circulating  to  the  beginning  of 
it,  they  become  older.  All  their  ages  however,  perpetually  preserve  the 
same  measures  of  time.  Again,  there  is  sameness  in  them  and  difference, 
the  former  indeed  preserving  equality,  but  the  latter  inequality,  according 
to  time.  The  one  therefore  subsists  prior  to  divine  souls,  and  generates 
these  also  together  with  the  Gods.  We  now  therefore  come  to  the  end  of 
the  whole  distribution  of  more  excellent  natures ;  and  the  cause  of  all 
intelligibles  at  once  unfolds  into  light  the  genera  that  follow  the  Gods, 
and  that  are  triply  divided  by  the  three  parts  of  time.  But  this  cause  is 
demonstrated  by  the  intellectual  projections  of  Parmenides  to  be  also 
exempt  from  these.  For  that  which  is  beyond  all  time  and  the  life  which 
is  according  to  time,  can  by  no  contrivance  become  subservient  to  the 
more  partial  periods  of  time. 

That  which  is  the  first  of  all  things  therefore,  unfolds  into  light  all  the 
Gods,  divine  souls,  and  the  more  excellent  genera,  and  is  neither  compli- 
cated with  its  progeny,  nor  multiplied  about  them  ;  but  being  perfectly 
exempt  from  them  in  an  admirable  simplicity,  and  transcendency  of 
union,  it  imparts  to  all  things  indifferently  progression  and  at  the  same 
time  order  in  the  progression.  Pannenides  therefore  beginning  from  the 
intelligible  place  of  survey  of  the  first  intellectual  Gods,  proceeds  thus 
far,  according  to  the  measures  of  generation,  giving  subsistence  to  the 
genera  of  the  Gods,  and  to  the  natures  that  are  united  to  and  follow  the 
Gods,'  and  perpetually  evinces  that  the  one  is  ineffably  exempt  from  all 
things.  But  again,  from  hence  he  returns  to  the  beginning,  and  imitating 
the  conversion  of  the  whole  of  things,  separates  the  one  from  the  highest, 
viz.  from  the  intelligible  Gods.  For  thus  especially  we  may  survey  the 
transcendency  of  the  one,  and  the  immense  difference  of  its  union  from 

all  other  things,  if  we  not  only  demonstrate  that  it  is  established  above 

i 

'  For  m>  famit  is  necessary  to  read  m{ 

Proc.  Vol.  i.  T 


146  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 

the  second  or  third  progressions  in  the  divine  orders,  but  also  that  it  sub- 
sists prior  to  the  intelligible  unities  themselves,  and  this  in  a  manner  con- 
formable to  the  simplicity  of  their  occult  nature,  and  not  through  a  variety 
of  words,  but  through  intellectual  projection  alone.  For  intelligibles  are 
naturally  adapted  to  be  known  by  intellect.  This  therefore,  Parmenides 
also  evinces  in  reality,  relinquishing  logical  methods,  but  energizing  ac- 
cording to  intellect,  and  asserting  that  the  one  is  above  essence,  and  being 
characterized  by  the  one.  For  this  assertion  was  not  collected  from  the 
preceding  conclusions.  For  the  discourse  about  the  first  Gods  them- 
selves would  be  without  demonstration,  if  it  derived  its  credibility  from 
things  subordinate.  At  the  same  time  therefore,  Parmenides  contends 
that  all  knowledge,  and  all  the  instruments  of  knowledge,  fall  short  of  the 
transcendency  of  the  one,  and  beautifully  end  in  the  ineffable  of  that 
God  who  is  bevond  all  tlii lij^s.  For  after  scientific  energies,  and  intellec- 
tual  projections,  a  union  with  the  unknown  follows,  to  which  also  Par- 
menides referring  the  whole  of  his  discussion,  concludes  the  first  hypo- 
thesis, suspending  indeed  all  the  divine  genera  from  the  onef  but  evincing 
that  the  one  is  unically  exempt  from  all  things,  subsisting  without  the 
participation  of  intelligibles  and  sensible*,  and  in  an  ineffable  manner 
giving  subsistence  to  the  participated  monads.  Hence  also,  the  one  is 
said  to  be  beyond  that  one  which  is  conjoined  with  essence,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  be  beyond  every  participated  multitude  of  unities. 


Digitized  by  Google 


BOOK  III. 


CHAPTER  I. 


Such  therefore  is  the  theology  with  Plato  concerning  the  first  God,  as 
it  appears  to  me,  and  so  great  is  the  transcendency  which  it  is  allotted 
with  respect  to  all  other  discussions  of  divine  concerns ;  at  one  and  the 
same  time  venerably  preserving  the  ineffable  union  of  this  God  exempt 
from  the  whole  of  things,  uncircumscribed  by  all  gnostic  com  prehensions, 
and  apart  from  all  beings  ;  and  unfolding  the  anagogic  paths  to  him,  per- 
fecting that  parturient  desire  which  souls  always  possess  of  the  father,  and 
progenitor  of  all  things,  and  enkindling  that  torch  in  them,  by  which  they 
are  especially  conjoined  with  the  unknown  transcendency  of  the  one.  But 
after  this  imparticipable,  ineffable,  and  truly  superessential  cause,  which 
is  separated  from  all  essence,  power  and  energy,  the  discussion  of  the 
Gods  immediately  follows.    For  to  what  other  thing  prior  to  the  unities 
is  it  lawful  to  be  conjoined  with  the  one,  or  what  else  can  be  more  united 
to  the  unical  God  than  the  multitude  of  Gods  ?  Concerning  these  there- 
fore, we  shall  in  the  next  place  unfold  the  inartificial  theory  of  Plato,  in- 
voking the  Gods  themselves  to  enkindle  in  us  the  light  of  truth.    I  wish 
however  prior  to  entering  on  the  particulars  of  this  theory,  to  convince 
the  reader,  and  to  make  it  evident  to  him  through  demonstration,  that 
there  are  necessarily  as  many  orders  of  the  Gods,  as  the  Parmenides  of 
Plato  unfolds  to  us  in  the  second  hypothesis. 


digitized  by  Google 


148  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

This  therefore  is  I  think  prior  to  all  other  things  apparent  to  those  whose 
conceptions  are  not  perverted,  that  every  where,  but  especially  in  the 
divine  orders,  second  progressions,  are  completed  through  the  similitude 
of  these  to  their  proper  principles.  For  nature  and  intellect,  and  every 
generative  cause,  are  naturally  adapted  to  produce  and  conjoin  to  them- 
selves things  similar,  prior  to  such  as  as  are  dissimilar  to  themselves.  For 
if  it  is  necessary  that  the  progression  of  beings  should  be  continued,  and 
that  no  vacuum  should  intervene  either  in  incorporeal  natures,  or  in 
bodies,  it  is  necessary  that  every  thing  which  proceeds  naturally  should 
proceed  through  similitude.  For  it  is  by  no  means  lawful  that  the  thing 
caused  should  be  the  same  with  its  cause  ;  since  a  remission  and  deficiency 
of  the  union  of  the  producing  cause  generates  secondary  natures.  For 
again,  if  that  which  is  second  were  the  same  as  that  which  is  first,  each 
would  be  similarly  the  same,  and  one  would  not  be  cause,  but  the  other 
the  thing  caused.  If  however,  the  one  by  its  very  being,  or  essentially, 
lias  an  exuberance  of  productive  power,  but  the  other  falls  short  of  the 
power  that  produced  it,  these  are  naturally  separated  from  each  other,  and 
the  generative  cause  precedes  in  excellence  the  thing  generated,  and  there 
is  not  a  sameness  of  things  which  so  greatly  differ.  But  if  that  which  is 
second  is  not  the  same  with  that  which  is  first,  if  indeed  it  is  different 
only,  they  will  not  be  conjoined  to  each  other,  nor  will  the  one  participate 
of  the  other.  For  contact  and  participation,  are  indeed  a  communion  of 
things  conjoined,  and  a  sympathy  of  participants  with  the  natures  they 
participate.  But  if  it  is  at  the  same  time  the  same  with  and  different 
from  that  which  is  first,  if  indeed  the  sameness  is  indigent,  and  vanquished 
by  the  power  which  is  contrary  to  it,  the  one  will  no  longer  be  the  leader 
of  the  progression  of  beings,  nor  will  every  generative  cause  subsist  prior 
to  things  of  a  secondary  nature,  in  the  order  of  the  good.  For  the  one 
is  not  the  cause  of  division,  but  of  friendship.  And  the  good  converts 
generated  natures  to  their  causes.  But  the  conversion  and  friendship  of 
things  secondary  to  such  as  are  primary  is  through  similitude,  but  not 
through  a  dissimilar  nature.  If  therefore  the  one  is  the  cause  of  the  whole 
of  things,  and  if  the  good  is  in  an  exempt  manner  desirable  to  all  things, 
it  will  every  where  give  subsistence  to  the  progeny  of  precedaneous  causes, 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  1.  OF  PLATO.  I49 

through  similitude,  in  order  that  progression  may  be  according  to  the  one, 
and  that  the  conversion  of  things  which  have  proceeded  may  be  to  the 
good.  For  without  similitude  there  will  neither  be  the  conversion  of  things 
to  their  proper  principles,  nor  the  generation  of  efFepts.  Let  this  there- 
fore be  considered  as  a  thing  admitted  in  this  place. 

But  the  second  thing  besides  this,  and  which  is  demonstrated  through 
this,  is,  that  it  is  necessary  every  monad  should  produce  a  number  co-or- 
dinate to  itself,  nature  indeed  a  natural,  but  soul  a  psychical,  and  intellect 
an  intellectual  number.  For  if  every  thing  generative  generates  similars 
prior  to  dissimilar*,  as  has  been  before  demonstrated,  every  cause  wilt 
certainly  deliver  its  own  form  and  peculiarity  to  its  own  progeny,  and 
before  it  gives  subsistence  to  far  distant  progressions,  and  things  which 
are  separated  from  its  nature,  it  will  produce  things  essentially  near  to  it, 
and  conjoined  with  it  through  similitude.  Every  monad  therefore,  gives 
subsistence  to  a  multitude  indeed,  as  generating  that  which  is  second  to 
itself,  and  which  divides  the  powers  that  presubsist  occultly  in  itself.  For 
those  things  which  are  uniformly  and  contractedly  in  the  monad,  present 
themselves  to  the  view  separately  in  the  progeny  of  the  monad.  And  this 
indeed  the  wholeness  of  nature  manifests,  since  it  contains  in  one  the 
reasons,  [i.  e.  productive  principles]  of  all  things  both  in  the  heavens 
and  in  the  sublunary  region  ;  but  distributes  the  powers  of  itself  to  the 
natures  which  are  divided  from  it  about  bodies.  For  the  nature  of  earth, 
of  fire,  and  of  the  moon,  possesses  from  the  wholeness  of  nature  its  pecu- 
liarity and  form,  and  energizes  together  with  this  wholeness,  and  con- 
tains its  own  allottment.  This  also  the  monad  of  the  mathematical  sci- 
ences and  of  numbers  manifests.  For  this  being  all  things  primarily,  and 
spermatically  producing  in  itself  the  forms  of  numbers,  distributes  dif- 
ferent powers  to  different  externally  proceeding  numbers.  For  it  is  not 
possible  that  what  is  generated,  should  at  once  receive  all  the  abundance 
of  its  generator.  And  it  is  necessary  that  the  prolific  power  of  every 
thing  that  pre-exists  in  the  cause '  itself  should  become  apparent.  The 
monad  therefore  gives  subsistence  to  a  multitude  about  itself,  and  to 


'  For  airua  it  U  Decenary  to  read  «r<a. 


150 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


number  which  distributes  the  peculiarities  that  abide  collectively  in  itself. 
Since  however,  as  was  before  observed,  the  similar  is  always  more  allied 
to  cause  than  the  dissimilar,  there  will  be  one  multitude  of  similars  to  the 
monad,  proceeding  from  the  monad  ;  and  another  of  dissimilars.  But 
again,  the  multitude  which  is  similar  to  the  monad  is  that  in  a  divided 
manner  which  the  monad  is  indivisibly.  For  if  the  monad  possesses  a 
peculiar  power  and  hyparxis,  there  will  be  the  same  form  of  hyparxis  in 
the  multitude  together  with  a  remission  with  reference  to  the  whole. 

After  this  however,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  in  the  third  place,  that 
of  progressions,  such  as  are  nearer  to  their  cause  are  indicative  of  a  greater 
multitude  of  things,  and  are  at  the  same  time  in  a  certain  respect  equal 
to  their  containing  causes ;  but  that  such  as  are  more  remote  possess  a 
less  extended  power  of  signification  ;  and  on  account  of  the  diminution 
of  their  power,  change  and  diminish  at  the  same  time  the  amplitude  of 
production.    For  if,  of  progressions,  that  which  subsists  the  first  in  order 
is  more  similar  to  its  principle,  and  that  which  gives  subsistence  to  the 
greatest  number  is  both  with  respect  to  essence  and  power  more  similar 
to  the  generating  principle  of  all  things,  it  is  necessary  that  of  secondary 
natures,  such  as  are  nearer  to  the  monad,  and  which  receive  dominion  after 
it,  should  give  a  greater  extent  to  their  productions  ;  but  that  such  things 
as  are  more  separated  from  their  primary  monad  should  neither  pervade  in 
a  similar  manner  through  all  things,  nor  extend  their  efficacious  energies  to 
far  distant  progressions.  And  again,  as  similar  to  this,  it  is  necessary  that 
the  nature  which  gives  subsistence  to  the  greatest  number  of  effects,  should 
be  arranged  next  to  the  monad  its  principle  ;  and  that  the  nature  gene- 
rative of  a  more  numerous  progeny,  because  it  is  more  similar  to  the 
supplying  cause  of  all  things  than  that  which  is  generative  of  a  few,  must 
be  arranged  nearer  to  the  monad,  according  to  hyparxis.  For  if  it  is  more 
remote,  it  will  be  more  dissimilar  to  the  first  principle ;  but  if  it  is  more 
dissimilar,  it  will  neither  possess  a  power  comprehending  the  power  of 
similar  natures,  nor  an  energy  abundantly  prolific.    For  an  abundant 
cause  is  allied  to  the  cause  of  all.    And  universally,  that  which  is  gene- 
rative of  a  more  abundant,  is  more  naturally  allied  to  its  principle  than 
that  which  is  productive  of  a  less  numerous  progeny.  For  the  production 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  I. 


OF  PLATO. 


151 


of  fewer  effects  is  a  defect  of  power ;  but  a  defect  of  power  is  a  diminu- 
tion of  essence ;  and  a  diminution  of  essence  becomes  redundant  on  ac- 
count of  dissimilitude  to  its  cause,  and  a  departure  from  the  first  prin- 
ciple. 

Again  therefore,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  said,  we  sball  assert  this 
which  possesses  the  most  indubitable  truth,  that  prior  to  the  causes  which 
are  participated,  it  is  every  whe  re  necessary  that  imparticipable  causes 
should  have  a  prior  subsistence  in  the  whole  of  things.  For  if  it  is  neces- 
sary tbat  a  cause  should  have  the  same  relation  to  its  progeny  as  the  one 
to  all  the  nature  of  beings,  and  that  it  should  naturally  possess  this  order  - 
towards  things  secondary ;  but  the  one  is  imparticipable,  being  similarly 
exempt  from  all  beings,  as  unically  producing  all  things ;— if  this  be  the 
case,  it  is  requisite  that  every  other  cause  which  imitates  the  transcen- 
dency of  the  one  with  respect  to  all  things,  should  be  exempt  from  the 
natures  which  are  in  secondary  ranks,  and  which  are  participated  by  them. 
And  again,  as  equivalent  to  this,  it  is  requisite  that  every  imparticipable 
and  primary  cause  should  establish  monads  of  secondary  natures  similar 
to  itself,  prior  to  such  as  are  dissimilar.  I  say,  for  instance,  it  is  requisite 
that  one  soul  should  distribute  many  souls  to  different  natures ;  and  one 
intellect  participated  intellects  to  many  souls.  For  thus  the  first  exempt 
genus  will  every  where  have  an  order  analogous  to  the  one.  And  secon- 
dary natures  which  participate  kindred  causes  will  be  analogous  to  these 
causes,  and  through  the  similitude  of  these  will  he  conjoined  with  their 
imparticipable  principle.  Hence  prior  to  the  forms  which  are  in  other 
things,  those  are  established  which  subsist  in  themselves ;  exempt  causes 
prior  to  such  as  are  co-ordinate ;  and  imparticipable  monads  prior  to  such 
as  are  participable.  And  consequently  (as  that  which  is  demonstrated  at 
the  same  time  with  this)  the  exempt  causes  are  generative  of  the  co-or- 
dinate, and  imparticipable  natures  extend  participable  monads  to  their 
progeny.  And  natures  which  subsist  from  themselves  produce  the  powers 
which  are  resident  in  other  things.  These  things  therefore  being  discussed, 
let  us  consider  how  each  of  the  divine  genera  subsists  through  analogy,' 
and  survey  following  Plato  himself,  what  are  the  first  and  most  total 

'  For  ■mAotn*  it  U  neceMWy  to  mdmmXoymf. 


Digitized  by  Google 


152 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY- 


BOOK  lit. 


orders  of  the  Gods.  For  having  discovered  and  demonstrated  this,  we 
shall  perhaps  be  able  to  perceive  the  truth  concerning  these  several  orders. 

It  is  necessary  therefore,  from  the  before-mentioned  axioms,  since  there 
is  one  unity  the  principle  of  the  whole  of  things,  and  from  which  every 
hyparxis  derives  its  subsistence,  that  this  unity  should  produce  from  itself, 
prior  to  all  other  things,  a  multitude  characterized  by  unity,  and  a  num- 
ber most  allied  to  its  cause.  For  if  every  other  cause  constitutes  a  pro- 
geny similar  to  itself  prior  to  that  which  is  dissimilar,  much  more  must 
the  one  unfold  into  light  after  this  manner  tilings  posterior  to  itself,  since 
it  is  beyond  similitude,  and  Me  one  itself  must  produce  according  to  union 
things  which  primarily  proced  from  it.  For  how  can  the  one  give  subsist- 
ence to  its  progeny  except  unically  ?  For  nature  generates  things  secon- 
dary to  itself  physically,  soul  psychically,  and  intellect  intellectually. 
The  one  therefore  is  the  cause  of  the  whole  of  things  according  to  union, 
and  the  progression  from  the  one  is  uniform.  But  if  that  which  prima- 
rily produces  all  things  is  the  one,  and  the  progression  from  it  is  unical,  it 
is  certainly  necessary  that  the  multitude  thence  produced  should  be  self- 
perfect  unities,  most  allied  to  their  producing  cause.  Farther  still,  if 
every  monad  constitutes  a  number  adapted  to  itself,  as  was  before  demon- 
strated, by  a  much  greater  priority  must  the  one  generate  a  number  of 
this  kind.  For  in  the  progression  of  things,  that  which  is  produced  is 
frequently  dissimilar  to  its  producing  cause,  through  the  dominion  of  dif- 
ference :  for  such  are  the  last  of  things,  and  which  are  far  distant  from 
their  proper  principles.  But  the  first  number,  and  which  is  connascent 
with  the  one,  is  uniform,  ineffable,  superessential,  and  perfectly  similar  to 
its  cause.  For  in  the  first  causes,  neither  does  difference  intervening 
separate  from  the  generator  the  things  begotten,  and  transfer  them  into  • 
another  order,  nor  docs  the  motion  of  the  cause  effecting  a  remission  of 
power,  produce  into  dissimilitude  and  indefiniteness  the  generation  of  the 
whole  of  things  ;  but  the  cause  of  all  things  being  unically  raised  above 
all  motion  and  division,  has  established  about  itself  a  divine  number,  and 
has  united  it  toits  own  simplicity.  The  one  therefore  prior  to  beings  has 
given  subsistence  to  the  unities  of  beings. 

For  again,  according  to  another  mode  [of  considering  the  subject]  it  is. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  I.  OF  PLATO.  1.53 

necessary  that  primary  beings  should  participate  of  the  first  cause  through 
their  proximate  unities.  For  secondary  things  are  severally  conjoined  to 
the  natures  prior  to  them  through  similars ;  bodies  indeed  to  the  soul  which 
ranks  as  a  whole,  through  the  several  souls  [which  they  participate] ;  but 
souls  to  universal  intellect  through  intellectual  monads ;  and  first  beings, 
through  unical  hyparxes  to  the  one.  For  being  is  in  its  own  nature  dis- 
similar to  the  one.  For  essence  and  that  which  is  in  want  of  union  ex- 
ternally derived,  are  unadapted  to  be  conjoined  with  that  which  is  super- 
essential,  and  with  the  first  union,  and  are  far  distant  from  it.  But  the 
unities  of  beings,  since  they  derive  their  subsistence  from  the  imparticipa- 
ble  unity,  and  which  is  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things,  are  able  to  con- 
join  beings  to  the  one,  and  to  convert  them  to  themselves. 

It  appears  therefore  to  me,  that  Parmenides  demonstrating  these  tilings 
through  the  second  hypothesis,  connects  the  one  with  being,  surveys  all 
things  about  the  one,  and  evinces  that  this  proceeding  nature,  and  which 
extends  its  progressions  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  thing!  is  the  one.  For 
prior  to  true  beings  it  was  necessary  to  constitute  the  unities  ;  since  it 
neither  was  nor  is  lawful,  says  Timaeus,  for  that  which  is  the  best  of 
things  to  effect  any  thing  else  than  that  which  is  most  beautiful.  But 
this  is  in  a  remarkable  degree  most  similar  to  that  which  is  best.  To  the 
one  however,  a  unical  multitude  is  most  similar ;  since  the  demiurgus  of 
the  universe  also  being  good,  constituted  all  things  similar  to  himself 
through  goodness  itself.  Much  more  therefore,  does  the  fountain  of  all 
good  produce  goodnesses  naturally  united  to  itself,  and  establish  them 
in  beings.  IJence  there  is  one  God,  and  many  Gods,  one  unity  and  many 
unities  prior  to  beings,  and  one  goodness,  and  many  after  the  one  good- 
ness, through  which  the  demiurgic  intellect  is  good,  and  every  intellect  is 
divine,  whether  it  be  an  intellectual  or  intelligible  intellect.  And  that 
which  is  primarily  superessential  is  the  one ;  and  there  are  many  superes- 
sentials  after  the  one.  Whether  therefore,  is  this  multitude  of  unities  im- 
participable  in  the  same  manner  as  the  one  itself,  or  is  it  participated  by 
beings,  and  is  each  unity  of  beings  the  flower  as  it  were  of  a  certain 
being,  and  the  summit  and  center  of  it,  about  which  each  being 1  subsists  ? 

'  For  n  it  U  oeccisary  to  read  »y. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  U 


Digitized  by  Google 


j54  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  111. 

But  if  these  unities  also  are  imparticipable,  in  what  do  they  differ  from 
the  one  ?  For  each  of  them  is  one,  and  primarily  subsists  from  the  one. 
Or  in  what  being  more  redundant  than  the  first  cause  were  they  consti- 
tuted by  it  ?  For  it  is  every  where  necessary  that  what  is  second  being 
subordinate  to  that  which  is  prior  to  itself,  should  fall  short  of  the  union 
of  its  producing'  cause,  and  by  the  addition  of  a  certain  thing  should 
hav  e  a  diminution  of  the  monadic  simplicity  of  the  first.  What  addition 
therefore,  can  we  adduce,  or  what  redundancy  besides  the  one,  if  each  of 
these  also  is  by  itself  one?  For  if  each  of  them  is  one  and  many,  we 
shall  appear  to  transfer  to  them  the  peculiarity  of  being.  But  if  each  is 
one  only,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  one  itself,  why  does  this  rank  as  the 
cause  which  is  exempt  from  all  things,  but  eac  h  of  these  is  allotted  a 
secondary  dignity  ?  Neither  therefore  shall  we. preserve  the  transcendency 
of  the  first  with  reference  to  the  things  posterior  to  it,  nor  can  we  admit 
that  the  unities  proceeding  from  it  are  unconfuscd  either  with  respect  to 
themselves,  or  to  the  one  principle  of  them. 

But  neither  shall  we  be  persuaded  by  Parmenides  who  produces  the  one 
together  with  being,  and  demonstrates  that  there  are  as  many  parts  of  the 
one  as  there  are  of  being;  that  each  being*  also  participates  of  the  one, 
but  that  the  one  is  every  where  consubsistent  with  being ;  and  in  short, 
who  asserts  that  the  one  of  the  second  hypothesis  participates  of  beings 
and  is  participated  by  being,  the  participation  in  each  not  being  the  same. 
For  the  one  indeed  participates  of  being,  as  not  being  primarily  one,  nor 
exempt  from  being,  but  as  illuminating  truly-existing  essence.  But  being 
participates  of  the  one,  as  that  which  is  connected  by  it,  and  filled  with 
divine  union,  and  converted  to  the  one  itself  which  is  imparticipable.  For 
the  participated  monads  conjoin  beings  to  the  one  which  is  exempt  from 
the  whole  of  things,  in  the  same  manner  as  participated  intellects  conjoin 
souls  to  the  intellect  which  ranks  as  a  whole,  and  as  participated  souls 
conjoin  bodies  to  the  soul  which  ranks  as  a  whole.  For  it  is  not  possible 
that  the  dissimilar  genera  of  secondary  natures  should  be  united  without 

1  For  *a;wof  it  appears  requisite  to  read  rngxyomi. 
'■  Here  also  for  iv  it  is  necessary  to  read  o». 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  ir. 


OF  PLATO. 


155 


media  to  the  cause  which  is  exempt  from  multitude  ;  but  it  is  necessary 
that  the  contact  should  be  effected  through  similars.  For  a  similar  mul- 
titude, so  far  indeed  as  it  is  multitude,  communicates  with  the  dissimilar ; 
but  so  far  as  it  is  similar  to  the  monad  prior  to  itself,  it  is  conjoined  with 
it.  Being  established  therefore,  in  the  middle  of  both,  it  is  united  to  the 
whole,  and  to  the  one  which  is  prior  to  multitude.  But  it  contains  in 
itself  remote  progressions,  and  which  are  of  themselves  dissimilar  to  the 
one.  Through  itself  also,  it  converts  all  things  to  that  one,  and  thus  all 
things  are  extended  to  the  first  cause  of  the  whole  of  things,  dissimilars 
indeed  through  similars,'  but  similars  through  themselves.  For  similitude 
itself  by  itself  conducts  and  binds  the  many  to  the  one,  and  converts 
secondary  natures  to  the  monads  prior  to  them.  For  the  very  being  of 
similars  so  far  as  they  are  similars  is  derived  from  the  one.  Hence,  it  con- 
joins multitude  to  that  from  which  it  is  allotted  its  progression.  And  on 
this  account  similitude  is  that  which  it  is,  causing  many  things  to  be  allied, 
to  possess  sympathy  with  themselves,  and  friendship  with  each  other  and 
the  one. 


CHAPTER  II. 

If  however  it  be  requisite,  not  only  by  employing  the  intellectual  pro- 
jections of  Parmenides  to  unfold  the  multitude  of  Gods  participated  by 
beings,  but  also  concisely  to  demonstrate  the  theory  of  Socrates  about 
these  particulars,  we  must  recollect  what  is  written  in  the  Republic,  where  » 
he  says  that  the  light  proceeding  from  the  good  is  unific  of  intellect  and 
of  beings.  For  through  these  things  the  good  is  demonstrated  to  be  ex- 
empt from  being  and  essence,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sun  is  exempt 
from  visible  natures.  But  this  light  being  in  intelligibles  illuminates 
them,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  solar-form  light  which  is  iu  visible  na- 

'  For  «m>/uu»>  it  U  necessary  to  lead  tp>tm. 


Digitized  by  Google 


156 


O.N  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


tures.  For  visible  natures  no  otherwise  become  apparent,  and  known 
to  the  sight,  than  through  the  light  which  is  ingenerated  in  them.  All 
intelligibles  therefore  become  boniform  through  the  participation  of 
light,  and  through  this  light,  every  true  *  being  is  most  similar  to  the 
good.  If,  therefore,  it  makes  no  difference  to  speak  of  this  light,  or  of 
the  one  (for  this  light  conjoins  intelligibles,  and  causes  them  to  be  one, 
as  deriving  its  subsistence  from  the  one)  if  this  be  the  case,  the  deity 
proceeding  from  the  first  is  participable,  and  all  the  multitude  of  unities 
is  participable.  And  that  indeed  which  is  truly  supercssential  is  the  one. 
But  each  of  the  other  Gods,  according  to  his  proper  hyparxis,  by  which 
he  is  a  superessential  God,  is  similar  to  the  first ;  but  they  are  participated 
by  essence  and  being.  According  to  this  reasoning  therefore,  the  Gods 
appear  to  us  to  be  unities,  and  participable  unities,  binding  indeed  all 
beings  to  themselves,  but  conjoining  through  themselves  to  the  one  which 
similarly  transcends  all  things,  the  natures  posterior  to  themselves. 

Since  therefore  each  of  the  Gods  is  indeed  a  unity,  but  is  participated 
by  some  being,  whether  shall  we  say  that  the  same  being  participates  of 
each  of  the  unities  or  that  the  participants  of  some  of  the  unities  are 
more,  but  of  others  less  numerous  ?  And  if  this  be  the  case  either  the  par- 
ticipants of  the  superior  unities  must  be  more,  but  of  the  inferior  must 
be  fewer  in  number,  or  vice  versa.  For  it  is  necessary  that  there  should 
be  an  order  of  the  unities,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  see  that  of  numbers 
some  are  nearer  to  their  principle,  but  others  more  remote  from  it.  And 
that  some  are  more  simple,  but  others  more  composite,  and  exceed  indeed 
in  quantity,  but  suffer  a  diminution  in  power.  But  it  is  well  that  we 
have  mentioned  numbers.  For  if  it  is  necessary  to  survey  the  order  of 
the  first  monads  with  respect  to  each  other,  and  their  progression  about 
beings,  from  these  as  images,  in  these  also  the  monads  which  are  nearer 
to  the  one  will  be  participated  by  things  which  arc  more  simple  in  essence, 
but  those  which  are  more  remote  from  it,  will  be  participated  by  more 
composite  essences.  For  thus  the  participation  will  be  according  to  the 
analogous  ;  first  monads  being  always  participated  by  the  first  beings,  but 
second  monads  by  secondary  beings.    For  again,  if  the  first  is  exempt 


■  oirr<«{  U  omitted  in  the  original. 


CHAP  II. 


OF  PLATO. 


157 


from  all  things,  and  is  imparticipable,  but  that  which  is  connascent  with 
the  most  simple  nature  and  the  one  is  more  similar  to  the  imparticipable 
than  that  which  is  connascent  with  a  more  various  and  multiform  nature, 
and  which  has  more  powers  suspended  from  it, — if  this  be  the  case,  it  is 
perfectly  obvious,  that  the  unities  which  are  nearer  to  the  one  are  neces- 
sarily participated  by  the  first  and  most  simple  essences ;  but  that  those 
which  are  more  remote  are  participated  by  more  composite  essences, 
which  are  less  in  power,  but  are  greater  in  number  and  multitude.  For 
in  6hort,  additions  in  these  unities  are  ablations  of  powers ;  and  that 
which  is  nearer  to  the  one,  which  surpasses  the  whole  of  things  by  an 
admirable  simplicity,  is  more  uniform,  and  is  consubsistent  with  more 
total  orders.  And  it  happens  according  to  the  ratio  of  power,  that  the 
simplicity  of  the  first  unities  is  transcendent.  For  those  things  which  arc 
the  causes  of  a  greater  number  of  effects,  imitate  as  much  as  possible  the 
cause  of  all  things,  but  those  which  are  the  causes  of  fewer  effects,  have 
an  essence  more  various  than  the  natures  that  are  prior  to  them.'  For 
this  variety  distributes  inio  minute  parts  and  diminishes  the  power  which 
abides  in  one.  Moreover,  in  participated  souls  also,  such  as  are  first  and 
most  divine  subsist  in  simple  and  perpetual  bodies.  Others  again  are 
connected  with  bodies  that  are  simple,  but  in  conjunction  with  these  with 
material  bodies  also.  And  others  are  connected  at  one  and  the  same 
time  with  simple,  material  and  composite  bodies.  For  the  celestial  souls 
indeed  rule  over  simple  bodies,  and  such  as  have  an  immaterial  and  im- 
mutable subsistence.  But  the  souls  that  govern  the  wholes  of  the  elements, 
are  at  the  same  time  invested  with  etherial  garments,  and  at  the  same 
time  through  these  are  carried  in  the  wholes  of  the  elements,  which  as 
wholes  indeed  are  perpetual  and  simple,  but  as  material  receive  genera- 
tion and  corruption,  and  composition  from  dissimilar  natures.  And  the 
souls  that  rank  in  the  third  order,  are  those  which  proximately  inspire 
with  life  their  luciform  *  vehicles,  but  also  attract  from  the  simple  ele- 

1  Instead  of  n  jut  yaf  *A«i»w»*  out**,  xcu  rat  wctvno*  mrrmi  xarct  Tip  ivra+ur  rant  *f*  avrwr 
*«miX«ri{an>  xmret  tij»  owiav  tow,  it  U  necessary  to  read  ra  pr,  yaf  *X|ior»»  cutix,  xcu  raw  wairaw 
"""!«»  xarm  fovofuv  pyuvno*,  T«  ttrwv  i\atr<ronov  toi>  wjg  xvtwy  ireixiA»Tff«  xot«  nf»  cv»mw  ten*. 

1  For  avTMifarir  it  if  requisite  to  read  j^miW* 


158  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

ment  material  vestsmeuts,  pour  into  these  a  secondary  life,  and  through 
these  communicate  with  composite  and  multiform  bodies,  and  sustain 
through  this  participation  another  third  life. 

If,  however,  you  are  willing  to  survey  the  intellectual  orders,  some  of 
these  are  arranged  in  the  souls  which  rank  as  wholes,  and  in  the  most 
divine  of  mundane  souls,  which  also  they  govern  in  a  becoming  manner. 
But  others  being  arranged  in  the  souls  of  the  more  excellent  genera,  are 
proximately  participated  by  the  rulers  that  are  in  them  ;  and  are  parti- 
cipated secondarily  by  more  partial  essences.  But  again  they  arrange 
third  intellectual  orders  in  partial  souls.  And  according  as  the  power 
which  they  are  allotted  is  diminished,  in  such  proportion  is  participation 
in  them  more  various,  and  far  more  composite  than  the  participation  of 
the  natures  that,  are  prior  to  them.  If,  therefore,  this  is  the  mode  of  par- 
ticipation in  all  beings,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  of  the  Gods  also 
those  that  are  nearer  to  the  one,  should  be  carried  in  the  more  simple  parts 
of  being,  but  that  those  which  have  proceeded  to  a  greater  distance 
should  be  carried  in  the  more  composite  parts  of  being.  For  the  parti- 
cipations of  second  genera  are  divided  after  this  manner  according  to  a 
similitude  to  them. 

Again  therefore,  we  may  summarily  say,  that  after  the  one  principle 
of  the  whole  of  things,  the  Gods  present  themselves  to  our  view  as  self- 
perfect  monads,  participated  by  beings.'  How  many  orders  therefore 
there  are  of  beings  we  shall  afterwards  unfold,  and  show  what  beings  are 
allotted  a  more  simple,  and  what  a  more  various  hyparxis.  Of  all  beings 
then,  the  last  is  that  which  is  corporeal.  For  this  derives  its  being,  and  all 
its  perfection  from  another  more  ancient  cause,  and  is  neither  allotted  sim- 
plicity nor  composition,  nor  perpetuity,  nor  incorruptibility  from  its  own 
power.  For  no  body  is  either  self-subsistent,  or  self-begotten  ;  but  every 
tiling  which  is  so  contracting  in  one,  cause,  and  that  which  proceeds  from 
cause,  is  incorporeal  and  impartible.  And  in  short,  that  which  is  the 
cause  of  hyparxis  to  itself,  imparts  also  to  itself  an  infinite  power  of  ex- 

•  In  the  original  here,  about  a  line  and  a  half  is  so  defectire,  that  not  being  able  to  supply  the 
deficiency,  I  hare  not  attempted  to  translate  it. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  II.  OF  PLATO.  15g 

istence.  Tor  never  deserting  itself,  it  will  never  cease  to  be,  or  depart  from 
its  own  subsistence.  For  every  thing  that  is  corrupted,  is  corrupted  through 
being  separated  from  the  power  that  supplied  it  with  being.  But  that 
which  imparts  being  to  itself,  as  it  is  not  separated  from  itself,  is  allotted 
through  itself  a  perpetual  essence.  No  body  however,  since  it  is  not  the 
cause  of  perpetuity  to  itself,  will  be  perpetual.  For  every  thing  which  is 
perpetual  possesses  an  infinite  power.  But  body  being  finite  is  not  the 
cause  of  infinite  power.  For  infinite  power  is  incorporeal,  because  all  power 
is  incorporeal.  But  this  is  evident,  because  greater  powers  are  every 
where.  But  no  body  is  capable  of  being  wholly  every  where.  If  there- 
fore, no  body  imparts  to  itself  power,  whether  the  power  be  infinite  or 
finite,  but  that  which  is  self-subsistent  imparts  to  itself  the  power  of  being, 
and  of  existing  perpetually,  no  body  will  be  self-subsistent.  Whence 
therefore  is  being  imparted  to  bodies,  and  what  is  it  which  is  adapted 
proximately  to  supply  them  with  being  ?  Must  wc  not  say  that  the  cause 
of  being  to  bodies  primarily  is  that  which  by  being  present  renders  the 
nature  of  body  more  perfect  than  its  kindred  bodies  [when  they  are  de- 
prived of  it?]  This  indeed  is  obvious  to  every  one.  For  it  is  the  province 
of  that  which  imparts  perfection  to  connect  also  the  essence  of  secondary 
natures,  since  perfection  itself  is  the  perfection  of  essence.  What  there- 
fore is  that  of  which  bodies  participating,  are  said  to  be  better  than  the 
bodies  which  do  not  participate  of  it  ?  Is  it  not  evident  that  it  is  soul? 
For  we  say  that  animated  bodies  are  more  perfect  than  such  as  are 
inanimate.  Soul  therefore  is  primarily  beyond  bodies  ;  and  it  must  be 
admitted  that  all  heaven  and  every  thing  corporeal  is  the  vehicle  of  soul. 
Hence,  these  two  orders  of  beings  present  themselves  to  our  view ;  the  one 
indeed  being  corporeal,  but  the  other  which  is  above  this,  psychical. 

With  respect  to  soul  itself  however,  whether  is  it  the  same  with  or  dif- 
ferent from  intellect  ?  For  as  the  body  which  participates  of  soul  is  per- 
fect, thus  also  the  soul  is  perfect  which  participates  of  intellect.  And 
of  the  soul  indeed,  which  is  able  to  live  according  to  reason,  all  things  do 
not  participate  :  but  of  intellect  and  intellectual  illumination  rational 
souls  participate,  and  also  such  things  as  partake  of  any  kind  of  know- 
ledge.   And  soul  indeed  energizes  according  to  time  ;  but  intellect  com- 


4 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 

ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


prebends  in  eternity  both  its  essence,  and  at  the  same  time  its  stable  energy. 
And  not  every  soul  indeed  is  adapted  to  preserve  immutably  and  without 
diminution  the  perfection  of  itself ;  but  every  intellect  is  always  perfect, 
and  possesses  a  never-failing  power  of  its  own  blessedness.  The  intellec- 
tual genus  therefore  is  essentially  beyond  the  psychical ;  since  the  former, 
neither  in  whole  nor  in  partial  intellects,  admits  the  entrance  of  the  na- 
ture of  evil ;  but  the  latter  being  undcfiled  in  whole  souls,  departs  in 
partial  souls  from  its  own  proper  blessedness.  What  therefore  is  the  first  of 
beings?  Shall  we  say  intellect,  or  prior  to  this  the  extent  of  life?  For 
soul  indeed  is  self-vital,  supplying  itself  with  life;  and  intellect  is  the  best 
and  most  perfect,  and  as  we  have  said,  an  eternal  life.  But  the  life  of 
intellect  is  indeed  in  a  certain  respect  intellectual,  and  is  mingled  from 
the  intellectual  and  vital  peculiarity.  It  is  necessary  however,  that  there 
should  be  life  itself.  Whether  therefore  is  life  or  intellect  the  more  ex- 
cellent thing?  But  if  gnostic  beings  only  participate  of  intellect,  but 
such  beings  as  are  destitute  of  knowledge  participate  of  life,  (for  we  say 
that  plants  live)  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  life  should  be  arranged 
above  intellect,  being  the  cause  of  a  greater  number  of  effects,  and  im- 
parting by  illumination  more  gifts  from  itself  than  intellect.  What  then  ? 
Is  life  the  first  of  beings  ?  And  is  to  live  the  same  thing  as  to  be  f  But 
this  is  impossible.  For  if  life  is  that  which  is  primarily  being,  and  to  be 
vital  is  the  same  thing  as  to  have  being,  and  there  is  the  same  definition  of 
both  life  and  being,  every  thing  which  participates  of  life  would  also 
participate  of  being,  and  every  thing  which  participates  of  existence 
would  likewise  participate  of  life.  For  if  each  is  the  same  thing  all 
things  would  similarly  participate  of  being  and  life.  All  vital  natures 
indeed  have  essence  and  being ;  but  there  are  many  beings  that  are  des- 
titute of  life.  Being  therefore  subsists  prior  to  the  first  life.  For  that 
which  is  more  universal,  and  the  cause  of  a  greater  number  of  effects,  is 
nearer  to  the  one,  as  has  been  before  demonstrated.  Soul  therefore  is 
that  which  is  primarily  established  above  bodies;  but  intellect  is  beyond 
soul life  is  more  ancient  than  intellect ;  and  being  which  is  primarily 
being  is  established  above  all  these.    Every  thing  also  which  participates 

'  Instead  of  fas  here  it  is  necessary  to  read  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  II  OF  PLATO.  l6l 

of  soul,  by  a  much  greater  priority  participates  of  intellect;  but  not  every 
thing  which  enjoys  intellectual  efficiency,  is  also  adapted  to  participate  of 
soul.  For  of  soul  rational  animals  only  participate ;  since  we  say  that 
the  rational  soul  is  truly  soul.  For  Plato  in  the  Republic  says,  that  the 
work  of  soul  is  to  reason  and  survey  beings.  And  every  soul  [i.  e.  every 
rational  soul]  is  immortal,  as  it  is  written  in  the  Phaedrus  ;  the  irrational 
soul  being  mortal,  according  to  the  demiurgus  in  the  Timaeus.  And  in 
short,  it  is  in  many  places  evident  that  Plato  considers  the  rational  soul 
to  be  truly  soul,  but 'others  to  be  the  images  of  souls,  so  far  as  these  also 
are  intellectual  and  vital,  and  together  with  whole  souls  produce  the  lives 
that  are  distributed  about  bodies.  Of  intellect  however,  we  not  only 
admit  that  rational  animals  participate,  but  also  such  other  animals  as 
possess  a  gnostic  power ;  I  mean  such  as  possess  the  phantasy,  memory 
and  sense ;  since  Socrates  also  in  the  Philebus  refers  all  such  animals  to 
the  intellectual  series.  For  taking  away  intellect  from  the  life  which  is 
according  to  pleasure,  he  likewise  takes  away  not  only  the  rational  life, 
but  every  gnostic  .  power  of  the  irrational  life.  For  all  knowledge  is  the 
progeny  of  intellect,  in  the  same  manner  as  allreason  is  an  image  of  soul. 

Moreover,  all  things  which  participate  of  intellect,  by  a  much  greater 
priority  participate  of  life,  some  things  indeed  more  obscurely,  but  others 
more  manifestly.  But  all  living  beings  do  not  participate  of  intellectual 
power,  since  plants  indeed  are  animals,  as  Timaeus  says,  but  they  jieither 
participate  of  sense,  or  phantasy ;  unless  some  one  should  say  that  they 
have  a  co-sensation  of  what  is  pleasing  and  painful.  And  in  short,  the 
orcctic  powers  every  where  are  lives,  and  the  images  of  the  whole  of  life* 
and  the  last  productions  of  life  ;  but  they  are  of  themselves  destitute  of 
intellect  and  without  any  participation  of  the  gnostic  power.  Hence 
also,  they  are  of  themselves  indefinite,  and  deprived  of  all  knowledge. 

Again  therefore,  all  animals  indeed  receive  a  portion  of  being,  and 
different  animals  a  different  portion,  according  to  their  respective  natures; 
but  all  beings  are  not  similarly  able  to  participate  of  life ;  since  we  say 
that  qualities  and  all  passions,  and  the  last  of  bodies,  receive  the  ultimate 
effective  energy  of  being,  but  we  do  not  also  say  that  they  participate  of 
life.  Being  therefore  is  more  ancient  than  life ;  life  than  intellect ;  and 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  X 


162  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III 

intellect  than  soul.  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  causes  of  a  greater  number 
of  effects  being  more  ancient  and  according  to  order  more  principal, 
should  preside  over  causes  which  are  able  to  produce  and  adorn  fewer 
effects.  Very  properly  therefore,  does  Plato  in  the  Timeeus  give  subsist- 
*  ence  to  soul  from  intellect,  as  being  secondary  to  it  according  to  its  own 
nature.  But  in  the  Laws  he  says  that  intellect  is  moved  similarly  to  a 
sphere  fashioned  by  a  wheel.'  For  that  which  is  moved,  is  moved  by 
participating  of  life,  and  is  nothing  else  than  real  life  about  motion.  And 
in  the  Sophista  he  exempts  being  from  all  the  total  genera  of  things,  and 
from  motion.  For  being,  says  he,  according  to  its  own  nature,  neither 
stands  still,  nor  is  moved.  But  that  which  neither  stands  still  nor  is  moved, 
is  beyond  eternal  life. 

These  four  causes  therefore  being  prior  to  a  corporeal  subsistence,  vis. 
essence,  life,  intellect  and  soul,  soul  indeed  participates  of  all  the  causes 
prior  to  itself,  being  allotted  reason  from  its  own  peculiarity,  but  intellect, 
life  and  being,  from  more  ancient  causes.  Hence  it  gives  subsistence  to 
things  posterior  to  itself  in  a  fourfold  manner.  For  according  to  its  being 
indeed,  it  produces  all  things  as  far  as  to  bodies ;  according  to  its  life, 
all  things  which  arc  said  to  live,  even  as  far  as  to  plants  ;  according  to 
its  intellect,  all  things  which  possess  a  gnostic  power,  even  as  far  as  to  the 
most  irrational  natures;  and  according  to  its  reason,  the  first  of  the 
natures  that  are  able  to  participate  of  it.1  But  intellect  being  established 
beyond  soul,  and  existing  as  the  plenitude  of  life  and  being,  adorns  all 
things  in  a  threefold  manner,  imparting  indeed  by  illumination  the  power 
of  the  intellectual  peculiarity  to  all  gnostic  beings,  but  supplying  the 
participation  of  life  to  a  still  greater  number,  and  of  being  to  all  those  to 
whom  primary  being  imparts  itself.  But  life  being  arranged  above  intel- 
lect, presubsists  as  the  cause  of  the  same  things  in  a  twofold  respect,  vivi- 
fying secondary  natures  indeed,  together  with  intellect,  and  filling  from 
itself  with  the  rivers  of  life,  such  things  as  are  naturally  adapted  to  live, 
but  together  with  being  supernally  producing  essence  in  all  things.  But 
being  itself  which  is  primarily  being  generates  all  things  by  its  very  exist- 

'  For  flrrsMi;  it  is  necessary  to  read  sv  npwic. 
*  For  «urw{  read  avnjf. 


C 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  II. 


OF  PLATO. 


163 


ence,  all  lives,  and  intellects  and  souls,  and  is  uniformly  preseot  to  all 
things,  and  its  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things  according  to  one  cause 
which  gives  subsistence  to  all  things.  Hence  it  is  the  most  similar  of  all 
things  to  the  one,  and  unites  the  comprehension  of  beings  in  itself  to  the 
first  principle  of  the  whole  of  things,  through  which  all  beings,  and  non- 
being,  wholes  and  parts,  forms  and  the  privations  of  forms  subsist,  which 
privations  do  not  necessarily  participate  of  being,  but  it  is  entirely  neces- 
sary that  they  should  participate  of  the  one. 

These  things  as  it  appears  to  me  persuaded  the  Elcan  guest  in  the  So- 
phista,  when  discussing  that  which  is  perfectly  being,  to  admit  that  not 
only  being  is  there,  but  also  life,  intellect  and  soul.  For  if  true  and  real 
being  is  venerable  and  honorable,  intellect  is  there  in  the  first  place,  says 
be.  For  it  is  not  lawful  for  that  which  is  of  itself  venerable  and  immate- 
rial to  be  without  intellect.  But  if  intellect  is  in  that  which  is  perfectly 
being,  intellect  will  entirely  be  moved.  For  it  is  not  possible  for  intellect 
ever  to  subsist,  either  without  motion  or  permanency.  But  if  intellect  is 
moved  and  stands  still,  there  are  in  being  both  life  and  motion.  Hence, 
from  what  has  been  said,  three  things  become  apparent,  viz.  being,  life 
and  intellect.  Moreover,  soul  also  in  the  next  place  is  discovered  through 
these  things.  For  it  is  necessary,  says  lie,  that  life  and  intellect  which 
before  were  by  themselves,  should  also  be  in  soul.  For  every  soul  is  a 
plenitude  of  life  and  intellect,  participating  of  both,  which  the  Elean 
guest  indicating  adds,  "  Shall  we  say  that  both  these  are  inherent  in  it, 
but  yet  it  does  not  possess  these  in  soul  ?"  For  to  possess,  as  some  one 
says  in  a  certain  place,  is  secondary  to  existing.  And  soul  indeed  parti- 
cipates of  each  of  these  according  to  the  peculiarity  of  itself;  but  it 
mingles  the  rational  form  of  its  own  hyparxis,  with  the  intellectual  vivific 
power.  But  both  intellect  and  life  subsist  prior  to  soul,  the  former  as 
being  moved  and  standing  still  at  one  and  the  same  time,  and  the  latter  as 
being  motion  and  permanency.  These  four  monads  also,  soul,  intellect, 
life  and  being  are  not  only  mentioned  by  Plato  here,  but  in  many  other 
places.  And  as  in  soul  all  things  subsist  according  to  participation,  so  in 
intellect  the  things  which  are  prior  to  it  subsist,  and  in  life  that  which  is 
prior  to  life.  For  we  say  that  life  exists,  or  has  a  being.  Or  how  could 
i*be  said  to  be  arranged  in  being  unless  it  participated  of  being?  We 


Digitized  by  Google 


1G4 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


likewise  say  that  intellect  is  and  lives.  For  it  is  moved,  and  is  a  portion 
of  being.  Hence  it  is  the  third  of  the  more  comprehensive  monads. 
Prior  however  to  beings  which  are  participated,  it  is  every  where  neces- 
sary that  imparticipable  causes  should  subsist,  as  was  before  demonstrated, 
conformably  to  the  similitude  of  beings  to  the  one.  Being  therefore  which 
is  primarily  being,  is  imparticipable ;  but  life  first  participates  of  being, 
yet  is  imparticipable,  being  exempt  from  intellect.  And  intellect  is  filled 
indeed  from  being  and  life;  but  is  imparticipable  in  souls,  and  in  the 
natures  posterior  to  itself.  Intellect  also  presides  over  soul,  imparting  to 
it  by  illumination  the  participation  of  life  and  being;  but  being  imparti- 
cipable subsists  prior  to  bodies.  The  last  order  of  beings  therefore  is  that 
to  which  bodies  are  annexed ;  celestial  bodies  indeed  primarily,  but  sub- 
lunary bodies  with  the  addition  of  material  [vestments.]  This  therefore 
is  the  progression  of  beings,  through  life,  intellect  and  soul,  ending  in  a 
corporeal  nature. 

If,  however,  it  is  necessary  that  the  super  essential  unities  of  the  Gods 
which  derive  their  subsistence  from  the  imparticipable  cause '  of  all  things 
should  be  participated,  some  of  them  indeed,  by  the  first  orders  in  beings, 
others  by  the  middle,  and  others  by  the  last  orders,  as  was  before  demon- 
strated, it  is  evident  that  some  of  them  deify  the  imparticipable  portion 
of  being,  but  that  others  illuminate  life,  others  intellect,  others  sou),  and 
others  bodies.  And  of  the  last  unities  indeed,  not  only  bodies  participate, 
but  likewise  soul,  intellect,  life  and  essence.  For  intellect  in  itself  is  a 
plenitude  of  life  and  being.  But  from  the  unities  which  are  above  this 
world  intellect  is  suspended,  and  the  psychical  power,  which  preexists  in 
intellect.  From  the  unities  above  these,  imparticipable  and  intellectual 
intellect  is  suspended.  From  those  that  are  beyond  these,  the  first  and  im- 
participable life  is  suspended.  And  from  the  highest  unities,  the  first  being 
itself,  and  which  is  the  most  divine  of  beings,  is  suspended.  Hence  Par- 
menides  beginning  from  the  one  being,  produces  from  thence  the  whole 
orders  of  the  Gods.  These  things  therefore  being  previously  determined  by 
us,  let  us  speak  concerning  the  divine  dialogues,  beginning  from  on  high, 
and  producing  from  the  one  the  whole  orders  of  the  Gods.    Let  us  also, 

'  For  «tm»  it  is  necemry  to  read  wru* 


t 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  III.  OF  PLATO.  !gA 

following  Plato,  in  the  first  place  demonstrate  the  several  orders  from 
other  dialogues,  by  arguments  which  cannot  be  confuted.  Afterwards, 
let  us  thus  conjoin  and  assimilate  the  conclusions  of  Parraenides  to  the 
divine  progressions,  adapting  the  first  conclusions  to  the  first,  but  the  last 
to  the  last  progressions. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Aoaiit  therefore,  the  mystic  doctrine  concerning  the  one  must  be  re- 
sumed by  us,  in  order  that  proceeding  from  the  first  principle,  we  may 
celebrate  the  second  and  third  principles  of  the  whole  of  tilings.  Of  all 
beings  therefore,  and  of  the  Gods  that  produce  beings,  one  exempt  and 
imparticipable  cause  preexists, — a  cause  ineffable  indeed  by  all  language, 
and  unknown  by  all  knowledge  and  incomprehensible,  unfolding  all 
tilings  into  light  from  itself,  subsisting  ineffably  prior  to,  and  converting  all 
things  to  itself,  but  existing  as  the  best  end  of  all  things.  This  cause 
therefore,  which  is  truly  exempt  from  all  causes,  and  which  gives  subsist- 
ence unically  to  all  the  unities  of  divine  natures,  and  to  all  the  genera  of 
beings,  and  their  progressions,  Socrates  in  the  Republic  calls  the  good, 
and  through  its  analogy  to  the  sun  reveals  its  admirable  and  unknown 
transcendency  with  respect  to  all  intelligibles.  But  again,  Parmenides 
denominates  it  the  one.  And  through  negations  demonstrates  the  exempt 
and  ineffable  hyparxis  of  this  one  which  is  the  cause  of  the  whole  of  things. 
But  the  discourse  in  the  epistle  to  Dionysius  proceeding  through  enigmas, 
celebrates  it  us  that  about  which  all  things  subsist,  and  as  the  cause  of  all 
beautiful  things.  In  the  Philebus  however,  Socrates  celebrates  it  as  that 
which  gives  subsistence  to  the  whole  of  things,  because  it  is  the  cause  of 
all  deity.  For  all  the  Gods  derive  their  existence  as  Gods  from  the  first 
God.    Whether  therefore,  it  be  lawful  to  denominate  it  the  fountain 


Digitized  by  Google 


166 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


of  deity,  or  the  kingdom  of  beings,  or  the  unity  of  all  unities,  or  the  good- 
ness which  is  generative  of  truth,  or  an  hyparxis  exempt  from  all  these 
tilings,  and  beyond  all  causes,  both  the  paternal  and  the  generative,  let 
it  be  honored  by  us  in  silence,  and  prior  to  silence  by  union,  and  of  the 
mystic  end  may  it  impart  by  illumination  a  portion  adapted  to  our  souls. 

But  let  us  survey  with  intellect  the  biformed  principles  proceeding  from 
and  posterior  to  it.    For  what  else  is  it  necessary  to  arrange  after  the 
union  of  the  whole  theory,  than  the  duad  of  principles  ?    What  *  the  two 
principles  therefore  are  of  the  divine  orders  after  the  first  principle,  we 
shall  in  the  next  place  survey.    For  conformably  to  the  theology  of  our 
ancestors,  Plato  also  establishes  two  principles  after  the  one.    In  the  Phi- 
lebus  therefore,  Socrates  says,  that  God  gives  subsistence  to  bound  and 
infinity,  and  through  these  mingling  all  beings,  has  produced  them,  the 
nature  of  beings,  according  to  Philolaus  subsisting  from  the  connexion 
of  things  bounded,  and  things  infinite.   If,  therefore,  all  beings  subsist 
from  these,  it  is  evident  that  they  themselves  have  a  subsistence  prior  to 
beings.    And  if  secondary  natures  participate  of  these  mingled  together, 
these  will  subsist  unmingled  prior  to  the  whole  of  things.    For  the  pro- 
gression of  the  divine  orders  originates,  not  from  things  coordinated  and 
which  exist  in  others,  but  from  things  exempt,  and  which  are  established 
in  themselves.    As  therefore  the  one  is  prior  to  tilings  united,  and  as  that 
which  is  passive  to  the  one,  has  a  second  order  after  the  imparticipable 
union,  thus  also  the  two  principles  of  beings,  prior  to  the  participation  of 
and  commixture  with  beings,  arc  themselves  by  themselves  the  causes  of 
the  whole  of  tilings.    For  it  is  necessary  that  bound  should  be  prior  to 
things  bounded,  and  infinity  prior  to  infinites,  according  to  the  similitude 
to  the  one  of  things  which  proceed  from  it    For  again,  if  we  should  pro- 
duce beings  immediately  after  the  one,  we  shall  no  where  find  the  pecu- 
liarity of  the  one  subsisting  purely.   For  neither  is  being  the  same  with 
the  one,  but  it  participates  of  the  one,  nor  in  reality  is  that  which  is  the 
first  the  one ;  for,  as  has  been  frequently  said,  it  is  better  than  the  one, 
Where  therefore  is  that  which  is  most  properly  and  entirely  one  ?  Hence 

'  For  Tin*  it  is  neceisary  to  reail  rms. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  in.  OF  PLATO.  ^ 

there  is  a  certain  one  prior  to  being,  which  gives  subsistence  to  being, 
and  is  primarily  the  cause  of  it ;  since  that  which  is  prior  to  it  is  beyond 
union,  and  is  a  cause  without  habitude  with  respect  to  all  things,  and 
im participate,  being  exempt  from  all  things.  If  however  this  one  is  the 
cause  of  being,  and  constitutes  it,  there  will  be  a  power  in  it  generative 
of  being.  For  every  thing  which  produces,  produces  according  to  its 
own  power,  which  is  allotted  a  subsistence  between  that  which  produces 
and  the  things  produced,  and  is  of  the  one  the  progression  and  as  it  were 
extension,  but  of  the  other  is  the  pre-arranged  generative  cause.  For 
being  which  is  produced  from  these,  and  which  is  not  the  one  itself,  but 
uniform,  possesses  its  progression  indeed  from  the  one,  through  the  power 
which  produces  and  unfolds  it  into  light  from  the  one;  but  its  occult 
union  from  the  hyparxis  of  the  one.  This  one  therefore  which  subsists 
prior  to  power,  and  first  presubsists  from  the  imparticipable  and  unknown 
cause  of  the  whole  of  things,  Socrates  in  the  Philcbus  calls  bound,  but  he 
denominates  the  power  of  it  which  is  generative  of  being,  infinity.  But 
he  thus  speaks  in  that  dialogue,  "  God  we  said  has  exhibited  the  bound, 
and  also  the  infinite  of  beings." 

The  first  therefore  and  unical  God,  is  without  any  addition  denominated 
by  him  God  ;  because  each  of  the  second  Gods  is  participated  by  being, 
and  has  being  suspended  from  its  nature.  But  the  first  indeed,  as  being 
exempt '  from  the  whole  of  beings,  is  God,  defined  according  to  the  in- 
effable itself,  the  unical  alone,  and  superessential.  But  the  bound  and 
the  infinite  of  beings,  unfold  into  light  that  unknown  and  imparticipable 
cause  ;  bound  indeed,  being  the  cause  of  stable,  uniform,  and  connective 
deity  ;  but  the  infinite  being  the  cause  of  power  proceeding  to  all  things 
and  capable  of  being  multiplied,  and  in  short,  being  the  leader  of  every 
generative  distribution.  For  all  union  and  wholeness,  and  communion  of 
beings,  and  all  the  divine  measures,  are  suspended*  from  the  first  bound. 
But  all  division,  prolific  production,  and  progression  into  multitude,  de- 
rive their  subsistence  from  this  most  principal  infinity.    Hence,  when  we 


'  For  (floral  it  it  necessary  to  read  rfafmjTiti. 

*  Here  alio  it  it  neceuary  for  iftpfrai  to  read  fftfnrrat. 


168  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

say  that  each  of  the  divine  orders  abides  '  and  at  the  same  time  proceeds, 
we  must  confess  that  it  stably  abides  indeed,  according  to  bound,  but 
proceeds  according  to  infinity,  and  that  at  one  and  the  same  time  it  has 
unity  and  multitude,  and  we  must  suspend  the  former  from  the  principle 
of  bound,  but  the  latter  from  that  of  infinity.  And  in  short,  of  all  the 
opposition  in  the  divine  genera,  we  must  refer  that  which  is  the  more 
excellent  to  bound,  but  that  which  is  subordinate  to  infinity.  For  from 
these  two  principles  all  things  have  their  progression  into  being,  even  as 
far  as  to  the  last  of  things.  For  eternity  itself  participates  at  once  of 
bound  and  infinity  ;  so  far  indeed,  as  it  is  the  intelligible  measure,  it  par- 
ticipates of  bound  ;  but  so  far  as  it  is  the  cause  of  a  never-failing  power 
of  existing,  it  participates  of  infinity.  And  intellect,  so  far  indeed  as 
it  is  uniform,  and  whole,  and  so  far  as  it  is  connective  of  paradigmatical 
measures,  so  far  it  is  the  progeny  of  bound.  But  again,  so  far  as  it  pro- 
duces all  things  eternally,  and  subsists  conformably  to  the  whole  of  eter- 
nity, supplying  all  things  with  existence  at  once,  and  always  possessing  its 
own  power  undiminished,  so  far  it  is  the  progeny  of  infinity.  And  soul 
indeed,  in  consequence  of  measuring  its  own  life,  by  restitutions  and  pe- 
riods, and  introducing  a  boundary  to  its  own  motions,  is  referred  to  the 
cause  of  bound ;  but  in  consequence  of  having  no  cessation  of  motions, 
but  making  the  end  of  one  period  the  beginning  of  the  whole  of  a  second 
vital  circulation,  it  is  referred  to  the  order  of  infinity.  The  whole  of  this 
heaven  also,  according  to  the  wholeness  of  itself,  its  connexion,  the  order 
of  its  periods,  and  the  mcasores  of  its  restitutions,  is  bounded.  But  ac- 
cording to  its  prolific  powers,  its  various  evolutions,  and  the  never-failing 
revolutions  of  its  orbs,  it  participates  of  infinity.  Moreover,  the  whole  of 
generation,  in  consequence  of  all  its  forms  being  bounded,  and  always 
permanent  after  the  same  manner,  and  in  consequence  of  its  own  circle 
which  imitates  the  celestial  circulation,  is  similar  to  bound.  But  again, 
in  consequence  of  the  variety  of  the  particulars  of  which  it  consists,  their 
unceasing  mutation,  and  the  intervention  of  the  more  and  the  less  in  the 
participations  of  forms,  it  is  the  image  of  infinity.  And  in  addition  to 
these  things,  every  natural  production,  according  to  its  form  indeed,  is 

'  furu*  U  (Knitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IX.  OF  PLATO.  169 

similar  to  bound,  but  according  to  its  matter,  resembles  infinity.  For 
these  are  suspended  in  the  last  place '  from  the  two  principles  posterior 
to  the  one,  and  as  far  as  to  these  the  progression  of  their  productive  power 
extends.  Each  of  these  also  is  one,  but  form  is  the  measure  and  boun- 
dary of  matter,  and  is  in  a  greater  degree  one.  Matter  however  is  all 
things  in  capacity,  so  far  as  it  derives  its  subsistence  from  the  first  power. 
There,  however,  power  is  generative  of  all  things.  But  the  power  of  matter 
is  imperfect,  and  is  indigent  of  the  hypostasis  which  is  generative '  of  all 
things  according  to  energy.  Very  properly  therefore  is  it  said  by  So- 
crates that  all  beings  are  from  bound  and  infinity,  and  that  these  two  in- 
telligible principles  primarily  derive  their  subsistence  from  God.  For 
that  which  congregates  both  of  them,  and  perfects  them,  and  unfolds  it- 
self into  light  through  all  beings  is  the  one  prior  to  the  duad.  And  union 
indeed  is  derived  to  all  things  through  that  which  is  first ;  but  the  division 
of  the  two  orders  of  tilings  is  generated  from  these  primary  causes,  and 
through  these  is  extended  to  the  unknown  and  ineffable  principle.  Let 
it  therefore  be  manifest  through  these  things,  what  the  two  principles  of 
beings  are,  which  become  proximately  apparent  from  the  one,  according 
to  the  theology  of  Plato. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

In  the  next  place  let  us  show  what  the  third  '  thing  is  which  presents 
itself  to  the  view  from  these  principles.  It  is  every  where  therefore  called 
that  which  is  mixed,  as  deriving  its  subsistence  from  bound  and  infinity. 
But  if  bound  is  the  bound  of  beings,  and  the  infinite  is  the  infinite  of 
beings,  and  beings  are  the  things  which  have  a  subsistence  from  both 


'  For  13^ straw  it  is  necessary  to  read  tv^antf. 

•  The  word  ynmrnxq;  u  omitted  in  the  original. 

*  TfiTn  is  onutted  in  the  original. 

Proc.  Vol.  I. 


Y 


1 70  °N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II!. 

these,  as  Socrates  himself  clearly  teaches  us,  it  is  evident  that  the  first  of 
things  mingled,  is  the  first  of  beings.  This,  however,  is  nothing  else  than 
that  which  is  highest  in  beings,  which  is  being  itself,  and  nothing  else  than 
being.  My  meaning  is,  that  this  is  evident  through  those  things  by  which 
we  demonstrate  that  what  is  primarily  being,  is  comprehensive  of  all 
things  intelligibly,  and  of  life  and  intellect.  For  we  say  that  hfe  is  triadic 
vitally,  and  intellect  intellectually  ;  and  also  that  these  three  things  being 
life  and  intellect  are  every  where.  But  all  things  presubsist  primarily 
and  essentially  in  being.  For  there  essence,  life  and  intellect  subsist,  and 
the  summit  of  beings.  Life  however  is  the  middle  centre  of  being,  which 
is  denominated  and  is  intelligible  life.  But  intellect  is  the  boundary  of 
being,  and  is  intelligible  intellect.  For  in  the  intelligible  there  is  intellect, 
and  in  intellect  the  intelligible.  There  however  intellect  subsists  intelli- 
gibly, but  in  intellect,  the  intelligible  subsists  intellectually. 

And  essence  indeed  is  that  which  is  stable  in  being,  and  which  is  woven 
together  with  the  first  principles,  and  does  not  depart  from  the  one.  But 
life  is  that  which  proceeds  from  the  principles,  and  is  connascent  with  in- 
finite power.  And  intellect  is  that  which  converts  itself  to  the  principles, 
conjoins  the  end  with  the  beginning,  and  produces  one  intelligible  circle. 
The  first  of  beings  therefore  is  that  which  is  mingled  from  the  first  prin- 
ciples, and  is  triple,  one  thing  which  it  contains  subsisting  in  it  essentially, 
another  vitally,  and  another  intellectually,  but  all  things  presubsisting  in 
it  essentially.  I  mean  however  by  the  first  of  beings  essence.  For 
essence  itself  is  the  summit  of  all  beings,  and  is  as  it  were  the  monad 
of  the  whole  of  things.  In  all  things  therefore,  essence  is  the  first.  And 
in  each  thing  that  which  is  essential  is  the  most  ancient,  as  deriving  its 
subsistence  from  the  Vesta  of  beings.  For  the  intelligible  is  especially 
this.  Since  intellect  indeed  is  that  which  is  gnostic,  life  is  intelligence, 
and  being  is  intelligible.  If  however  every  being  is  mingled,  but 
essence  is  being  itself,  prior  to  all  other  things  essence  is  that  which  sub- 
sists as  mingled  from  the  two  principles  proceeding  from  the  one.  Hence 
Socrates  indicating  how  the  mode  of  generation  in  the  two  principles 
differs  from  that  of  the  mixture  says,  "  that  God  has  exhibited  bound  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IX. 


OF  PLATO. 


171 


infinity."  For  they  are  unities  deriving  their  subsistence  from  the  one,  and 
as  it  were  luminous  patcfactions  from  the  imparticipable  and  first  union. 
But  with  respect  to  producing  a  mixture,  and  mingling  through  the  first 
principles,  by  how  much  to  make  is  subordinate  to  the  unfolding  into  light, 
and  generation  to  pate/action,  by  so  much  is  that  which  is  mixed  allotted 
a  progression  from  tfie  one,  inferior  to  that  of  the  two  principles. 

That  which  is  mixed  therefore,  is  intelligible  essence,  and  subsists  pri- 
marily from  [the  first]  God,  from  whom  infinity  also  and  bound  are  de- 
rived. But  it  subsists  secondarily  from  the  principles  posterior  to  the 
unical  God,  I  mean  from  bound  and  infinity.  For  the  fourth  cause  which 
is  effective  of  the  mixture  is  again  God  himself;  since  if  any  other  cause 
should  be  admitted  besides  this,  there  will  no  longer  be  a  fourth  cause, 
but  a  fifth  will  be  introduced.  For  the  first  cause  was  God,  who  unfolds 
into  light  the  two  principles.  But  after  him  are  the  two  principles  bound 
and  infinity.  And  the  mixture  is  the  fourth  thing.  If  therefore  the 
cause  of  the  mixture  is  different  from  the  first  divine  cause,  this  cause 
will  be  the  fifth  and  not  the  fourth  thing,  as  Socrates  says  it  is.  Far- 
ther still,  in  addition  to  these  things,  if  we  say  that  God  is  especially 
the  supplier  of  union  to  beings,  and  the  mixture  itself  of  the  principles  is 
a  union  into  the  hypostasis  of  being,  God  is  also  certainly  the  cause  of  this 
primarily.  Moreover,  Socrates  in  the  Republic  clearly  evinces  that  the  good 
is  the  cause  of  being  and  essence  1o  intelligibles,  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
sun  is  to  visible  natures.  Is  it  not  therefore  necessary,  if  that  which  is  mix- 
ed is  primarily  being,  to  refer  it  to  the  first  God,  and  to  say  that  .it  receives 
its  progression  from  him  ?  If  also  the  demiurgus  in  the  Timauis,  consti- 
tutes the  essence  of  the  soul  itself  by  itself  from  an  impartible  and  a  par- 
tible essence,  which  is  the  same  thing  as  to  constitute  it  from  bound  and 
infinity  ;  for  the  soul  according  to  bound  is  similar  to  the  impartible,  but 
according  to  infinity,  to  the  partible  essence;— if  therefore  the  demiurgus 
mingles  the  essence  of  the  soul  from  these,  and  again  separately,  from 
same  and  different,  and  if  from  these  being  now  preexistent,  he  constitutes 
the  whole  soul,  must  we  not  much  more  say  that  the  first  God  is  the 
cause  of  the  first  essence  ?   That  which  is  mixed  therefore,  proceeds,  as 


t 


172  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

we  have  said,  from  the  first  (Jod,  and  does  not  subsist  from  the  principles 
alone  posterior  to  the  one,  but  proceeds  also  from  these,  and  is  triadic. 
And  in  the  first  place  indeed,  it  participates  from  God  of  ineffable  union, 
and  the  whole  of  its  subsistence.  But  from  bound,  it  receives  hyparxis, 
and  the  uniform,  and  a  stable  peculiarity.  .  And  from  infinity,  it  receives 
power,  and  the  occult  power  which  is  in  itself,  of  all  things.  For  in  short, 
since  it  is  one  and  not  one,  the  one  is  inherent  in  it  according  to  bound, 
but  the , non-one  according  to  infinity.  The  mixture  however  of  both 
these,  and  its  wholeness,  arc  derived  from  the  first  Cod.  That  which  is 
mixed  therefore,  is  a  monad,  because  it  participates  of  the  one;  and  it  is 
biformed,  so  far  as  it  proceeds  from  the  two  principles  ;  but  it  is  a  triad, 
so  far  as  iu  every  mixture,  these  three  things  are  necessary  according  to 
Socrates,  viz.  beauty,  truth,  and  symmetry.  Concerning  these  things 
however,  we  shall  speak  again. 

In  what  manner,  however,  essence  is  that  which  is  first  mixed,  we  shall 
now  explain.  For  this  is  of  all  things  the  most  difficult  to  discover,  viz. 
what  that  is  which  is  primarily  being,  as  the  Elcan  guest  also  somewhere 
says ;  for  it  is  most  dubious  how  being  is  not  less  than  non-being.  In 
what  manner  therefore  essence  subsists  from  bound  and  infinity  must  be 
shown.  For  if  bound  and  infiuity  are  superessential,  essence  may  appear 
to  have  its  subsistence  from  non-essences.  How  therefore  can  non-es- 
sences produce  essence  ?  Or  is  not  this  the  case  in  all  other  things  which 
subsist  through  the  mixture  of  each  other  ?  For  that  which  is  produced 
from  things  mingled  together,  is  not  the  same  with  things  that  are  not  min- 
gled. For  neitheris  soul  the  same  with  the  genera,  from  which,  bcingmingled 
together,  the  father  generated  it,  nor  is  a  happy  life  the  same  with  the  life 
which  is  according  to  intellect,  or  with  the  life  which  is  according  to  plea- 
sure, nor  is  the  one  in  bodies  the  same  with  its  elements.  Hence  it  is  not 
wonderful,  if  that  which  is  primarily  being,  though  it  is  neither  bound  nor 
infinity,  subsists  from  both  these,  and  is  mixed,  superessential  natures  them- 
selves not  being  assumed  in  the  mixture  of  it,  but  secondary  progressions 
from  thein  coalescing  into  the  subsistence  of  essence.  Thus  therefore 
being  consists  of  these,  as  participating  of  both,  possessing  indeed  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IX. 


OF  PLATO. 


173 


uniform  from  bound,  but  the  generative,  and  in  short,  occult  multitude 
from  infinity.    For  it  is  all  things  occultly,  and  on  this  account,  is  the 
cause  of  all  beings ;  which  also  the  Elcan  guest  indicating  to  us,  calls 
being  the  first  power,  as  subsisting  according  to  the  participation  of  the 
first  power,  and  participating  of  hyparxis  from  bound,  and  of  power 
from  infinity.    Afterwards  however,  the  Elcan  guest  defines  being  to  be 
power,  as  prolific  and  generative  of  all  things,  and  as  being  all  things  uni- 
formly.   For  power  is  every  where  the  cause  of  prolific  progressions,  and 
of  all  multitude;  occult  power  indeed  being  the  cause  of  occult  multi- 
tude :  but  the  power  which  exists  in  energy,  and  which  unfolds  itself  into 
light,  being  the  cause  of  all-perfect  multitude.    Through  this  cause  there- 
fore, I  think,  that  every  being,  and  every  essence  has  connascent  powers. 
For  it  participates  of  infinity,  and  derives  its  hyparxis  indeed  from  bound, 
but  its  power  from  infinity.    -And  being  is  nothing  else  than  a  monad  of 
many  powers,  and  a  multiplied  hyparxis,  and  on  this  account  being  is 
one  many.    The  many  however  subsist  occultly  and  without  separation 
in  the  first  natures  ;  but  with  separation  in  secondary  natures.    For  by 
Bow  much  being  is  nearer  to  the  one,  by  so  much  the  more  does  it  conceal 
multitude,  and  is  defined  according  to  union  alone.    It  appears  to  me 
also  that  Plotinus  and  his  followers,  frequently  indicating  these  things, 
produce  being  from  form  and  intelligible  matter,  arranging  form '  as  ana- 
logous to  the  one,  and  to  hyparxis,  but  power  as  analogous  to  matter. 
And  if  indeed  they  say  this,  they  speak  rightly.    But  if  they  ascribe  a 
certain  formless  and  indefinite  nature  to  an  intelligible  essence,  they  ap- 
pear to  me  to  wander  from  the  conceptions  of  Plato  on  this  subject  For 
the  infinite  is  not  the  matter  of  bound,  but  the  power  of  it,  nor  is  bound 
the  form  of  the  infinite,  but  the  hyparxis  of  it.    But  being  consists  of 
both  these,  as  not  only  standing  in  the  one,  but  receiving  a  multitude  of 
unities  and  powers  which  are  mingled  into  one  essence. 

'  For  w\tfti  in  the  original  it  is  necessary  to  read 


174 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  If  I 


CHAPTER  X. 

That  therefore  which  is  primarily  being  is  through  these  things  deno- 
minated by  Plato  that  which  is  mixed.  And  through  the  similitude  of 
it,  generation  also  is  mingled  from  bound  and  infinity.  And  the  in- 
finite indeed  in  this  is  imperfect  power;  but  the  bound  in  it  is  form  and 
the  morphe  of  this  power.  On  this  account  we  establish  this  power  to  be 
matter,  not  possessing  existence  in  energy,  and  requiring  to  be  bounded 
by  something  else.  We  no  longer  however  say  that  it  is  lawful  to  call  the 
power  of  being  matter,  since  it  is  generative  of  energies,  produces  all 
beings  from  itself,  and  is  prolific  of  the  perfect  powers  in  beings.  For  the 
power  of  matter  being  imperfect  dissimilarly  imitates  the  power  of  being; 
and  becoming  multitude  in  capacity,  it  expresses  the  parturition  of  mul- 
titude in  the  power  of  being."  Moreover,  the  form  of  matter  imitates 
ultimately  bound,  since  it  gives  limits  to  matter,  and  terminates  its  infi- 
nity. But  it  is  multiplied  and  divided  about  it.  It  is  also  miugled  with 
the  privation  of  matter,  and  represents  the  supreme  union  of  the  hyparxis 
of  being,  by  its  essence  always  advancing  to  existence,  and  always  tending 
to  decay.  For  those  things  which  subsist  in  the  first  natures  according  to 
transcendency,  are  in  such  as  are  last  according  to  deficiency.  For  that 
also  which  is  primarily  being  is  mixed,  is  exempt  from  the  bound  of  in- 
finite life,  and  is  the  cause  of  it.  But  that  which  consists  of  the  last '  of 
forms  and  the  first  matter,  is  in  its  own  nature  void  of  life ;  since  it  pos- 
sesses life  in  capacity.  For  there  indeed  generative  causes  subsist  prior 
to  their  progeny,  and  things  perfect  prior  to  such  as  are  imperfect.  But 
here  things  in  capacity  are  prior  to  such  as  are  in  energy,  and  concauses 

'  The  punctuation  in  the  latter  part  of  this  sentence  in  the  original  is  erroneous :  for  instead  of 
x<u  tv  «v  fwnjrotf  nXt)twf  «W  Suwfui  ynw/MHj,  re  »Xi{<0f  «*«x<w*T»,  it  should  be  xcu  n]»  n  txtivp 
tow  wfcjfotff  o£i»*  Sowifif i  yoojWKfl  to  »Xi]»of ,  owuxau-aro. 

*  For  wgonw  here,  it  is  necessary  to  read  Tot  in  this  place,  Froclus  is  speaking  of  body. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  X. 


OF  PLATO. 


175 


are  subject  to  the  things  which  are  produced  from  them.  This  however, 
I  think,  happens  naturally,  because  the  gifts  of  the  first  principles  pervade 
as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  and  not  only  generate  more  perfect  natures, 
but  also  such  as  have  a  more  imperfect  subsistence.  And  on  this  account 
that  which  is  mixed  is  the  cause  of  generation,  and  of  the  nature  which  is 
mingled  here.  The  bound  and  infinity  however,  which  are  prior  to  being, 
are  not  only  the  causes  of  this  nature,  but  also  of  the  elements  of  it,  of 
which  that  which  is  mixed  is  not  the  cause,  so  far  as  it  is  mixed.  For 
bound  and  infinity  are  twofold.  And  one  kind  of  these  is  exempt  from 
the  things  mingled,  but  another  kind  is  assumed  to  the  completion  of  the 
mixture.  For  I  think  it  is  every  where  necessary  that  prior  to 
things  that  are  mingled,  there  should  be  such  as  are  unmingled,  prior  to 
things  imperfect,  such  as  are  perfect,  prior  to  parts,  wholes,  and  prior  to 
things  that  are  in  others,  such  as  are  in  themselves ;  and  this  Socrates 
persuades  us  to  admit  not  in  one  thing  only,  but  also  in  beauty  and  sym- 
metry, and  in  all  forms.  If  therefore  the  second  and  third  genera  of  being 
and  forms  subsist  prior  to  their  participants,  how  can  we  assert  that 
bound  and  infinity  which  pervade  through  all  beings  have  their  first  sub- 
sistence as  things  mingled  ?  It  must  be  admitted  therefore,  that  they  are 
unmingled  and  separate  from  being,  and  that  being  is  derived  from  them, 
and  at  the  same  time  consists  of  them.  It  is  derived  from  them  indeed, 
because  they  have  a  prior  subsistence ;  but  it  consists  of  them,  because 
they  subsist  in  being  according  to  a  second  progression. 

The  genera  of  being  also  are  twofold  ;  some  of  them  indeed  being  fa- 
bricative  of  beings,  but  others  existing  as  the  elements  of  the  nature  of 
each  being.  For  some  of  them  indeed  presubsist  themselves  by  themselves, 
as  possessing  a  productive  power  ;  but  others  being  generated  from  these* 
constitute  each  particular  being.  Let  no  one  therefore  any  longer  won- 
der, how  Socrates  indeed  in  the  Fhilebus  establishes  that  which  is  min- 
gled, prior  to  bound  and  infinity,  but  we  on  the  contrary  evince  that  bound 
and  infinity  are  exempt  from  that  which  is  mixed.  For  each  is  twofold, 
and  the  one  indeed  is  prior  to  being,  but  the  other  is  in  being  ;  and  the 
one  is  generative,  but  the  other  is  the  element  of  the  mixture.  Of  this 
kind  also,  are  the  bound  and  infinity  of  the  mixed  life,  each  being  the 


176 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


HOOK  III. 


element  of  the  whole  of  felicity.  Hence  also  each  is  indigent  of  each. 
And  neither  is  intellect  by  itself  desirable,  nor  perfect  pleasure.  It  is 
necessary  however,  that  the  good  should  consist  of  all  these,  viz.  of  the 
desirable,  the  sufficient,  and  the  perfect.  Bound  itself  therefore  and  in- 
finity, which  are  separate,  subsist  according  to  cause  prior  to  that  which  is 
mixed.  But  the  bound  and  infinity  which  are  mixed  are  more  imperfect 
than  the  mixture.  Hence,  from  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident  what  the 
things  are  of  which  the  mixture  consists. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Ik  the  next  place,  we  must  speak  of  the  triad,  which  is  consubsistent 
with  this  mixture.  For  every  mixture,  if  it  is  rightly  made,  as  Socrates 
says,  requires  these  three  things,  beauty,  truth,  and  symmetry.  For  nei- 
ther will  any  thing  base,  if  it  is  introduced  into  the  mixture,  impart  recti- 
tude, since  it  will  be  the  cause  of  error,  and  of  inordinate  prerogative,  nor 
if  truth  is  at  auy  time  separated,  will  it  suffer  the  mixture  to  consist  of 
things  that  are  pure,  and  which  are  in  reality  subdued,  but  it  will  fill  the 
whole  with  an  image  and  with  non-being.  Nor  without  symmetry  will 
there  be  a  communion  of  the  elements,  and  an  elegant  association.  Sym- 
metry, therefore,  is  necessary  to  the  union  of  the  things  that  are  mingled, 
and  to  an  appropriate  communion.  But  truth  is  necessary  to  purity. 
And  beauty  to  order ;  which  also  renders  the  whole  lovely.  For  when 
each  thing  in  the  mixture  has  a  place  adapted  to  itself,  it  renders  both 
the  elements,  and  the  arrangement  resulting  from  them,  beautiful.  Here 
therefore,  in  the  first  mixture,  these  three  things  are  apparent,  symmetry, 
truth,  and  beauty.  And  symmetry  indeed  is  the  cause  to  the  mixture, 
that  being  is  one  ;  truth  is  the  cause  of  the  reality  of  its  existence  ;  and 
beauty  is  the  cause  of  its  being  intelligible.  Hence  it  is  intelligible  and 
truly  being.   That  also  which  is  primarily  being  is  more  uuiform,  and  in- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XII. 


OF  PLATO. 


177 


tcllect  is  conjoined  to  itr  according  to  its  familiarity  with  the  beautiful. 
But  each  participates  of  existence,  because  it   is  being  derived  from 
being.    That  which  is  mixed  however,  is  supreme  among  beings,  because 
it  is  united  to  the  good.    And  it  appears  to  me,  that  the  divine  lamblichus 
perceiving  these  three  causes  of  being,  defines  the  intelligible  in  these 
three,  viz.  in  symmetry,  truth,  and  beauty,  and  unfolds  the  intelligible 
Cods  through  these  in  the  Platonic  theology.    In  what  manner  indeed, 
the  intelligible  breadth  consists  of  these,  will  be  most  evident  as  we  pro- 
ceed.   Now  however,  from  what  has  been  said,  it  is  perfectly  manifest 
why  Socrates  says  that  this  triad  is  found  to  be  in  the  vestibules  of  the 
good.    For  that  which  is  primarily  being  participates  of  this  triad  through 
its  union  with  the  good.    For  because  indeed  the  good  is  the  measure  of 
all  beings,  the  first  being  becomes  itself  commensurate.    Because  the 
former  is  prior  to  being,  the  latter  subsists  truly  and  really.   And  because 
the  former  is  good  and  desirable,  the  latter  presents  itself  to  the  view  as 
the  beautiful  itself.   Here  therefore,  the  first  beauty  also  subsists ;  and  on 
this  account  the  one  h  not  only  the  cause  of  good,  but  likewise  of  beauty, 
as  Plato  says  in  his  Epistles.    Beauty  however  subsists  here  occultly, 
since  this  order  comprehends  all  things  uniformly,  in  consequence  of  sub- 
sisting primarily  from  the  principles  [bound  and  infinity].    But  where 
and  how  beauty  is  unfolded  into  light,  we  shall  shortly  explain. 


— — . 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Such  therefore,  is  the  first  triad  of  intelligible*,  according  to  Socrates 
in  the  Ph Helms,  viz.  bound,  infinite,  and  that  which  is  mixed  from  these. 
And  of  these,  bound  indeed  is  a  God  proceeding  to  the  intelligible  sum- 
mit, from  the  imparticipable  and  first  God,  measuring  and  defining  all 
things,  and  giving  subsistence  to  every  paternal,  connective,  and  undefiled 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  Z 


178 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


genus  of"  Gods.  But  infinite  is  the  never-failing  power  of  this  God,  un- 
folding into  light  all  the  generative  orders,  and  all  infinity,  both  that  which 
is  prior  to  essence,  and  that  which  is  essential,  and  also  that  which  pro- 
ceeds as  far  as  to  the  last  matter.  And  that  which  is  mixed,  is  the  first 
and  highest  order  of  tbe  Gods,  comprehending  all  things  occultly,  deriving 
its  completion  indeed  through  the  intelligible  connective  triad,  but  uni- 
cally  comprehending  the  cause  of  every  being,  and  establishing  its  summit 
in  the  first  intelligibles,  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


After  this  first  triad  subsisting  from,  and  conjoined  with  the  one,  we 
shall  celebrate  the  second,  proceeding  from  this,  and  deriving  its  comple- 
tion through  things  analogous  '  to  the  triad  prior  to  it.  For  in  this  also 
it  is  necessary  that  being  should  participate,  and  that  the  one  should  be 
participated,  and  likewise  that  this  one  which  is  secondarily  one,  should 
be  generative  or  that  which  is  secondarily  being.  For  every  where  parti- 
cipated deity  constitutes  about  itself  that  which  participates  it.  Thus 
whole  souls  render  bodies  consubsistent  with  their  causes :  and  partial 
souls  generate,  in  conjunction  with  the  Gods,  irrational  souls.  Much 
more  therefore,  do  the  Gods  produce  in  conjunction  with  the  one  all  things. 
Hence,  as  the  first  of  the  unities  generates  the  summit  of  being,  so  like- 
wise the  middle  unity  constitutes  the  middle  being.  But  every  thing 
which  generates,  and  every  thing  which  makes  or  produces,  possesses  a 
power  prolific  of  the  things  produced,  according  to  which  it  produces, 
corroborates  and  connects  its  progeny.  Again  therefore,  there  will  be  a 
second  triad  unfolded  into  light  analogously  to  the  first.  And  one  thing 
indeed,  is  the  summit  of  it,  which  we  call  one,  deity,  and  hyparxis.  But 

1  For  oAoywv  it  is  necessary  to  read  uvatoymi. 


CHAP.  XI! I 


OF  PLATO. 


179 


another  thing  is  the  middle  of  it,  which  we  call  power.  And  another 
tiling  is  the  extremity  of  it,  which  wc  say  is  that  which  is  secondarily 
being.  This  however  is  intelligible  life.  For  all  things  are  in  the  intelli- 
gible, as  was  before  demonstrated,  viz.  to  be,  to  live,  and  to  energize  intel- 
lectually. And  the  summit  indeed,  of  the  intelligible  order,  is  all  things 
according  to  cause,  and  as  we  have  frequently  said,  occultly.  But  the 
middle  of  it,  causes  multitude  to  shine  forth,  and  proceeds  from  the  union 
of  being  into  manifest  light.  And  the  extremity  of  it,  is  now  all  intelli- 
gible multitude,  and  the  order  of  intelligible  forms.  For  forms  have  their 
subsistence  at  the  extremity  of  the  intelligible  order.  For  it  is  necessary 
that  forms  should  subsist  first  and  become  apparent  in  intellect.  If  there- 
fore being  abides  exemptly  in  the  first  mixture,  but  now  proceeds,  and  is 
generated  dyadically  from  the  monad,  there  will  be  motion  about  it ;  and 
if  there  is  motion,  it  is  also  necessary  that  there  should  be  intelligible  life. 
For  every  where  motion  is  a  certain  life,  since  some  one  calls  even  the 
motion  of  material  bodies  life.  That  which  is  first  therefore,  in  this  second 
triad,  may  be  called  bound  ;  that  which  is  second  in  it,  infinity ;  and  that 
which  is  the  third,  life.  For  the  second  triad  also  is  a  God,  possessing  pro- 
lific power,  and  unfolding  into  light  from,  and  about  itself,  that  which  is 
secondarily  being.  Here  however  also,  the  triad  is  analogous  to  the  first 
triad. 

But  again,  it  is  necessary  to  comprehend  by  reasoning  the  peculiarity 
of  this  triad.  For  the  first  triad  being  all  things,  but  intelligibly  and  uni- 
cally,  and  as  I  may  say,  speaking  Platonically,  according  to  the  form  of 
bound,  the  second  triad  is  indeed  all  things,  but  vitally,  and  as  I  may 
say,  following  the  philosopher,  according  to  the  form  of  infinity,  just  as 
the  third  triad  proceeds  according  to  the  peculiarity  of  that  which  is 
mixed.  For  as  in  the  progression  according  to  breadth,  that  which  is 
mixed  presents  itself  to  the  view  as  the  third,  so  likewise  in  the  progres- 
sion according  to  depth  of  intelligibles,  the  third  has  the  order  of  that 
which  is  mixed  with  reference  to  the  superior  triads.  The  middle  triad 
therefore,  is  indeed  all  things,  but  is  characterized  by  intelligible  infinity. 
For  the  three  principles  after  the  first,  orderly  distribute  for  us  the  intelli- 
gible genus  of  the  Gods.  For  bound  indeed,  unfolds  into  light  the  first 
triad  ;  but  infinity  the  second  ;  and  that  which  is  mixed,  the  third.    It  is 


v 


.Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


infinite  power  therefore,  according  to  which  the  second  triad  is  characte- 
rized. For  being  (he  middle,  it  subsists  according  to  the  middle  of  the 
first  triad,  being  all  things  from  all.  For  in,  each  triad,  there  is  bound* 
infinity,  and  that  which  is  mixed.  But  the  peculiarity  of  the  monads 
being  respectively  different,  evolves  the  intelligible  order  of  the  Gods. 
The  middle  triad  however,  Uiub  subsisting,  but  I  say  thus*  because  it  con. 
sists  of  all  the  things  of  which  the  triad  prior  to  it  consists,  yet  it  contains 
and  connects  the  middle  of  intelligibles-  according  to  infinite  power,  and 
is  filled  indeed  from  a  more  elevated  union*  but  fills  the  union  posterior  to 
itself  with  the  powers  of  being.  And  it  is  measured  indeed,  from  thence 
uniformly,  but  measures  the  third  triad  by  the  power  of  itself.  And  it 
abides  indeed*  in  the  first  triad  stably,  but  it  establishes  in  itself  the  triad 
which  is  next  in  order.  And  in  short,  it  binds  to  itself  the  intelligible 
centre,  and  establishes  one  intelligible  coherence ;  causing  indeed  that 
which  is  occult  and.  possesses  the  fiorm  of  the  one  in  the  first  triad,  to  shine 
forth ;  but  collecting  Ae  intelligible  multitude  of  the  third  triad,  and 
comprehending  it  on  all  sides.  The  being  however,  which  gives  comple- 
tion to  this  triad  is  mixed,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  being  of  the  triad 
prior  to  it,  and  receives  the  peculiarity  of  life.  For  the  infinity  in  this 
generates  hfe. 

It  is  likewise  necessary  that  this  triad  should  participate  of  the  three 
things*  symmetry,  truth,  and  beauty.  That  which  is  primarily  being 
however,  principally  subsists  according  to  symmetry,  which  unites  it,  and 
conjoins  it  to  the  gwd.  But  the  second  triad,  principally  subsists  accord- 
ing to  truth.  For  because  it  participates  of  that  which  is  primarily  being,, 
it  is  being,  and  truly  l>eing.  And  the  third  triad  principally  subsists 
according  to  the  beautiful.  For  there  intelligible  multitude,  order  and 
beauty,  first  shine  forth  to  the  view.  Hence  this  being  is  the  most  beau- 
tiful of  all  intelligihka.  This  however  will  be  discussed  hereafter.  As. 
there  is  a  triad  therefore,  in  each  of  the  mixtures,  the  first  indeed,  sym- 
metry especially  comprehends  and  connects ;  the  second  truth,  and  the 
third  beauty.  And  this  induced  the  divine  Iamblichus  to  say,  that  Plato 
in  these  three  defines  the  whole  of  the  intelligible  fjorder].  For  all  are 
in  each,  but  one  of  these  predominates  more  in  one  of  the  intelligible 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIV. 


OF  PLATO. 


181 


monads  than  in  another.  Moreover,  the  third  triad  presents  itself  to  the 
view  after  this.  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  extremity  of  being  should 
also  be  deified,  and  should  participate  of  an  intelligible  unity.  For  beings 
are  not  more  in  number  than  the  unities,  as  Parmenides  says,  nor  are  the 
uuities  more  numerous  than  beings ;  but  each  progression  of  being  par- 
ticipates of  the  one ;  since  this  universe  also,  according  to  each  part  of 
itself,  is  governed  by  soul  and  intellect.  By  a  mnch  greater  priority 
therefore,  must  the  intelligible  in  its  first,  middle,  and  last  hypostases, 
participate  of  the  intelligible  Gods. 


CHAPTER  XIV, 

As  the  first  unity  therefore,  after  the  exempt  cause  of  all  things, unfolds 
into  light  intelligible  being,  and  the  second  unity,  intelligible  life,  thus  also 
the  third  constitutes  about  itself,  intelligible  intellect,  and  fills  it  with  divine 
union,  constituting  poweras  the  medium  between  itself  and  being,  through 
which  it  gives  completion  to  this  being,  and  converts  it  to  itself.  In  this 
therefore,  every  intelligible  multitude  shi  ncs  forth  to  the  view.  For  the 
whole  of  this  being  is  intelligible  intellect,  life,  and  essence.  And  it  is 
neither  all  tilings  according  to  cause,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  which  is 
primarily  being,  nor  docs  it  cause  all  things  to  shine  forth,  as  the  second 
being  does,  but  it  is  as  it  were  all  things  according  to  energy,  and  openly. 
Hence  also,  it  is  the  boundary  of  all  intelligiblcs.  For  since  the  progres- 
sion of  beings  is  accomplished  according  to  similitude,  the  first  being  is 
most  similar  to  the  one  ;  the  second,  is  parturient  with  multitude,  and  is 
the  origin  of  separation ;  but  the  third,  is  now  all-perfect,  and  unfolds 
into  light  in  itself,  intelligible  multitude  and  form. 

Farther  still,  as  the  first  triad  abides  occultly  in  bound,  and  fixes  in 
itself  every  thing  that  is  stable  in  intelligibles ;  but  the  second  abides 


182 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  HI. 


and  at  the  same  time  proceeds  ;  so  the  third,  after  progression  converts 
the  intelligible  end  to  the  beginning,  and  convolves  the  order  to  itself. 
For  it  is  every  where  the  province  of  intellect  to  convert  and  converge  to 
the  intelligible.  All  these  likewise  are  uniform  [i.  e.  have  the  form  of  one] 
and  intelligible,  viz.  the  abiding,  the  proceeding,  and  the  returning.  For 
each  of  these  is  not  asserted  after  the  same  manner  in  intelligibles.  And 
the'  intelligible  genus  of  Gods  '  is  unical,  simple,  and  occult,  conjoining 
itself  to  the  one  itself  which  is  prior  to  beings  ;  and  unfolds  1  into  light 
nothing  else  than  the  transcendency  of  the  one.  For  these  three  triads, 
mystically  announce  that  unknown  cause  the  first  and  perfectly  imparti- 
cipable  God.  The  first  of  them  indeed,  announcing  his  ineffable  union  ; 
the  second  his  transcendency,  by  which  he  surpasses  all  powers  ;  and 
the  third,  his  all-perfect  generation  of  beings.  For  as  they  are  able  to 
comprehend  the  principle  which  surpasses  both  the  union  and  the 
powers  of  all  beings,  so  they  exhibit  to  secondary  natures,  his 1  admirable 
transcendency ;  receiving  indeed  separately  the  unical  power  and  domi- 
nion of  the  first  God ;  but  unfolding  into  light  intelligibly  the  cause  which 
is  prior  to  intelligibles.  For  these  Gods  though  they  arc  allotted  a  sim- 
plicity which  is  equally  exempt  from  all  the  divine  orders,  yet  they  fall 
short  of  the  union  of  the  father.  Of  this  triad  therefore,  which  converts 
all  intelligibles  to  the  first  principle,  and  convolves  the  multitude  apparent 
in  itself  to  the  stable  union  of  the  whole  of  things,  one  thing  is  bound, 
and  unity  and  hyparxis ;  another,  is  infinity  and  power ;  and  another  is 
that  which  is  mixed,  essence,  life,  and  intelligible  intellect.  But  the  whole 
triad  subsists  according  to  being,  and  is  the  intellect  of  the  first  triad. 
For  the  first  triad  is  an  intelligible  God  primarily.  But  the  triad  posterior 
to  it  is  an  intelligible  and  intellectual  God.  And  the  third  triad  is  an  in- 
tellectual God.  These  three  deities  also,  and  triadic  monads,  give  com- 
pletion to  the  intelligible  genera.  For  they  are  monads  according  to  their 
deities ;  since  all  other  things  are  suspended  from  the  Gods,  and  also 

■  The  word*  rm>  ftn-a  in  the  original  immediately  before  T»  nnrn  lw  ynof,  are  to  be  rejected 
a»  superfluous. 

*  ,*?«>n.  is  omitted  in  the  original. 

*  For  txiiwi;,  it  is  necessary  to  read  exuvw. 


Digitized 


CHAR  XiV.  OF  PLATO.  J8S 

powers  and  beings.    But  they  are  triads  according  to  a  separate  division. 
For  bound,  infinity,  and  that  which  is  mixed,  have  a  threefold  subsist- 
ence ;  but  in  one  place  indeed,  all  things  are  according  to  bound ;  in 
another,  all  things  are  according  to  infinity  ;  and  in  another,  all  things 
are  according  to  that  which  is  mixed.    And  in  one  place,  that  which  is 
mixed  is  essence ;  in  another,  it  is  intelligible  life ;  and  in  another,  intel- 
ligible intellect.    In  this  last  therefore,  forms  subsist  primarily.    For  the 
separation  of  intelligiblcs,  unfolds  the  order  of  forms;  because  form  is 
being,  but  is  not  simply  being.    Hence  that  which  is  primarily  being,  is 
being  itself,  and  is  that  which  is  being.    But  that  which  is  the  second 
being,  is  power,  proceeding  indeed  from  the  first  being,  and  existing  as  it 
were  a  duad  generative  of  the  multitude  of  beings,  but  not  yet  being 
multitude.    And  that  which  is  the  third  being,  is  itself  the  multitude  of 
beings ;  being  there  existing  with  separation.    For  being  is  the  exempt 
cause  of  those  things  which  forms  constitute  divisibly.  And  of  the  things 
of  which  being  is  productive  collectively,  of  these,  forms  are  the  cause  in  a 
way  attended  with  separation.  Because  forms  indeed,  are  causes  produc- 
tive of  separation  in  their  effects,  and  also  because  forms  are  called  the 
paradigms  of  beings.    Being  however,  is  the  cause  of  all  things  posterior 
to  itself,  but  is  not  the  paradigm  of  them.  For  paradigms  are  the  causes  of 
things  which  are  separated  according  to  existence,  and  which  have  diffe- 
rent characters  of  essence.    After  the  one  therefore  which  is  prior  to 
beings,  that  which  is  one-many  occultly,  and  the  united  subsists.  On  this 
account,  it  is  that  which  is  divided  into  multitude,  and  which  tends  from 
the  uniform  to  the  splendid.    But  the  last  of  intelligibles,  is  that  from 
which  a  certain  distribution  into  parts  originates,  and  which  is  compre- 
hensive of  intelligible  multitude. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Socrates  therefore,  in  the  Philebus,  affords  us  such  like  auxiliaries  to 
the  theory  of  the  intelligible  triads.    It  is  requisite  however,  not  only 
to  abide  in  these  conceptions,  but  also  to  demonstrate  the  theology  of 
Plato  about  these  triads  from  other  dialogues,  and  from  them  to  point  out 
one  truth  adapted  to  the  things  themselves.    We  shall  assume  therefore, 
what  is  written  in  the  Timaeus,  and  shall  follow  our  leader  [Syrianus^  who 
has  unfolded  to  us  the  arcane  mysteries  of  these  triads,  and  conjoin  with 
the  end  of  what  has  been  said  the  beginning  of  the  following  discussion, 
in  the  Timaeus  therefore,  Plato  investigating  what  the  paradigm  of  the 
whole  world  is,  discovers  that  it  is  comprehensive  of  alt  intelligible  ani- 
mals, that  it  is  all-perfect,  that  it  is  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligible*, 
that  it  is  only-begotten,  and  that  it  is  the  intelligible  of  the  demiurgus.  He 
likewise  denominates  it  animal  itself,  as  being  the  intelligible  paradigm  of 
every  am  mal,  and  of  that  which  is  the  object  of  sense.    Hence  it  is  ne*. 
cessary  that  this  animal  itself,  because  it  is  all-perfect,  and  the  most  beau- 
tiful of  intelligibles,  should  be  established  m  the  intelligible  orders.  For 
though  there  is  intelligible  animal  m  the  demiurgus,  yet  it  is  rather  intel- 
lectual than  intelligible,  and  is  not  the  most  beautiful  of  all  intelligibles, 
but  is  second  to  them  in  beauty  and  power.    For  primary  beauty  is  in 
the  intelligible  Gods.    In  the  demiurgus  also,  there  are  not  only  four 
forms  of  the  things  contained  in  the  world,  but  there  is  all  the  multitude 
of  forms.    For  in  him  the  paradigms  of  individual  forms  presubsist.  But 
animal  itself  is  totally  constitutive  of  all  animals  by  the  intelligible  tetrad. 
The  demiurgus  likewise  is  not  like  animal  itself  only-begotten  among  be- 
ings, but  subsists  in  conjunction  with  the  vivific  cause,  together  with  which 
he  constitutes  the  second  genera  of  being,  mingling  them  in  the  crater  or 
bowl,  in  order  to  the  generation  of  souls.    For  of  the  things  of  which  in- 
telligible animal  is  effective  and  at  the  same  time  generative,  of  these  the 
demiurgus  is  allotted  the  cause  in  a  divided  manner,  in  conjunction  with 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XV. 


OF  PLATO. 


185 


the  crater.  Hence,  as  I  have  said,  animal  itself  is  exempt  from  the  de- 
mi  urgus,  and  is,  asTimseus  every  where  denominates  it,  intelligible. 

Nevertheless,  because  forms  are  first  separated  in  it,  and  because  it  is 
all-perfect,  it  subsists  in  the  third  order  of  intelligibles.  For  neither  that 
which  is  primarily,  nor  that  which  is  secondarily  being,1  is  all-perfect. 
For  the  former  is  beyond  all  separation  ;  but  the  latter  generates  indeed, 
and  is  parturient  with  intelligibles,  but  is  not  yet  the  multitude  of  beings. 
If  therefore  neither  of  these  is  multitude,  how  can  either  of  them  be  all- 
perfect  multitude  ?  If  however  all-perfect  multitude  shines  forth  in  the 
third  triad  of  intelligibles,  as  wa9  a  little  before  demonstrated,  but  animal 
itself  is  the  first  paradigm  (for  it  is  comprehensive  of  all  intelligible  ani- 
mals,  is  an  only-begotten  paradigm,  and  is  not  conjoined  with  any  other 
principle)  it  is  necessary  that  animal  itself  should  be  established  accord- 
ing to  this  order.  For  either  there  will  not  be  an  intelligible  paradigm, 
(and  in  this  case,  how  will  sensibles  be  images  of  intelligibles?  or  how 
will  the  intelligible  Gods  be  the  fathers  of  the  whole  of  things  >)  or  tf 
there  is,  it  is  the  third  in  intelligibles.  For  the  natures  which  are  prior 
to  the  triad  in  intelligibles,  are  not  all-perfect ;  since  they  are  exempt 
from  the  division  into  multitude.  But  the  natures  posterior  to  it  are  not 
only-begotten.  For  they  proceed  together  with  others ;  the  male  indeed, 
with  the  female,  and  those  that  are  of  a  demiurgic  together  with  those 
that  are  of  a  generative  characteristic  Nor  are  they  the  roost  beautiful 
of  intelligibles ;  for  beauty  is  in  the  intelligible.  But  animal  itself  is  all- 
perfect,  and  at  the  same  time  only  begotten.  The  first  paradigm  of  beings 
therefore,  is  arranged  in  the  third  triad  of  intelligibles.  Moreover,  animal 
itself  is  eternal,  as  Timeeus  himself  says.  For  says  he,  "the  nature  of 
animal  is  eternal."  And  again,  in  another  place  he  asserts,  "  that  the 
paradigm  is  through  all  eternity  being."  If  therefore  it  is  eternal,  it  par- 
ticipates of  eternity.  And  if  that  which  participates  is  every  where 
secondary  to  that  which  is  participated,  animal  itself  is  secondary  to  eter- 
nity. And  if  it  is  through  all  eternity  being,  it  is  filled  with  the  whole 
power  of  eternity.    If  this  however  be  the  case,  it  subsists  proximately 

'  ro.   Intelligible  life,  or  life  iuelf,  or  the  fir*  life. 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  $  A 


Digitized  by  Google 


186  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

after  eternity.  For  that  which  enjoys  the  whole  of  causes,  is  arranged 
proximately  after  them. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

Moreover,  if  eternity  has  the  same  ratio  to  intelligible  animal,  which, 
time  has  to  that  which  is  sensible,  but  the  universe  proximately  partici- 
pates of  time  (for  time  was  generated  together  with  the  uiyverse)  it  is 
certainly  necessary  that  animal  itself  should  primarily  participate  of 
eternity.  Eternity  therefore  is  beyond  the  first  paradigm.  For  eternity 
indeed  measures  the  existence  of  animal  itself :  but  animal  itself  is  mea- 
sured and  filled  with  perpetuity  from  it.  To  which  may  bemadded,  that 
we  assert  eternity  to  be  the  cause  of  immortality  to  all  things.  Hence 
eternity  is  that  which  is  primarily  immortal.  For  as  that  which  is  pri- 
marily being  is  the  cause  of  existence  to  all  things,  but  that  which  is 
effective  of  form  is  itself  prior  to  other  forms,  so  that  which  is  the  cause 
of  perpetuity  and  immortality,  is  itself  primarily  inunortal.  The  daemo- 
niacal  Aristotle  also  rightly-  calls  eternity  immortal  and  divine,  and  that 
from  whence  the  existence  and  life  of  all  things  are  suspended.  If  how- 
ever it  is  that  which  is  primarily  immortal,  and  not  according  to  partici- 
pation, but  is  as  it  were  immortality  and  perpetuity, it  will  be  life,  pos- 
sessing from  itself  the  ever,  and  exuberantly  scattering  the  power  of  per- 
petuity, and  extending  it  to  other  things,  so  far  as  each  is  naturally  adapt- 
ed to  receive  it.  For  the  immortal  is  in  life,  and  subsists  together  with 
life.  Hence  Socrates  in  the  Phredo,"  after  many  and  beautiful  demon- 
strations of  the  psychical  immortality,  says,  "  God  therefore,  my  dear 
Cebes,  and  the  form  itself  of  life,  are  much  more  immortal."  Hence,  in- 
telligible life,  and  the  God  who  is  connective  of  this  life,  primarily  pos- 
sess the  immortal,  and  are  the  fountain  of  the  whole  of  perpetuity.  But 

'  For  <Pa>lf*>  it  U  necessary  to  read  tfsuW 


Digitized  by  LiOOQle 


CHAP.  XVI.  OF  PLATO.  187 

this  is  eternity.  Eternity  therefore  has  its  subsistence  in  life,  and  will 
be  established  in  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  order. 

Farther  still,  it  is  necessary  to  assert  that  intelligible  eternity  is  one  of 
these  thiee  things,  viz.  that  it  subsists  either  according  to  being,  or  ac- 
cording to  life,  or  according  to  intelligible  intellect.  But  being,  as  the 
Elean  guest  says,  according  to  its  own  nature,  neither  stands  still,  nor  is 
moved.  For  if  being  is  being  to  all  things,  and  essence  is  a  thing  of 
this  kind,  much  more  must  this  be  the  case  with  intelligible  essence  and 
that  which  is  primarily  being.  For  they  are  nothing  eke  than  essence 
only.  But  being  unfolds  motion  and  permanency,  and  the  other  genera 
of  beings,  in  the  second  and  third  progressions  of  itself.  The  first  being 
therefore,  as  we  have  said,  is  at  one  and  tlie  same  time  exempt  from 
motion  and  permanency.  But  eternity  according  to  Timeeus  abides  in 
one.  Hence  also  time  imitates  in  its  motion  the  intelligible  permanency 
of  eternity.  Eternity  therefore  does  not  subsist  according  to  that 
which  is  primarily  being,  nor  yet  according  to  intelligible  intellect.'  For 
neither  is  soul  time,  which  is  moved  through  the  whole  of  time.  And  in 
short,  in  divine  beings,  that  which  is  participated  is  every  where  esta- 
blished above  that  which  participates.  But  the  eternal  participates  of 
eternity,  just  as  that  which  is  temporal  participates  of  time.  Eternity 
therefore  is  prior  to  intelligible  intellect,  and  posterior  to  being ;  so  that 
it  is  established  in  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  breadth.  And  as  ani- 
mal itself  is  eternal,  so  likewise  eternity  is  that  which  is  always  being. 
For  as  animal  itself  participates  of  eternity,  so  eternity  participates  of 
being,  and  is  the  cause  of  existence,  of  perpetual  life,  and  intellection, 
and  measures  the  essences,  powers  and  energies  of  all  things. 

»  It  is  here  necessary  to  supply  «XV  ovfc       t*»  vow  tw  mpw- 


Digitized  by  Google 


188 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Stock,  however,  eternity  subsists  according  to  the  middle  centre  of  in- 
teliigibles,  and  animal  itself  according  to  the  extremity  of  them,  and  the 
most  splendid  of  that  which  is  intelligible,  what  is  that  which  is  the  first 
of  intclligibles,  and  how  is  it  denominated  by  Timaeus?  He  says  there- 
lore  of  eternity,  that  while  it  abides  in  one,  time  proceeds  according  to 
number;  and  that  by  motion  it  adumbrates  the  permanency  of  eternity, 
but  by  number,  its  stable  union.  What  therefore  is  that  one,  in  which 
Timaeus  says  eternity  abides  ?  For  it  is  necessary  either  to  say  that  it  is 
the  one  of  eternity,  or  the  one  which  transcends  all  intelligibles,  or  the 
one  of  the  first  triad.  But  if  indeed,  we  say  that  it  is  the  imparticipable 
one,  how  is  it  possible  that  any  thing  can  abide  in  that  which  is  exempt 
from  all  things;  and  which  neither  admits  the  habitude  nor  communion 
Of  secondary  natures  with  itself?  For  every  thing  which  abides  in  any 
thing,  is  in  a  certain  respect  on  all  sides  comprehended  by  that  in  which 
we  say  it  abides.  It  is  however  perfectly  impossible  that  the  first  one 
should  either  comprehend  any  being,  or  be  coarranged  with  beings.  But 
if  any  one  should  suppose  that  it  is  the  one  of  eternity,  in  which  Timaeus 
says  eternity  abides,  in  this  case,  eternity  will  be  in  itself.  It  is  necessary 
however,  that  it  should  abide  in  itself,  by  having  its  subsistence  in  abiding 
in  that  which  is  prior  to  itself.  For  to  abide  in  that  which  is  prior  to,  is 
better  than  the  establishment  of  things  in  themselves,  in  the  same  manner 
as  it  is  more  perfect  than  the  collocation  of  better  in  less  excellent  natures. 
If  therefore  eternity  abides  in  itself,  to  what  shall  we  primarily  assign 
permanency  in  that  which  is  prior  to  itself?  For  it  is  necessary  that  this 
being  more  divine,  should  have  its  generation  prior  to  that  which  is  infe- 
rior to  it.  If  therefore  eternity  can  neither  abide  in  itself,  nor  in  the  one 
which  is  prior  to  beings,  it  is  evident  that  abiding  in  one  according  to 
Timaeus,  it  is  established  in  the  one  of  the  first  triad,  or  rather  in  the  whole 


Digitized  by  Google 


/ 


CHAP.  XVIII.  OF  PLATO.  IQQ 

of  that  triad.  For,  as  we  have  before  observed,  the  first  triad  is  the  cause 
of  stability  to  all  beings,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  middle  triad  is  the 
cause  of  their  progression,  and  the  third  triad  of  their  conversion  to  their 
principle. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Again  therefore,  three  orders  of  intelligibles  present  themselves  to  our 
view,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Timaeus,  viz.  animal  itself,  eternity, 
and  the  oue.  And  through  this  one,  and  the  firm  establishment  in  it, 
eternity  has  fixed  the  intelligible  kingdom.  But  through  eternity,  animal 
itself  defines  the  boundary  of  the  intelligible  Gods,  according  to  a  per- 
petual and  invariable  sameness.  And  animal  itself  indeed,  having  pro- 
ceeded tetradically,  is  suspended  from  the  duad  in  eternity.  For  eternity 
is  tlu  ever  in  conjunction  with  being.  But  the  duad  in  eternity  participates 
of  the  intelligible  monad,  which  Timams  on  this  account  denominates 
one,  as  being  the  monad  and  principle  of  all  the  intelligible  breadth.  Since 
otherwise  indeed,  he  very  properly  calls  the  first  triad  one,  in  consequence 
of  its  being  especially  characterized  according  to  bound,  denominating 
it  from  bound.  But  he  calls  the  middle  triad  dyadically,  eternity,  con- 
necting the  names  ;  because  this  triad  is  defined  according  to  intelligible 
jiower.  And  lie  denominates  the  third  triad  animal  itself,  transferring  the 
appellation  to  the  whole  of  it,  from  the  extremity  of  the  triad.  The  first 
triad  therefore  is  the  union  ofull  the  intelligibles,  being  in  a  certain  respect 
coordinated  with  them.  For  the  union  is  different  from  this  which  is  ex- 
empt from  intelligibles  and  im participate.  It  is  also  the  supplier  of 
stable  power.  For  all  things  are  established  on  account  of  it.  But  eter- 
nity is  primary  being,  and  is  that  which  is  primarily  established.  Hence, 
with  respect  to  the  permanency  of  the  whole  of  things,  we  say  that  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


190 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


nooK  m. 


first  triad  is  that  on  account  of  which  this  permanency  is  effected ;  but  that 
the  second  triad  is  that  by  vrhich  it  is  produced.    For  the  firm  establish- 
ment of  beings  is  indeed  according  to  this  second  triad,  but  is  on  account 
of  the  first.    But  the  second  triad  is  the  proximate  measure  of  all  beings, 
and  is  coordinated  with  the  things  that  are  measured.    There  arc  also 
at  one  and  the  same  time  in  it,  bound  and  infinity  ;  bound  indeed,  so  far 
as  it  measures  intelligibles  ;  but  infinity,  so  far  as  it  is  the  cause  of  perpe- 
tuity, and  the  ever.    For  according  to  the  oracle,  eternity  is  the  cause  of 
never-failing  life,  of  unwearied  power,  and  unsluggish  energy.  Neverthe- 
less, eternity  is  more  characterised  by  infinity  [than  by  bound.]  For  it  com- 
prehends in  itself  infinite  time.    And  time  indeed  has  bound  and  infinity 
in  a  divided  manner.    For  according  to  its  continuity,  it  is  infinite;  but 
according  to  the  now  it  is  bounded.    For  the  now  is  a  bound.    But  eter- 
nity establishes  bound  and  infinity  in  the  same.    For  it  is  a  unity  and 
power.    And  according  to  the  one  indeed,  it  is  bound ;  but  according  to 
power  infinite ;  which  time  *  also  demonstrates  as  from  images  ;  because 
the  middle  triad  [of  intelligibles]  has  bound,  infinity,  and  that  which  is 
mixed.    For  whence  is  the  bound  of  time  derived  except  from  eternal 
bound?    For  the  temporal  bound  also  is  impartible,  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  bound  of  eternity  is  one.  For  the  impartible  is  the  image  of  the  one. 
Whence  likewise  is  the  infinity  of  the  continuity  of  time  derived  except 
from  the  power  of  the  infinite  ?    For  the  latter  is  a  stable  infinity,  but  the 
former  an  infinity  which  is  moved.    And  as  the  latter  stands  still  accord- 
ing to  the  one,  so  the  former  is  moved  according  to  number.  Since 
whence  i6  the  alliance  of  time  with  lives,  except  from  the  first  principle 
[of  life,  eternity  ?]    But  time  proceeds  through  all  temporal  life. 

Again,  therefore,  from  these  things  it  is  evident,  that  eternity  subsists 
according  to  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  Gods.  For  here  there  is  infi- 
nite life,  and  the  cause  of  all  life,  intellectual,  psychical,  and  that  which 
subsists  partibly  in  bodies.  But  eternity  is  the  father  and  supplier  of  in- 
finite life;  since  eternity  is  also  the  cause  of  all  immortality  and  perpe- 
tuity.   And  Flotinus,  exhibiting,  in  a  most  divinely  inspired  manner,  the 

*  •  xfovo;  U  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


chap.  xrin. 


OF  PLATO". 


peculiarity  '  of  eternity,  according  to  the  theology  of  Plato,  defines  it  to 
be  infinite  life,  at  once  unfolding  into  light  the  whole  of  itself,  and  its  own 
being.    For  establishing  its  life  in  the  intelligible  centre,  and  through  the 
one  indeed  measuring  its  being,  and  fixing  it  in  that  which  is  prior  to  itself, 
but  through  power  causing  it  to  be  infinite,  it  unfolds  indeed  the  uniform- 
transcendency  of  the  first  triad,  but  defines  the  termination  of  the  Gods, 
and  extends  from  the  middle  on  all  sides,  and  to  all  the  intelligible 
breadth.  Moreover  the  third  triad  is  filled  indeed  with  intelligible  life,' and 
on  this  account  is  an  intelligible  animal,  and  the  first  animal.    For  it  pri- 
marily participates  of  the  whole  nature  of  this  life ;  but  unfolds  into  light 
in  itself  the  first  of  forms,  to  which  also  the  demiurgic  intellect  extending 
itself,  constitutes  the  whole  world,  and  is  itself  the  intelligible  universe, 
and  the  apparent  world  the  sensible  universe.    Hence  also,  Plato  denomi- 
nates animal  itself  all-perfect    Or  rather,  if  you  are  willing  we  will  speak 
thus  :  that  in  this  third  triad,  there  are  bound,  infinity,  and  that  which  kv 
mixed,  which  we  have  called  intelligible  intellect.    Hence  the  whole  triad 
is  denominated  only-begotten  from  the  father  which  is  in  it.    For  the 
cause  of  bound  imparts,  that  which  is  uncoordinated  with  other  things,, 
and  an  exempt  transcendency.    For  that  which  comprehends,  says  rfi- 
inreus,  all  such  animals  as  are  intelligible,  will  not  be  the  second  with 
any  other ;  since  again,  it  would  be  requisite  that  there  should  be  ano- 
ther animal  about  it.    Hence  that  which  comprehends  in  one  all  intelli- 
gible animals  is  a  whole.    But  every  where  whole  is  referred  '  to  bound, 
and  parts  to  infinity.    So  that  if  on  this  account  animal  itself  is  only-be- 
gotten, it  will  possess  this  peculiarity  according  to  bound.    But  again,  it 
is  denominated  eternal  according  to  the  power  of  it.    For  this  power 
especially  pertains  to  that  which  is  eternal.    For  eternity  is  infinite 
power  abiding  in  one,  and  proceeding  stably.    Animal  itself,  however,  is 
all-perfect  according  to  intellect.    For  that  which  unfolds  in  itself  all  the 
intelligible  separation  of  being,  is  intelligible  intellect.    And  that  intel- 

'  Instead  of  aTiiozrrra,  it  U  necessary  to  read  itivnpa. 
*  {anij  is  omitted  in  the  original. 

1  Instead  of  wpo  rtu  xtpuras,  »ai  *?<>  ms  *mfi*f,  it  is  necessary  to  read  TftS  m  aru5. 


Digitized  by  Google 


19^  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  in. 

lect,  according  to  the  decision  of  Plato,  will  be  all-perfect,  which  compre- 
hends all  intelligibles,  and  defines  the  boundary  of  the  intelligible  order. 
The  only-begotten,  therefore,  the  eternal,  the  all-perfect,  bound,  infinity, 
and  that  which  is  mixed,  manifest  the  nature  of  intelligible  animal.  On 
this  account,  Timreus  also,  in  these  three  conclusions,  reminds  us  of  the 
paradigm,  viz.  in  the  conclusion  which  shews  that  the  universe  is  only- 
begotten,  and  again,  in  the  generation  of  time,  and  in  the  all-perfect  com- 
prehension of  all  animals. 

If  likewise  Timieus  says,  that  animal  itself  is  the  most  beautiful  of  all 
intelligibles,  and  that  this  has  the  third  order  in  intelligibles,  it  will  not 
be  wonderful.  For  it  has  beeu  before  asserted  by  us,  that  every  where 
the  cause  of  the  best  mixture  is  the  triad  symmetry,  truth,  and  beauty. 
But  beauty  principally  shines  forth  in  the  third  progression  of  being,  and 
exhibits  its  luminous  nature  together  with  intelligible  forms,  just  as  truth 
shines  forth  in  the  second,  and  symmetry  in  the  first  progression  of  being. 
If,  however,  truth  is  indeed  the  first,  beauty  the  second,  and  symmetry 
the  third,  it  is  by  no  means  wonderful,  that  according  to  order,  truth  and 
beauty  should  be  prior  to  symmetry ;  but  that  symmetry  being  more  ap- 
parent in  the  first  triad  than  the  other  two,  should .  shine  forth  as  the 
third  in  the  secondary  progressions.  For  these  three  subsist  occultly  in 
the  first  triad.  And  truth  indeed,  so  far  as  it  is  intelligible  knowledge,  is 
in  the  second  triad ;  but  beauty  so  far  as  it  is  the  form  of  forms  is  in  the 
third  triad.  For  that  this  triad  subsists  there  first,  is  evident  from  this, 
that  truth  is  primarily  in  that  which  is  especially  being,  prior  to  know- 
ledge. But  beauty,  which  pervades  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  beings,  is  ne- 
cessarily in  the  first  being,  from  which  the  last  of  beings  are  derived. 
And  the  first  symmetry  is  in  that  which  is  primarily  mixed.  For  every 
mixture  requires  symmetry,  in  order  that  what  is  produced  from  it  may 
be  one  certain  thing.  Though  these  three  things,  therefore,  presubsist 
there,  for  we  assume,  as  acknowledged  universally,  that  symmetry  is 
there,  and  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligible  animals,  as  Timaeus  says,  yet 
at  present  we  shall  dismiss  the  further  consideration  of  them,  as  we  have 
elsewhere  preccdaneously  discussed  them,  and  have  especially  endea- 
voured to  enforce  what  we  conceive  to  be  the  opinion  of  Plato  concern- 


Digitized  by  Google 


C1IAP.  XIX. 


OF  PLATO. 


193 


ing  their  order.  For  we  have  spoken  of  these  things  in  a  treatise  consist- 
ing of  one  t>ook,  in  which  we  demonstrate  that  truth  is  co-ordinate  to  the 
philosopher,  beauty  to  the  lover,  and  symmetry  to  the  musician;  and 
that  such  as  is  the  order  of  these  lives,  such  also  is  the  relation  of  truth, 
beauty,  and  symmetry  to  each  other. 

Animal  itself,  therefore,  may  with  the  greatest  justice,  be  called  most 
beautiful,  so  far  as  it  is  eminently  coutained  in  intelligible  beauty.  For 
beauty  is  wont  to  be  carried  in  forms,  and  is  as  it  were  the  form  of  forms, 
unfolding  that  which  is  occult  in  the  good,  causing  its  loveliness  to  shine 
forth,  and  attracting  to  its  own  splendor  the  desire  which  is  concealed 
about  it.    And  to  the  good  indeed,  ail  diings  possess  a  silent  and  arcane 
tendency ;  but  we  are  excited  to  the  beautiful  with  astonishment  and 
motion.    For  the  illumination  from  it,  and  its  efficacy,  acutely  pervade 
throng!)  every  soul,  and  as  being  the  most  similar  of  all  things  to  the  good, 
it  converts  every  soul  that  surveys  it.    The  soul  also,  beholding  that 
which  is  arcane  shining  forth  as  it  were  to  the  view,  rejoices  in,  and  ad- 
mires that  which  it  sees,  and  is  astonished  about  it.    And  as  in  the  most 
holy  of  the  mysteries,  prior  to  the  mystic  spectacles,  those  that  are  ini- 
tiated, are  seized  with  astonishment,  so  in  intelligibles  prior  to  the  partici- 
pation of  the  good,  beauty  shining  forth,  astonishes  those  that  behold  it, 
converts  the  soul  to  itself,  and  being  established  in  the  vestibules  [of  the 
good]  shows  what  that  is  which  is  in  the  adyta,  and  what  the  transcen- 
dency is  of  occult  good.    Through  these  things  therefore,  let  it  be  appa- 
rent whence  beauty  originates,  and  how  it  first  shines  forth ;  and  also 
that  animal  itself  is  the  most  beautiful  of  all  intelligibles. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

Since,  however,  Timazus  says  that  the  primary  and  intelligible  para- 
digms have  their  subsistence  in  intelligible  animal,  and  that  all  these  are 
Proc.  Voi»  I.  2  B 


Digitized  by  Google 


194 


ON  THE.  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  ill. 


four,  unfold iug  themselves  first  into  light,  according  to  the  all-perfect  te- 
trad,— this  being  the  case,  in  the  first  place  it  deserves  to  be  considered, 
that  as  species  or  forms  present  themselves  to  the  view  in  the  intelligible, 
it  is  necessary  by  a  much  greater  pi  iority,  that  the  genera  of  beings  should 
pre-subsist  in  intelligibles.    For  it  is  not  possible  to  admit  that  forms  arc 
intelligible,  but  that  genera  are  intellectual  only.    But  as  forms  exist 
intelligibly  indeed,  according  to  their  first  subsistence,  but  the  pleroma, 
or  plenitude  of  them  shines  forth  in  the  intellectual  '  gods,  and  divides 
that  which  is  total  into  more  partial  decrements,  produces  the  uniform 
into  multitude,  and  expands  that  which  is  exempt  into  co-ordinate  causes, 
thus  also  the  genera  of  being  are  occultly  and  indivisibly  in  intelligibles, 
but  are  accompanied  with  separation  in  intellectuals.    And  on  this  ac- 
count the  first  triad  indeed  has  essence  for  that  which  is  mixed ;  but  the 
second  has  life,  where  there  was  motion  and  permanency,  life  both  abiding 
and  proceeding ;  and  in  the  third  there  are  sameness  and  difference. 
For  the  all-perfect  multitude  indeed,  is  through  intelligible  difference, 
but  the  united  and  that  which  is  comprehensive  in  common  of  parts 
according  to  genera,  and  according  to  one,  is  through  intelligible  same- 
ness. And  all  these  subsist  intelligibly,  essentially,  and  uniformly  in 
these  triads. 

In  the  first  place  therefore,  this  deserves  to  be  inferred  by  those  who 
love  to  survey  the  nature  of  things,  and  it  is  also  fit  (hat  they  should  attri- 
bute co-ordinate  genera  to  intelligible  forms.  For  it  neither  was  nor  will 
be  lawful  for  genera  to  shine  forth  secondarily  *  after  forms.  Hence  much 
more  must  it  be  admitted  that  genera  subsist  in  the  intelligible  after  the 
above-mentioned  manner,  by  those  who  admit  that  there  are  intelligible 
forms.  In  the  next  place,  in  addition  to  these  things  we  must  sur- 
vey how  this  tetrad  of  forms  subsists,  and  how  it  shines  forth  in  intelli- 
gible intellect  analogous  to  the  principles.  For  it  is  divided  into  a  mo- 
nad and  triad.  For  so  far  as  the  idea  of  the  celestial  gods  is  arranged 
prior  to  the  others,  it  is  defined  according  to  a  div  ine  cause.    It  appears 

*  For  mr™>s  it  U  neeemry  to  read  myoif . 

*  For  Sttrnps  it  U  nectwary  to  read  htuTtpat- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIX. 


OF  PLATO. 


193 


however  to  me  that  intelligible  intellect  returning  to  the  principles  of  the 
whole  of  thing*,  according  to  the  conversion  of  itself,  it  becomes  the  ple- 
nitude of  forms,  and  is  all  things  intellectually  and  at  the  same  time  in- 
telligibly, comprehending  in  itself  the  causes  of  beings,  and  being  full  of 
the  ineffable  and  exempt  cause  of  all  things,  constitutes  the  monad  of  the 
gods;  whence  also,  Plato  I  think  calls  it  the  idea  of  the  gods.  But  re- 
ceiving the  intellectual  causes  of  the  three  principles  posterior  to  the  one,  it 
exhibits  three  ideas  after  this,  one  of  them  indeed,  being  the  cause  of  air- 
wandering  and  volant  animals,  this  cause  proceeding  analogous  to  bound. 
Hence  also  it  constitutes  gods  that  are  uniform,  elevating,  undefiled, 
united  to  the  celestial  gods,  and  which  receive  measures  second  in  dignity 
to  theirs,  and  have  the  same  relation  to  those  gods  that  govern  generation 
co-ordinately,  as  the  celestial  gods  have  to  these,  according  to  exempt 
transcendency.  But  it  exhibits  the  cause  of  the  aquatic  gods,  co-ordi- 
nate with  generative  and  infinite  power,  and  which  produces  gods  that 
are  tl>e  suppliers  of  motion  and  prolific  abundance,  and  that  are  the  in- 
spective  guardians  of  life ;  since  also  this  water  itself  which  is  the  object 
of  sense  is  under  the  dominion  of  effusion,  infinite  lation  and  indefinite- 
ncss.  Hence  likewise  it  is  attributed  to  vivific  powers.  And  intelligible 
intellect  exhibits  the  precedancous  cause  of  terrestrial  and  pedestrious 
gods,  in  a  manner  adapted  to  the  nature  of  that  which  is  mixed.  It  also 
generates  gods  who  contain  the  end  of  the  whole  of  things,  who  arc  stable, 
who  subdue  the  formless  nature  of  matter  by  the  last  Ibrms,  and  fix  the 
seat  of  mundaue  natures  in  the  one  centre  of  the  universe.  For  deriving 
their  subsistence  from  the  first  Vesta  as  it  were,  or  seat  of  brings,  they  sta- 
bly define  this  mundane  seat.  Thus  therefore  forms  first  unfold  them- 
selves into  light  in  intelligible  intellect,  possessing  their  progression  and 
order  according  to  the  first  principles.  It  is  necessary  however,  in  addi- 
tion to  these  things,  to  infer  this  in  the  third  place,  following  Timaeua, 
that  according  to  this  triad,  the  multitude  of  intelligible  parts  shines 
forth,  and  the  whole  is  divided  into  an  all-perfect  order  of  parts.  For 
that,  says  he,  of  which  other  iutclligible  animals  both  according  to  one, 
and  according  to  genera  are  parts,  is  the  first  and  most  beautiful  paradigm 
of  die  universe.    But  if  other  intelligible  animals  are  parts  of  this,  it  is 


OS  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


evident  that  it  is  a  whole,  comprehending  in  itself  the  multitude  of  in- 
telligible parts,  and  that  it  is  connective  of  all  intelligible  parts.  It  must 
be  inferred  therefore  that  this  triad  is  the  first  cause  of  production  and 
fabrication.  For  if  it  contains  the  primary  paradigms  of  things,  it  is  evi- 
dent that  the  orderly  distribution  of  secondary  natures,  originates  from  it. 
And  if  it  is  an  animal  constitutive  of  all  animals,  every  psychical  extent, 
and  all  the  extent  of  bodies,  have  their  progression  from  thence  ;  and  it 
will  also  comprehend  the  intelligible  causes  of  all  the  vivific  and  demiurgic 
orders. 


CHAPTER  XX. 


Sue ii  conceptions  therefore,  as  these,  may  be  assumed  from  what  is 
written  in  the  Timaeus  concerning  the  three  intelligible  triads,  conformably 
to  what  is  said  of  them  in  the  Philebus,  surveying  in  each  bound,  infinity, 
and  that  which  is  mixed.  If  you  are  willing  also,  we  will  show  from 
what  is  scattered  in  the  Sophista,  that  Plato  had  the  same  conception  as 
we  have  concerning  the  first  principles.  The  Elean  guest  therefore,  in 
that  dialogue,  doubting  against  the  assertion  of  Parmenides  that  the  uni- 
verse is  one,  unfolding  intelligible  multitude,  and  showing  how  it  is  sus- 
pended from  the  one,  at  first  indeed,  he  argues  from  the  one  being  [or  being 
characterized  by  the  one]  and  reminds  us  that  this  is  passiveto/Ae  one,  and 
participates  of  the  one,  but  is  not  the  one  itself,  nor  that  which  is  prima- 
rily one.  But  afterwards,  he  produces  the  conception  of  the  distinction 
between  the  imparticipable  one  and  being,  from  whole.  For  if  the  one 
being  is  a  whole,  as  Parmenides  testifies,  but  that  which  is  a  whole  has 
parts,  and  that  which  has  parts,  is  not  the  one  itself,  the  one  being  will  not 
be  the  same  as  the  one.    In  the  third  place  therefore,  he  argues  from  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XX. 


OF  PLATO. 


197 


all-perfect.  For  that  which  ii  perfectly  divided,  and  is  connective  of 
many  parts,  can  never  have  the  same  subsistence  as  that  which  is  entirely 
one.  And  having  proceeded  thus  far  he  shows  that  what  is  void  of  mul- 
titude, is  in  its  own  nature  exempt  from  the  one  being,  proceeding  in 
the  demonstration  of  this  through  three  arguments.  And  at  one  time 
indeed,  he  begins  from  the  one  being,  at  another  time  from  whole,  and  at 
another  from  all.  It  is  better  however  to  hear  the  words  themselves  of 
Plato.  That  the  one  therefore, is  not  the  same  with  the  one  being,  he  proves 
through  the  following  words.  "  But  what  with  respect  to  those  who 
assert  that  the  universe  is  one  ?  Must  we  not  enquire  to  the  utmost  of 
our  power  what  they  say  being  is?  Certainly.  To  this  question  therefore 
they  may  answer  :  Do  you  say  there  is  one  thing  alone  ?  We  do  say  so. 
Or  will  they  not  speak  in  this  manner?  They  will.  What  then,  do  you  call 
being  any  tiling  ?  Yes.  Do  you  call  it  the  owe,  employing  two  names 
respecting  the  same  thing?  Or  how  do  you  say  ?  What  will  be  their  an- 
swer after  this  O  guest  ?'  Through  this  therefore,  Plato  separating  the  one 
and  being  from  each  other,  and  showing  that  the  conception  of  the  one 
is  different  from  that  of  being,  and  that  these  are  not  the  same  with  each 
other,  evinces  that  the  most  proper  and  primary  one  is  exempt  from  the 
one  being.  For  the  one  being  does  not  abide  purely  in  an  hyparxis  void 
of  multitude  and  possessing  the  form  of  one.  But  the  one  itst/fn  exempt 
from  every  addition.  For  by  whatever  you  may  add  to  it,  you  will  di- 
minish its  supreme  and  ineffahle  union.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  arrange 
the  one  prior  to  the  one  being,  and  to  suspend  the  one  being  from  that 
which  is  one  alone.  For  if  the  one  and  the  one  being  were  the  same,  and 
it  made  no  difference  to  say  one  and  being  (since  it'  they  differed,  the  one 
would  a <rHm  be  changed  from  the  one  being,)  if  therefore  the  one  differs 
in  no  respect  from  the  one  being,  all  things  will  be  one,  and  there  will 
not  be  multitude  in  beings,  nor  will  it  be  possible  to  denominate  things, 
lest  there  should  be  two  things,  the  thing  and  the  name.  For  being  ex- 
empt from  all  multitude,  and  all  division,  there  will  neither  be  a  name  of 
any  thing,  nor  any  discourse  about  it,  but  the  name  will  appear  to  be  the 
same  with  the  thiug.    And  neither  will  a  name  be  the  name  of  a  thing, 


198 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III 


but  a  name  will  be  die  name  of  a  name,  if  a  thing  is  the  same  with  a 
name,  and  a  name  is  the  same  with  a  thing,'  and  a  tiling  will  be  the  thing 
of  a  thing.  For  all  things  will  exist  about  a  thing  the  same  as  about 
a  name,  through  the  union  of  the  thing  and  the  name.  If  theretore,  these 
things  are  absurd,  and  theone  is,  and  also  being, and  being  participates  of 
the  one,  the  one  and  the  one  being  are  not  the  same. 

But  that  whole  also  is  not  the  same  with  the  one,  Plato  afterwards  de- 
monstrates [in  the  same  dialogue,]  beginning  as  follows:  "  What  then? 
Will  they  say  that  whole  is  different  from  the  one  being,  or  that  it  is  the 
same  with  it?  Undoubtedly  they  will  and  do  say  so.  If  therefore  whole 
is,  as  Parmenides  says,  "  that  which  is  every  where  similar  to  the  bulk  of 
a  perfect  sphere,  entirely  possessing  equal  powers  from  the  middle;  for 
nothing  is  greater  or  more  stable  than  this :" — if  this  be  the  case,  it  is  ne- 
cessary that  being  should  have  a  middle  and  extremities.  And  having 
these,  there  is  every  necessity  that  it  should  have  parts.  Or  how  shall  we 
say?  Just  so.  Nothing  however  hinders  but  that  when  it  is  divided, it 
may  have  the  passion  of  the  one  in  all  its  parts,  and  that  thus  the  all  and 
whole  may  be  one.  Undoubtedly.  But  is  it  not  impossible  that  that 
which  suffers  these  things  should  be  the  one  f  Why  ?  Because  according 
to  right  reason,  that  which  is  truly  one  should  be  said  to  be  entirely  with- 
out parts.  It  must  indeed  necessarily  be  so.  But  such  a  thing  as  we  have 
just  now  mentioned,  in  consequence  of  consisting  of  many  parts  would 
not  accord  with  the  one''  Through  these  things  therefore,  the  Elean  guest 
arguing  from  wholeness  after  the  one  being,  and  also  from  the  division  of 
the  parts  of  wholeness,  demonstrates  that  the  all  is  not  one.  For  if  whole 
is  in  beings,  as  Parmenides  in  his  verses  testifies  it  is,  all  things  will  not  be 
theone.  Vox  the  one  is  impartible ;  but  whole  possesses  parts.  Whole 
therefore  is  not  the  one  itself.  For  that  transcends  all  things  and  whole- 
ness ;  but  whole  is  passive  to  the  one.  Hence  also  it  is  denominated 
whole ;  for  it  is  not  the  one  itself.  Hence  all  things  are  not  one  void  of 
separation  and  multiplication. 

Moreover,  the  all  is  comprehensive  of  many  parts.    For  whole  indeed, 

'  lojteid  of  to  rpayna  r<f  *np*rt,  it  it  Decenary  to  read  t»  «*>i«  r<y  wpoyn-orri. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XX.  OF  PLATO.  I99 

consists  at  first  of  two  parts ;  but  the  all  possesses  a  multitude  of  parts, 
and  participating  of  wholeness  at  the  same  time  is  all,  as  being  perfectly 
distributed  into  parts.  This  therefore  is  not  the  one  itself,  but  is  passive  to 
the  one.  For  the  one  itself  \s  impartible.  But  it  is  impartible  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  be  exempt  from  all  parts.  Hence  the  all  is  not  the  same 
with  the  one.  We  therefore,  have  divided  whole  and  the  all,  but  Plato 
conjoins  them,  when  he  says :  "  Nothing  however  hinders  but  that  when 
it  is  divided,  it  may  have  the  passion  of  the  one  in  all  its  parts,  and  that 
thus  the  all  and  whole  may  be  one."  At  the  same  time  however,  they  are 
divided  after  the  above  mentioned  manner.  From  these  three  arguments 
therefore,  the  Elean  guest  separates  the  one  from  the  participants  of  the 
one,  and  doubts  against  those  who  assert  all  things  to  begone,  viz.  the  one 
being,  whole  and  the  all ;  of  which  the  all  indeed  participates  of  whole, 
and  is  a  self-perfect  multitude,  consisting  of  many  parts  ;  but  whole  par- 
ticipates of  being.  For  being  is  not  whole,  as  Parmenides  testifies.  These 
therefore,  having  such  an  order  as  this,  is  it  not  necessary  that  the  argu- 
ments of  Plato  should  be  made  conformably  to  the  three  intelligible ' 
triads  ?  For  it  was  requisite,  since  Parmenides  defined  the  one  being  in 
intelligibles,  that  Plato  should  from  thence  derive  his  demonstrations  of 
the  distinction  between  the  one  prior  to  intelligibles,  and  the  one  which  is 
in  intelligibles.  For  the  doubts  against  Parmenides,  evince  in  many 
places  that  tlie  one  which  is  participated  derives  its  subsistence  from  the 
im participate  union.  The  one  *  therefore  is  not  in  these  triads,  but  the 
one  being  and  whole.  But  with  respect  to  the  all,  it  is  evident  that  it  is 
in  the  extremity  of  the  intelligible  order.  For  that  which  is  in  every 
respect  perfect,  and  all  intelligible  multitude,  have  their  subsistence  in  that 
extremity.  But  whole  is  in  the  middle  centre,  and  in  the  bond  of  the 
intelligible  breadth.  For  whole  is  adapted  to  have  a  subsistence  prior  to 
the  all ;  since  the  all  is  a  whole,  but  whole  is  not  necessarily  all.  For  the 
all  is  divided  multitude  ;  but  that  which  contains  multitude  in  itself,  and 
which  is  not  yet  separated  is  whole.  And  this  especially  pertains  to  eter- 
nity.   For  eternity  is  the  measure  of  all  intelligible  multitude,  just  as 

•  For  vwpaf  hera  it  it  nfcemry  to  read 

*  It  U  requisite  here  to  Wppty  n  it. 


Digitized  by  Google 


200  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  lit. 

whole  is  the  coherence  and  union  of  the  all.    But  the  one  being  is  in 
the  first  triad.    For  the  me  is  especially  the  peculiarity  of  this  triad,  as 
Timseus  also  has  demonstrated.    And  being  which  is  occultly  and  intelli- 
gibly being,  and  which  is  the  cause  of  essence  to  all  other  things,  prima- 
rily shines  forth  there.    Again  therefore,  following  the  Eiean  guest,  three 
triads  present  themselves  to  our  view  ;  the  first  indeed  according  to  the 
one  being ;  the  second  according  to  whole  ;  and  the  third  according  to 
the  all.    To  which  also  the  demiurgus  of  the  universe  looking,  adorns 
the  sensible  universe,  defining  the  visible  nature  with  reference  to  that 
intelligible  all ;  but  time  with  reference  to  the  intelligible  wholeness.  On 
which  account  also  time  is  continued.    And  as  the  intelligible  whole  com- 
prehends two  parts,  but  contains  the  parl6  in  one  boundary,  after  the  same 
manner,  time  also  is  bounded  by  the  now,  but  by  its  twofold  parts  is  in- 
finite.   These  things  therefore,  we  shall  shortly  after  more  fully  discuss 
when  we  speak  concerning  the  Parmenides.    For  the  conceptions  of  the 
Blean  guest  are  the  pretekia  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Parmenides.  Before 
however  we  turn  to  the  Parmenides,  let  us  discuss,  if  it  is  agreeable  to  you, 
the  three  triads  from  the  beginning,  collecting  the  conception  of  Plato 
from  his  assertions  that  are  scattered  in  many  places. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

There  are  three  triads  therefore,  as  we  have  frequently  observed,  and 
they  are  divided  after  this  manner  into  bound,  infinity,  and  that  which 
is  mixed.  Hence  there  are  triple  intelligible  bounds,  triple  inBnities,  and 
triple  mixtures.  But  of  every  intelligible  triad,  the  bound  in  each  is  de- 
nominated father;  the  infinite,  power;  and  that  which  is  mixed,  intellect. 
And  let  not  any  one  apprehend  that  these  names  are  foreign  from  the 
philosophy  of  Plato.   For  it  will  appear  that  he  uses  these  appellations 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP  XXI. 


OF  PLATO. 


201 


in  the  before  mentioned  triads  more  than  any  one.    For  be  denominate* 
the  first  God  father  and  lord  in  his  Epistles-    It  is  evident  however,  that 
as  the  first  God  surpasses  oven  the  paternal  order,  the  first  paternal  is  in 
the  intelligible  Gods.    For  these  arc  they  that  are  most  eminently  allied 
to  the  one,  and  that  intelligibly  unfold  his  ineffable  and  unknown  union. 
If  therefore  the  first  God  is  denominated  one  and  father  from  the  nature* 
that  proximately  proceed  from  him, — if  this  be  the  case,  as  the  intelligible 
Gods  are  primarily  unities,  so  likewise  they  are  primarily  fathers.  For 
Plato  gives  names  to  the  inefTable  in  a  twofold  respect,  either  from  the 
summits  of  beings,  or  from  all  beings.    For  through  these  the  transcen- 
dency of  the  one  is  known.    Moreover,  the  Elean  guest  calls  being  that 
which  is  powerful  and  power.    The  first  power  therefore  exists  prior  to 
being,  and  is  united  to  the  father ;  but  it  particularly  accords  with  being, 
which  also  it  fills.    Hence  being  as  participating  of  power  is  denominated 
powerful;  but  as  united  to  it,  and  producing  all  beings  according  to  it, 
it  is  called  power.    If  however  both  Plato  himself,  and  his  most  genuine 
disciples,  frequently  call  all  [true]  beings  intellect  (on  which  account,  in 
many  places  they  make  three  principles,  the  good,  intellect  and  soul, 
denominating  every  [true]  being  intellect)  you  will  also  have  the  third  in 
these  intellect.    But  it  is  necessary  not  to  be  ignorant  of  the  difference. 
For  with  respect  to  intellect,  one  kind  is  intellect  as  with  reference  to 
hyparxis.    For  when  we  denominate  the  unity  in  each  triad  intelligible, 
as  the  abject  of  desire  to  being,  and  as  filling  being,  then  we  call  that 
which  ranks  as  the  third  in  the  triad  intellect.    For  it  is  intelligible  as 
essence  and  intellect,  but  not  as  the  intellect  of  essence,  but  of  father  and 
deity.    For  every  participated  deity  is  intelligible,  as  being  the  plenitude 
of  its  participant.    But  another  kind  is  intellect  which  is  the  intellect  of 
essence ;  according  to  which  we  say  that  the  being  of  the  third  triad,  is 
the  intellect  of  that  which  is  primarily  being.    For  this  is  essential  intel- 
lect, being  allotted  its  own  essence  by  energising.'    For  all  things  are 
essentially  in  it,  and  both  the  more  simple  genera,  and  the  primary  pa- 


radigms ;  for  it  is  intelligible  intellect.    But  the  third  kind  is  intellectual 


'  For  svro  r*  ntfytm  h  it 


Proc. 


Vol.  I. 


2  C 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  111. 


intellect,  which  subsists  analogous  to  intelligible  intellect,  is  conjoined  with 
it,  and  is  filled  from  it,  possessing  intellectually  those  things  which  are  in 
the  other  intelligibly.  And  in  short,  it  is  necessary  every  where  that 
such  things  as  are  first  according  to  each  series,  should  have  the  form  of 
the  things  that  are  prior  to  them.  Hence  also  they  are  called  things  first, 
and  possess  a  certain  transcendency  of  essence  towards  coordinate  na- 
tures. Since  therefore,  that  which  is  prior  to  intelligibles  is  God,  the  first 
intelligibles  are  Gods  and  unities.  And  since  the  intelligible  is  essential, 
the  first  intellects  are  essences.  Since  also  intellect  is  every  where  ac- 
cording to  its  own  nature  intellectual,  the  first  souls  are  intellectual. 
Because  likewise,  souls  are  the  plenitudes  of  life,  the  first  of  bodies  are 
most  vital.  And  because  the  bodies  that  are  perpetual  are  moved  in  a 
circle,  the  summits  of  material  bodies  are  moved  in  conjunction  with 
those  bodies  that  are  perpetual.  This  therefore  is  the  cause  why  the  unities 
are  frequently  called  intelligibles,  and  beings  intelligible  intellects. 

That  Plato  however  knew  this  triad,  I  mean  father,  power  and  intellect, 
we  shall  learn  by  looking  to  the  demiurgic  order.  For  in  this  the  triad  is 
most  remarkably  apparent.  Hence,  on  account  of  its  union  with  the  in- 
telligible, it  is  filled  with  this  triad,  and  possesses  these  things  in  a  more 
divided  manner  than  animal  itself,  or  intelligible  eternity.  Immediately 
therefore,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fabrication  in  the  Timaeus,  the  demi- 
urgus  calls  himself  father,  "  Of  which  works  I  am  the  demiurgus  and 
father."  But  shortly  after  he  unfolds  his  power,  "  Imitating  my  power 
in  your  generation."  This  therefore  is  also  wonderful,  that  he  lias  deli- 
vered to  us  the  most  theological  conception  concerning  power.  For  in 
the  first  place  indeed,  he  calls  it  the  power  of  the  father,  when  he  says, 
"  Of  which  works  I  am  the  demiurgus  and  father,"  and  that  the  power  is 
his,  [is  evident  from  the  words,]  "  Imitating  my  power :"  so  that  accord- 
ing to  Plato  power  is  of  the  lather.  And  in  the  next  place,  he  ascribes 
to  this  power  a  peculiarity  generative  of  the  whole  of  things  ;  for  this  is 
evident  from  the  words  "  In  your  generation."  Power  therefore  is  the 
cause  of  generation  and  of  the  progression  of  beings.  And  in  the  last 
place,  he  delivers  the  intellectual  peculiarity  of  the  demiurgus.  "  Having 
thus  spoke,  again  into  the  former  crater  in  which  he  had  tempered  the 


CHAP.  XXI. 


OF  PLATO. 


203 


soul  of  the  universe,  lie  poured  mingling  the  remainder  of  the  former 
mixture.*  For  to  pour,  to  mingle,  mixture*  and  to  be  productive  of  soul, 
pertain  to  intellect.  Though  what  necessity  is  there  for  asserting  these 
things,  since  prior  to  this  he  calls  the  demiurgus  intellect.  A  Whatever 
ideas  therefore  intellect  perceived  by  the  dianoctic  energy  in  animal  itself, 
such  and  so  many  he  conceived  it  necessary  for  this  universe  to  contain." 
Hence  the  demiurgu«  is  father,  and  power  and  intellect.  And  he  poss- 
esses these  things  as  much  as  possible  on  account  of  intelligiblcs.  For  he 
is  a  God  as  father,  on  account  of  them.  He  is  also  power,  and  the  gene- 
rator of  wholes,  and  knows  beings  intellectually,  on  account  of  them. 
For  in  them  intelligible  knowledge  first  subsists.  Much  more  therefore 
are  father,  power  and  intellect  in  intelligibles  ;  from  which  also  the  demi- 
urgus being  filled,  participates  of  this  triad.  For  Plato  assumes  each  of 
these  analogously.  For  as  the  paternal  triad  in  intelligibles  gives  sub- 
sistence to  intelligible  eternity,  so  the  demiurgus  makes  those  works  to  be 
indissoluble  of  which  he  is  the  father.  And  as  in  intelligibles,  eternity 
proceeding  according  to  all  power  generates  intelligible  animal  itself,  so 
the  demiurgic  power  gives  subsistence  to  mundane  animals  that  are  per- 
petual and  divine,  and  imparts  to  the  junior  Gods  another  power  which 
is  generative  of  mortal  animals.  That  any  one  therefore  may  assume 
these  names  from  Plato  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said. 

Since  however,  being  has  an  hypostasis  triply  in  intelligibles,  one  is 
primarily  being  and  prior  to  the  eternal ;  but  another  is  secondarily  being, 
and  the  first  eternity  ;  and  another  is  being  ultimately,  and  is  intelligible 
and  eternal  intellect.  And  here  indeed  there  is  being,  but  there  eternity, 
and  there  intellect.  And  eternity  is  more  comprehensive  than  intellect; 
but  being  than  eternity.  For  every  intellect  is  eternal,  but  not  every 
thing  eternal  is  intellect.  For  soul  according  to  its  essence  is  eternal,  and 
every  thing  which  participates  of  eternity,  participates  also  by  a  much 
greater  priority  ot  being.  For  with  perpetuity  of  existence,  existence  is 
entirely  consubsistent.  But  that  which  participates  of  existence  is  not 
universally  eternally  being.  For  bodies  also  participate  in  a  certain  res- 
pect of  the  nature  of  existence,  but  they  are  not  eternal.  Intellect  there- 
fore constitutes  an  intellectual  essence  only,  so  far  as  it  is  intellect ;  since 


204 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


book  nr. 


so  far  as  it  is  also  life  and  being  it  constitutes  uil  things.  But  eternity 
constitutes  both  the  intellectual  and  psychical  essence.  For  the  mixture 
[in  the  second  triad]  was  intelligible  life.  But  being  constitutes  the  in- 
tellectual, the  psychical,  and  the  corporeal  life.  For  matter  also  is  being 
[most  obscurely,]  and  is  capacity  indeed,  but  formless  being,  and  non- 
being,  falling  offfrom  the  participation  of  being.  If,  however,  some  one 
should  say  that  it  is  being  in  power  or  capacity,  yet  it  has  this  power 
from  being.  For  capacity  is  the  forerunning  participation  of  energy. 
And  thus  much  concerning  these  things. 

But  what  sufficient  argument  of  division  does  Socrates  afford  us  in  tlio 
Fbttdrus,  concerning  these  intelligible  triads  ?  And  how  from  what  it 
delivered  by  him  may  we  recur  to  the  conception  of  the  hypostasis  of  the 
most  principal  Gods  ?  Socrates  therefore  in  that  dialogue,  being  inspired 
by  the  Nymphs,  celebrates  every  thing  divine  as  beautiful,  wise  and  good, 
and  6ays  that  by  these  the  aoul  is  nourished.  But  if  every  thing  divine 
is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  this  is  the  case  with  the  intelligible  by  a  much 
greater  priority.  And  all  these  indeed  are  every  where,  but  in  the  first 
triad,  the  good  principally  subsists  ;  in  the  second  the  wise ;  and  in  the 
third  the  beautiful.  For  in  this  there  is  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligible*. 
But  in  the  second  triad  truth  and  the  first  intelligence  subsist.  And  in 
the  first  there  is  the  commensurate,  which  we  say  is  the  same  as  the  good. 
But  Socrates  in  the  Plnlebus  says  that  the  clement  of  the  good  is  the  de- 
al ruble,  the  sufficient,  and  the  perfect.  The  desirable  therefore  pertains 
indeed  to  bound  ;  for  it  is  the  union  and  goodness  of  all  the  triad,  and 
the  triad  converges  about  it.  But  the  sufficient  pertains  to  infinity.  For 
sufficiency  is  a  power  capable  of  pervading  to  all  things,  and  of  being 
present  to  all  things  without  impediment.  And  the  perfect  pertains  to 
dint  which  is  mixed.  For  this  is  that  which  is  primarily  triadic  ;  since 
every  mixture  has  its  coalition  from  the  triad.  The  elements  therefore 
of  the  good  unfold  to  us  the  fir*t  triad  ;  and  the  elements  of  intelligible 
wisdom,  the  second  triad.  But  every  thing  wise  is  full  of  being,  is  gene- 
rative of  truilt,  and  is  convertive  of  imperfect  natures  to  their  perfection. 
The  full  Uterefore  pertains  to  the  second  bound  ;  for  this  is  uniformly  filled 
with  the  participation  of  the  natures  prior  to  itself.    For  the  full  is  every 


CHAP.  XX1L 


OF  PLATO. 


203 


where  adapted  to  bound,  just  as  that  which  cannot  be  fitted  is  adapted  to 
the  infinite.  But  the  prolific  pertains  to  the  second  power,  and  to  infinity. 
For  that  which  does  not  abide  in  the  fulness  of  itself,  but  is  prolific  and 
generative  of  other  things,  is  especially  indicative  of  divine  infinity.  And 
the  convertive  pertains  to  that  which  is  mixed.  For  this  as  being  allotted 
the  end  of  the  triad,  converts  every  thing  imperfect  to  the  full,  and  unite* 
itself  prior  to  other  things  to  the  bound  of  the  whole  triad. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


Moft£OT£m,  the  elements  of  beauty  are  the  peculiarities  of  the  third 
triad  of  intelligibles.  But  these  are,  as  we  have  before  observed,  the 
lovely,  the  delicate,  and  the  splendid.  The  lovely  therefore,  being  ar- 
ranged analogous  to  the  desirable,  pertains  to  bound.  But  the  delicate 
being  coordinate  to  the  sufficient,  pertains  to  the  infinite  power  which  is 
in  the  beautiful.  And  the  splendid  is  of  an  intellectual  peculiarity.  For 
this  is  the  beautiful  of  beauty  ;  is  that  which  illuminates  all  things,  and 
astonishes  those  that  are  able  to  behold  it.  And  as  apparent  beauty 
shining  most  manifestly,  is  seen  through  the  clearest  of  the  senses  (for 
the  objects  of  this  sense  have  many  differences  according  to  Aristotle* 
and  this  sense  pervades  farther  than  the  rest)  so  likewise  intelligible  beauty 
appears  to  the  intellect  of  the  soul  shiuiug  intelligibly.  For  it  is  an  in- 
telligible form.  And  on  this  account  the  splendor  of  beauty  is  apparent 
to  iutellect.  Splendid  beauty  therefore,  us  Socrates  calls  it,  shines  forth  at 
the  extremity  of  die  intelligible  order.  For  this  is  the  most  splendid  of 
intelligibles,  is  intelligible  intellect,  and  is  that  which  emits  the  intelligible 
light,  that  when  it  appeared  astonished  the  intellectual  Gods,  and  made 
them  admire  their  father*  as  Orpheus  says.  Such  tlierefore  is  the  prepa- 
ration to  the  science  of  the  intelligible  Gods  which  may  from  these  tilings, 
be  assumed.    And  now  it  will  appear  how  beauty  is  indeed  occultly  in. 


206 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  111. 


the  end  of  the  first  intelligible  triad,  but  subsists  in  the  third  triad  so  as  to 
have  manifestly  proceeded  into  light.  For  in  the  former  it  subsists  ac- 
cording to  one  form  only  ;  but  in  the  latter  it  subsists  triadically.  It  is  also 
evident  how  each  of  the  triads  is  at  one  and  the  same  time  a  monad  and  a 
triad.  For  the  first  triad  being  characterized  according  to  the  good,derives 
its  completion  from  the  three  elements  of  the  good.  But  the  second 
being  characterized  by  the  wise  is  contained  in  the  triad  of  wisdom. 
And  the  third  subsisting  according  to  the  beautiful,  is  all-perfect  through 
the  triad  of  beauty.  If  however  the  beautiful  is  occultly  in  the  first 
triad,  and  shines  forth  triadically  in  the  third,  it  is  evident  that  intelligible 
intellect  loves  the  first  triad,  and  has  love  conjoined  with  its  beauty. 
And  this  is  the  intelligible  love  of  the  first  beauty.  From  these  there- 
fore, intellectual  love  proceeds,  together  with  faith  and  truth,  as  we  have 
before  observed.  For  the  three  intelligible  monads,  the  good,  the  wise 
and  the  beautiful,  constitute  three  powers  which  lead  upwards  all  other 
things,  and  prior  to  other  things  the  intellectual  Gods.  Concerning  these 
things  however,  we  shall  speak  hereafter. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Let  us  now  then  direct  our  attention  to  the  theory  of  the  Parmenides. 
But  I  wish  again  to  remind  the  reader  of  what  we  have  before  demon- 
strated. It  has  been  shown  therefore,  that  it  is  necessary  to  divide  the 
second  hypothesis  into  the  whole  progressions  of  the  one  being ;  and  that 
this  hypothesis  is  nothing  else  than  the  generation  and  progression  of  the 
Gods,  proceeding  supernally  from  the  supreme  union  of  intelligible*  as 
far  as  to  a  deified  essence.  For  the  discussion  is  not,  as  some  say  it  is,  in 
the  first  hypothesis,  concerning  God  and  the  Gods.  For  it  was  not  lawful 
to  Parmenides  to  conjoin  multitude  with  the  one,  and  the  one  with  mul- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XX1I1.  OF  PLATO.  207 

titude.  For  the  first  God  is  perfectly  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things. 
But  in  the  first  hypothesis  essence,  and  even  the  one  itself,  are  taken  away 
from  the  first  God.  That  such  an  ablation,  however,  as  this  is  not  adapted 
to  the  other  Gods  is  evident  to  every  one.  Moreover,  neither  does  Par- 
menides  in  the  first  hypothesis  speak  about  the  intelligible  Gods,  as  they 
say  he  does ;  for  they  assert  that  the  negations  are  of  these  Gods,  because 
they  are  conjoined  with  the  one,  and  in  simplicity  and  union  precede '  all 
thedivine  genera.  For  how  can  the  similar  or  the  dissimilar,  or  contact  and 
the  privation  of  contact,  and  all  the  other  particulars  which  are  denied 
of  the  one,  be  inherent  in  the  intelligible  Gods  ?  They  appear  indeed  to  me 
to  be  right  in  asserting  that  the  things  which  are  taken  away  are  simili- 
tudes of  the  Gods ;  but  they  do  not  speak  rightly  when  they  say  that  all 
of  them  are  similitudes  of  the  intelligible  Gods.  To  which  it  may  be 
added,  in  opposition  to  this  assertion,  that  the  discussion  is  again  con- 
cerning the  intelligible  Gods  in  the  second  hypothesis.  For  the  things 
which  are  denied  in  the  first,  are  affirmed  in  the  second  hypothesis.  This 
therefore,  as  I  have  said,  is  demonstrated  that  the  conclusions  with  refer- 
ence to  each  other  have  the  order  of  prior  and  posterior,  of  causes  and 
effects.  It  is  necessary  therefore,  that  proceeding  from  the  beginning,  we 
should  adapt  the  first  conclusions  to  the  first  orders,  the  middle  conclu- 
sions to  the  middle  orders,  and  the  last  conclusions  k>  the  hist  orders,  and 
should  demonstrate  that  as  many  questions  arc  asked,  us  there  are  pro- 
gressions of  the  divine  orders.  .And  in  the  first  place,  we  must  deliver 
the  doctrine  of  Parmenides  concerning  the  intelligible  Gods,  of  whom  we 
have  proposed  to  speak  ;  since  Plato  speaks  about  these  in  many  places, 
partly  indicating,  and  partly  clearly  untbldinghis  meaning. 

It  is  necessary  however,  that  we  should  collect  into  one  the  elaborate 
and  synoptical  theory  about  each  order,  since  it  would  not  be  proper  now 
to  repeat  the  exposition  which  we  have  given  in  our  commentaries  on 
that  dialogue.  But  assuming  each  of  the  conclusions  itself  by  itself,  I 
will  endeavour  to  refer  it  to  an  appropriate  order  of  the  Gods,  following 
in  so  doing  thedivine  inspirations  of  our  leader  [Syrianus].    For  wealsa 

•  For  ff«x«iTi{  it  it  neccwary  to  reid  xgo^omf. 


Digitized  by  Google 


208  ON  T,*K  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

through  his  assistance  have  with  a  divine  head  pursued  these  sacred  paths 
about  the  theory  of  the  Parmenides,  being  agitated  with  a  divine  fury, 
and  wakened  as  from  a  profound  sleep  to  this  arcane  mystic  discipline. 
And  thus  much  concerning  the  mode  of  tl»e  whole  of  the  conclusions. 
But  from  hence  I  shall  pass  to  the  narration  of  the  things  proposed. 

The  first  and  im participate  one  therefore,  which  preexists  beyond  the 
whole  of  things,  and  not  only  beyond  the  unities  that  participate,  but  also 
those  that  are  participated,  is  celebrated  through  the  first  hypothesis, 
being  demonstrated  to  be  the  cause  of  ull  things  ineffably,  but  not  being 
defined  itself  in  any  one  of  all  things,  nor  having  any  power  or  peculiarity 
of  a  kindred  nature  with  the  other  Gods.  But  after  this  [imparticipable 
one,]  that  which  is  aloae  supercssential  and  surpassing,  and  unmingled 
with  all  hyparxis,  is  a  unity  participated  by  being,  and  constituting  about 
itself  the  first  essence,  and  by  the  addition  of  this  participation  becoming 
more  redundant  than  that  which  is  primarily  one.  This  however  is  a 
superesscntial  hyparxis,  and  the  hyparxis  of  the  first  intelligible  triad. 
As  there  are  therefore  these  two  things  in  the  first  triad,  viz.  the  one  and 
being,  and  the  former  generates,  but  the  latter  is  generated,  and  the  former 
perfects,  but  the  latter  is  perfected,  it  is  necessary  that  the  middle  of  both 
should  be  power,  through  which  and  together  with  which  the  one  con- 
stitutes and  is  perfective  of  being.  For  the  progression  of  being  from  the 
me,  and  its  conversion  to  the  one,  is  through  power.  For  what  else  con- 
joins being  to  the  one,  or  causes  the  one  to  be  participated  by  being 
except  power?  For  it  is  the  progression  of  the  one,  and  its  extension  to 
being.  Hence,  in  all  the  divine  genera  powers  precede  progressions  and 
generations.  This  triad  therefore,  the  one,  power  and  being,  is  the  summit 
of  intelhgibles.  The  first  of  these  indeed  producing ;  the  third  being  pro- 
duced ;  and  the  second  being  suspended  from  the  one,  but  coalescing  with 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXtV. 


OF  PLATO. 


209 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


This  triad  therefore,  Parmenides  delivers  immediately  in  the  beginning 
of  the  second  hypothesis,  adjoining  to  the  one  the  most  simple  participa- 
tion of  essence.  But  he  calls  it  the  one  being,  and  says  that  being  par- 
ticipates of  the  one,  and  the  one  of  being.  The  participation  however  of 
these  is  different.  For  the  one  '  indeed  so  participates  of  being,  as  illumi- 
nating and  filling,  and  deifying  being ;  but  being  so  participates  of  the 
one,  as  suspended  from  the  one,  and  deified  by  it.  But  the  habitude 
which  is  the  middle  of  both,  is  not  with  them  void  of  essence.  For  neither 
is  the  habitude  which  is  among  sensibles  in  no  respect  being,  and  much 
more  is  this  the  case  with  the  habitude  which  is  there.  But  this  habitude 
is  biformed.  For  it  is  of  the  one,  and  is  connascent  with  being.  For  it 
is  the  motion  of  the  one,  and  its  progression  into  being.  Parmenides  de- 
livers this  triad,  beginning  what  he  says  about  it  as  follows  :  "  See  there- 
fore from  the  beginning  if  the  one  is.  Is  it  possible  then  for  it  to  be,  and 
yet  not  to  participate  of  essence  ?  It  is  not  possible."  But  he  ends  speaking 
about  it  in  the  following  words :  "  Will  therefore  that  which  is  said  be 
any  thing  else  than  this,  that  the.  one  participates  of  essence,  when  it  is 
summarily  asserted  by  any  one  that  the  one  is  ?  It  will  not."  This  there- 
fore is  the  first  intelligible  triad,  the  one,  being,  and  the  habitude  of  both, 
through  which  being  is  of  the  one  and  the  one  of  being,  in  a  manner  per- 
fectly admirable  ;  Plato  indicating  through  these  things,  that  the  father  is 
the  father  of  intellect,  and  that  intellect  is  the  intellect  of  the  father,  anil 
that  power  is  concealed  between  the  extremes.  For  deity  is  the  father 
of  the  triad,  and  bein*;  is  the  intellect  of  this  deity.  Yet  it  is  not  intel- 
lect in  the  same  way  as  we  are  accustomed  to  call  the  intellect  of  essence. 
For  every  such  intellect  stands  still  and  is  moved,  as  the  Elean  guest  says. 


•  In  the  original  n  o»,  but  the  true  reading  is  eridemlf  r»  alone. 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  *2  D 


*10  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOKIH. 

But  that  which  is  primarily  being,  neither  stands  still,  nor  is  moved,  as 
he  also  teaches.  The  first  triad  therefore  is  called  one  being  ;  since  power  is 
here  occultly.  For  the  triad  docs  not  proceed  from  itself ;  but  subsists 
without  separation  and  uniformly,  being  primarily  defined  according 
to  divine  union.  Hence,  this  is  the  first  participation  of  essence,  which 
participates  of  the  one  through  power  as  the  middle,  which  collects  toge- 
ther and  separates  both  the  one  and  being.  And  it  is  supcressential  in- 
deed, but  is  conjoined  with  essence.  We  must  never  think  therefore  that 
all  power  is  the  progeny  of  essence.  For  the  powers  of  the  Gods  are  su- 
peressential,  and  are  consubsistent  with  the  unities  themselves  of  the  Gods. 
And  through  this  power  the  Gods  are  generative  of  beings.  Rightly  there- 
fore, does  poetry  every  where  assert  that  the  Gods  are  able  to  do  all 
things.  For  essential  powers  indeed  are  not  capable  of  effecting  all 
things  ;  since  they  are  not  constitutive  of  supcrcssential  natures.  The 
first  triad  therefore,  is  through  these  things  unfolded  to  us  by  Parinenides. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

But  immediately  after  this,  the  second  triad  is  allotted  a  progression, 
which  Parmenides  characterises  by  intelligible  wholeness,  as  we  have 
shown  in  the  Sophista,  For  the  first  triad  being  uniform,  and  possessing 
all  things  intelligibly  and  occultly,  viz.  hyparxis,  power  and  being,  so  that 
power  which  is  the  cause  of  division,  subsisting  between  the  one  and  being, 
is  concealed,  and  becomes  apparent  through  the  communion  of  the  ex- 
tremes with  each  other,—  the  second  triad  proceeds,  being  characterized  by 
the  first  intelligible  power,  and  having  the  monads  in  itself  distinguished 
from  each  other.  For  all  things  being  uuited  and  without  distinction  in 
the  first  triad,  distinction  and  separation  shine  forth  in  this  triad.  Being 
also  and  power  arc  more  divided  from  each  other.    And  that  which  con- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXV- 


OF  PLATO. 


211 


sists  of  these  is  no  longer  one  being  [or  being  characterized  by  the  one,] 
but  is  a  whole,  so  that  it  has  the  one  and  being  in  itself  as  parts.  For 
above  indeed  [i.  e.  in  the  first  triad]  all  things  are  prior  to  parts  and 
wholeness.  But  ip  this  triad  there  are  both  parts  and  a  whole,  power 
unfolding  itself  into  light.  For  as  there  is  separation  here,  there  are  parts 
and  the  w  hole  consisting  of  these.  The  second  triad  therefore  is  called 
intelligible  wholeness.  But  the  parts  of  it,  the  one  and  being,  I  call  the 
extremes.  And  power  being  here  the  middle,  connects  the  one  and  being, 
and  does  not  cause  them  to  be  one,  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  first 
triad.  Since  also  it  is  the  middle  of  both,  through  its  communion  indeed 
with  being,  it  renders  the  one  one  being  ;  but  through  its  communion  with 
the  vnc,  it  perfectly  causes  being  to  be  one.  And  thus  the  one  being  con- 
sists of  two  parts,  viz.  of  being  which  is  characterised  by  the  one,  and  of 
the  one  which  is  characterized  by  being,  as  Parmenides  himself  says.  He 
begins  therefore  to  speak  about  this  triad  as  follows :  "  Again  therefore, 
let  us  say  if  the  one  is  what  will  happen.  Consider  then  if  it  is  not  ne- 
cessary that  this  hypothesis  should  signify  the  one  to  be  a  thing  of  such  a 
kind  as  to  have  parts  f  But-  he  ends  in  the  following  words :  •*  That 
which  is  one  therefore  is  a  whole,  and  has  a  part." 

Through  these  things  therefore  Parmenides  defines  the  second  order  of 
intelligible*  to  be  a  wholeness.  For  as  existence  is  derived  to  all  things 
from  the  first  triad,  so  whole  from  the  second,  and  an  nil-perfect  division 
from  the  third.  This  however  will  be  considered  by  us  hereafter.  Whole- 
ness therefore  is  triple,  being  either  prior  to  parts,  or  consisting  of  parts, 
or  .subsisting  in  a  part,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Plato.  For  in  the 
Politico*  indeed,  he  calls  genus  a  whole,  but  species  a  part,  not  that  genus 
derives  its  completion  from  species,  but  exists  prior  to  it.  And  in  the 
Timseus  he  says  that  the  world  is  a  whole  of  wholes.  And  all  the  world 
indeed  derives  its  completion  from  parts  that  are  wholes  ;  but  each  of  the 
parts  is  n  whole,  not  as  the  universe  is,  but  partially.  Wholeness  there- 
fore, being  triple  as  we  have  said,  according  to  Plato,  the  unity,  and  the 
intelligible  and  occult  cause  of  these  is  now  delivered,  unically  compre- 
hending and  constituting  three  wholenesses  ;  according  to  the  hyparxis 
indeed  of  itself,  the  wholeness  prior  to  parts  ;  but  according  to  its  power, 


x 


Digitized  by 'Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


the  wholeness  which  is  from  parts  ;  and  according  to  its  being  the  whole- 
ness which  is  in  a  part.  For  the  one  is  prior  to  all  multitude  ;  but  power 
communicates  in  a  certain  respect  with  both  the  extremes,  and  compre- 
hends in  itself  the  peculiarities  of  them  ;  and  being  in  a  certain  respect 
participates  of  the  one.  Hence  the  first  of  the  wholenesses,  or  that  which 
is  prior  to  parts  is  derived  from  a  unical  hyparxis.  For  it  is  a  monad, 
and  is  itself  constitutive  of  parts,  and  of  the  multitude  which  is  in  them. 
But  the  second  wholeness  is  from  power.  For  it  derives  its  completion 
from  parts,  just  as  in  the  power  which  is  collective  of  the  one  and  being, 
the  extremes  in  a  certain  respect  shiue  forth  to  the  view.  And  the  third 
wholeness  is  from  being.  For  being  is  a  part,  and  is  the  progeny  both  of 
power  and  the  one,'  and  possesses  each  of  these  partially.  After  the  in- 
telligible therefore,  three  wholenesses  are  divided  according  to  the  differ- 
ent orders  of  beings.  But  the  intelligible  wholeness  comprehends  the 
three  unically,  and  is  the  intelligibly  connective  monad  of  this  triad,  every 
way  extending  the  powers  of  itself  from  the  middle  of  the  intelligible 
and  occult  order. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Immediately  after  this  triad  we  may  sec  another  proceeding,  in 
which  all  intelligible  multitude  shines  forth,  and  which  Parmenides  indeed 
constitutes  a  wholeness,  but  a  wholeness  consisting  of  many  parts.  For 
after  the  occult  union  of  the  first  triad,  and  the  dyadic  separation  of  the 
second,  the  progression  of  the  third  is  generated,  which  has  indeed  its 
subsistence  from  parts,  but  the  parts  are  many,  with  the  multitude  of 
which  the  triad  prior  to  it  is  parturient.  For  in  this  triad  there  is  a  unity, 
and  power,  and  being.    But  the  one  is  multiplied,  and  also  being  and 

'  Instead  of  «vro;  it  is  necessary  to  read  m;. 


CHAP.  XXVI. 


OF  PLATO. 


213 


power.    And  thus  all  the  triad  indeed  is  a  wholeness;  but  each  of  its  ex- 
tremes, viz.  the  one  and  being,  as  it  is  multitude  conjoined  through  collec- 
tive power,  is  again  divided  and  multiplied.    For  this  power  conjoining 
unical  multitude  to  the  multitude  of  beings,  of  some  of  these  it  causes 
each  through  progression  to  be  being  characterized  by  the  one,  but  of 
others  each  according  to  participation  to  be  the  one  characterized  by  be- 
ing.   For  here  indeed  there  are  two  parts  of  the  wholeness,  the  one  and 
being ;  but  the  one  participates  of  being,  for  it  is  conjoined  with  it ;  and 
being  participates  of  the  one.    The  one  of  being  therefore,  is  again  divid- 
ed, so  that  the  one  and  being  generate  a  second  unity  conjoined  with  the 
part  of  being.   But  being  participating  of  the  one,  is  again  separated  into 
being  and  the  one.    For  it  generates  a  more  partial  being  suspended  from 
a  more  partial  unity.    And  being  consists  of  more  partial  deified  beings, 
and  is  a  more  specific  monad.    The  cause  however  of  this  progression  is 
power.    For  power  is  effective  of  two  things,  and  is  the  operator  of 
multitude.    For  the  one  indeed  calls  forth  into  multitude,  but  being  con- 
verts to  the  participation  of  the  divine  unities.    Whence  therefore  does 
Parmenides  begin  to  teach  us -concerning  this  triad?  And  where  docs  he 
conclude  his  discourse  about  it?   The  beginning,  therefore,  of  what  he 
says  on  this  subject  is  as  follows  :  "  What  then  ?  Can  each  of  these  parts 
of  the  one  being,  viz.  the  one  and  being,  desert  each  other,  so  that  the  one 
shall  not  be  a  part  of  being,  or  being  shall  not  be  a  part  of  the  one  t  It 
cannot  be.'"  But  he  ends  thus :  "  Will  not,  therefore,  the  one  being  after 
this  manner  be  an  infinite  multitude  ?    It  seems  so." 

In  the  first  place,  therefore,  it  is  proper  to  understand  the  manner  of 
the  progression  of  the  divine  genera;  and  that  conformably  to  the  intel- 
ligible monad,  which  we  arrange  according  to  the  one  being,  the  duad 
posterior  to  it  which  we  call  a  wholeness  [proceeds.]  But  we  say  that  it 
consists  of  two  parts  which  are  separated  by  power,  and  that  intelligible 
multitude  presents  itself  to  the  view  from  the  monad  and  the  duad.  For 
when  all  things  are  said  to  be  parts  of  the  one  being,  viz.  secondary  things, 
and  such  as  become  apparent  through  the  separating  cause  of  power,  then 

1  It  U  necessary  to  cornet  the  text  here,  and  to  read  as  follow* :  tuw;  raw  p*pun  immpn  rov» 
raw  tow  »»$•  orr»{  to,  ti  it  x«i  ts  oy  ap*  (nroXfnrraim,  q  to  it.  ».  r.  K. 


Digitized  by  Google 


214 


4 

ON  the  ti]j:olo<;y 


HOOK  lit. 


Parmenides  delivers  the  union  which  pervades  from  the  monad  to  the 
third  triad.  But  when  power  separating  and  conjoining  the  unities  and 
beings  gives  completion  to  multitude,  then  the  participation  of  the  duad 
becomes  perfectly  apparent,  as  1  think  Parmenides  demonstrates  when 
he  says,  "  so  that  it  is  necessary  two  things  should  always  he  generated, 
and  that  there  should  never  be  one  thing  (only.)"  This  triad,  therefore,  pro- 
ceeds according  to  both  the  preexistent  triads,  flowing  according  to  the 
Oracle, and  proceeding  to  all  intelligible  multitude.  For  infinite  multitude  is 
indicative  of  this  flux,  and  of  the  incomprehensible  nature  of  power. 
Hence,  in  the  first  place,  I  have  said  that  the  hypostasis  of  this  triad  is 
through  these  things  demonstrated  to  l>e  suspended  from  the  triads  prior 
to  it.  And  in  the  next  place,  I  say,  that  this  triad,  according  to  Parme- 
nides, is  primogenial.  For  this  first  imparts  the  power  of  being  generated; 
and  Parmenides  calls  the  multitude  which  is  in  it  in  generation,  [i.e.  be- 
coming to  be,  or  rising  into  existence^]  For  he  says  :  "  And  the  part  w  ill 
be  generated  from  two  parts  at  least."  And  again  :  "  Whatever  part  is 
generated,  will  always  have  these  parts."  And  in  what  follows :  •*  So 
that  it  is  necessary  it  should  always  be  generated  two  things,  and  should 
never  be*  one."'  Does  not  he,  therefore,  who  frequently  uses  the  word  ge-  • 
Deration  in  teaching  concerning  the  progression  of  the  intelligible  multi- 
tude, proclaim  that  the  natures  prior  to  this  order  are  more  united  to  each 
other?  But  this  order  proceeds  to  a  greater  extent,  unfolds  the  occult 
nature  of  the  triads  prior  to  itself,  and  is  primogenial,  unfolding  in  itself 
prolific  power. 

In  addition  to  these  things  also,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  infinity 
of  multitude,  not  as  those  think  fit  to  speak,  who  assume  the  infinite  in 
quantity,  but  since  in  the  principles  of  the  whole  of  things,  there  are 
bound  and  infinity,  the  former  being  the  cause  of  the  union,  but  the 
latter  of  the  separation  of  multitude^  Parmenides  calls  the  first  and  intel- 
ligible multitude  infinite,  because  all  multitude  indeed,  according  to  its 
own  nature,  is  infinite,  as  being  the  progeny  of  the  first  infinity.  All  in- 
telligible multitude,  however,  is  a  thing  of  this  kind.  For  it  is  the  first 
multitude,  and  multitude  itself.  But  multitude  itself  is  the  first  progeny 
of  intelligible  infinity.    Intelligible  multitude,  therefore,  is  on  this  ac- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXVII.  OF  PLATO.  415 

count  infinite,  as  unfolding  into  light  the  first  infinity,  and  this  infinity  is 
the  same  with  the  all-perfect.  For  that  which  has  proceeded  to  the  all, 
and  as  far  as  it  is  requisite  an  intelligible  nature  should  proceed,  through 
the  power  which  is  generative  of  the  whole  of  things,  is  infinite.  For  it 
cannot  be  comprehended  by  any  other  thing.  But  intelligible  multitude 
is  comprehensive  of  all  intelligible  multitude.  For  if  indeed  that  which 
is  primarily  infinite,  was  infinite  according  to  quantity,  it  would  be  re- 
quisite to  admit  that  the  intelligible  is  infinite  multitude  of  this  kind.  Since, 
however,  the  intelligible  is  infinite  power,  it  is  necessary  that  the  partici- 
pant of  the  primarily  infinite,  should  cause  infinity  to  shine  forth  accord- 
ing to  the  power  which  is  comprehensive  of  all  prior  natures.  And  if  it 
be  requisite  to  relate  my  own  opinion,  as  that  which  is  primarily  one  is 
primarily  bound,  so  that  which  is  primarily- multitude  is  infinite  multitude. 
For  it  receives  the  whole  power  of  infinity,  and  producing  all  unities,  and 
all  beings,  as  far  as  to  the  most  individual  natures,  it  possesses  never-failing 
power.  It  is,  therefore,  more  total  than  all  multitude,  and  is  an  incom- 
prehensible infinite.  Hence  unfolding  into  light  all  multitude,  it  bounds 
and  measures  it  by  iufinite  power,  and  through  wholeness  introduces 
bound  to  all  things.  These  tlnngs,  therefore,  may  be  assumed  from  Par- 
uienides  concerning  the  third  intelligible  triad. 


CHAFFER  XXVII. 

Let  us  in  the  next  place  speak  in  common  about  all  the  intelligible 
triads.  With  respect  to  the  first  triad,  therefore,  which  is  occult,  and  is 
allotted  the  intelligible  summit  in  intelligibles,  Plato  at  one  time  proceed- 
ing from  the  union  which  is  in  it,  and  its  exempt  transcendency  with  re- 
spect to  the  other  triads,  denominates  it  one,  as  in  the  Tiinacus.  For  eter- 
nity, says  he,  abides  in  one.  Hut  reason  evinces  that  this  one  is  the  first 
triad  of  intelli»ibles.    But  at  another  time  proceeding  from  the  extremi- 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  HI. 


ties  which  arc  in  it,  viz.  that  which  is  participated,  and  that  which  parti- 
cipates, he  calls  it  the  one  being,  considering  the  power  which  is  compre- 
hended in  these  as  ineffable,  in  consequence  of  its  subsisting  uniformly 
and  occultly.  And  at  another  time,  he  uufolds  the  whole  of  it,  accord- 
ing to  the  monads  which  are  in  it,  bound,  infinity,  and  that  which  is 
mixed;  bound  indeed  indicating  its  divine  hyparxis,  infinity  its  generative 
power,  and  that  which  is  mixed,  the  essence  proceeding  from  this  power. 
Plato,  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  teaches  us  through  these  names  the  first 
intelligible  triad  ;  at  one  time  indeed  through  one  name,  but  at  another 
through  two  names,  and  at  another  again  through  three  names,  unfolding 
it  to  our  view.  For  there  is  a  triad  in  it,  according  to  which  the  whole  is 
characterized  ;  and  a  duad  according  to  which  the  extremes  communicate 
with  each  other ;  and  a  monad  which  exhibits  the  ineffable,  occult,  and 
unical  nature  of  the  first,  through  its  own  monads. 

But  the  second  triad  after  this,  Plato  denominates  in  the  Timseus  in- 
deed, eternity ;  but  in  the  Parmenides  the  first  wholeness.  How  these, 
however,  arc  allotted  the  same  peculiarity  we  may  learn  by  considering 
that  every  thing  eternal  is  indeed  a  whole;  viz.  if  it  is  perfectly  eternal, 
and  has  the  whole  of  its  essence  and  energy  at  once  present.  For  every 
intellect  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  perfectly  establishing  at  once  in  itself,  the 
whole  of  intellectual  perception.  It  likewise  does  not  possess  one  part  of 
being,  but  is  deprived  of  another  part,  nor  does  it  partially  participate  of 
energy,  but  it  summarily  comprehends  the  whole  of  being,  and  the  whole 
of  intelligence.  If,  however,  in  its  energies  it  proceeded  according  to 
time,  but  had  an  eternal  essence,  it  would  be  allotted  the  whole  of  the 
latter,  and  this  always  stably  the  same,  but  would  possess  the  former  va- 
riably, so  as  to  exert  different  energies  at  different  times.  Eternity,  there- 
fore, is  every  where  the  cause  of  wholeness  to  the  natures  to  which  it  is 
primarily  present.  But  whole  also  is  every  where  comprehensive  of  per- 
petuity. For  no  whole  abandons  cither  its  essence  or  its  proper  perfec- 
tion ;  but  that  which  is  primarily  corrupted  and  vitiated  is  a  partial  na- 
ture. For  on  this  account  also  the  whole  world  is  perpetual,  viz.  because 
it  is  a  whole,  and  this  is  likewise  the  case  with  all  that  the  heavens  contain, 
and  with  each  of  the  elements.    For  every  where  wholeness  is  connective 


CHAP.  XXVII.  OF  PLATO  U7 

of  subjects.  Hence  eternity  is  consubsistent  with  wholeness,  and  whole 
and  eternity  are  the  same.  Each  also  Is  a  measure,  the  one  of  things 
eternal,  and  of  all  perpetual  natures,  but  the  other  of  parts  and  of  all  mul- 
titude. Since,  however,  there  are  three  wholenesses,  one  indeed  being 
prior  to  parts,  another  subsisting  from  parts,  and  another  in  a  part, — 
through  the  wholeness  which  is  prior  to  parts,  eternity  measures  those 
unities  of  divine  natures  which  are  exempt  from  beings ;  but  through  the 
wholeness  which  derives  its  subsistence  from  parts,  it  measures  the  unities 
that  are  co-ordinate  with  beings ;  and  through  the  wholeness  which  is  in 
a  part,  it  measures  all  beings  and  whole  essences.  For  these  wholenesses 
being  parts  of  the  divine  unities,  they  possess  partibly  what  pre-exists 
unically  in  the  unities.  And,  moreover,  eternity  is  nothing  else  than  the 
ever  shining  forth  from  the  unity  which  is  connected  with  being.  But 
whole  consists  of  two  parts,  viz.  of  the  one  and  being,  power  existing  as 
the  collector  of  the  parts.  According  to  both  these  conceptions,  there- 
fore, the  duad  pertaining  to  the  middle  intelligible  triad,  unfolds  the  uni- 
form and  occult  hypostasis  of  the  first  triad. 

Moreover,  in  the  Timseus,  Plato  calls  the  third  triad  of  intelligible?, 
animal  itself,  intelligible,  all-perfect,  and  only-begotten.  But  in  the  Par- 
menides  he  denominates  it  infinite  multitude,  and  a  wholeness  compre- 
hensive of  many  parts.  And  in  the  Sophista  he  perpetually  calh  it  the 
intelligible  distributed  into  many  beings.  All  these  assertions,  therefore, 
arc  the  progeny  of  one  science,  and  tend  to  one  intelligible  truth.  For 
when  Tim* us  calls  this  triad  intelligible  animal,  he  also  asserts  it  to  be 
all-perfect,  and  comprehensive  of  intelligible  animals  as  its  parts,  both  ac- 
cording to  one  and  according  to  parts.  Hence  nnimal  itself  is  according 
to  this  a  whole,  comprehensive  of  intelligible  animals  as  its  parts.  And 
Parmenides,  when  he  shows  that  the  one  being  is  all-perfect  multitude, 
demonstrates  that  it  is  consubsistent  with  this  order.  For  the  infinite  will 
be  all-powerful  and  all-perfect,  as  wc  have  before  observed,  comprehend- 
ing in  itself  an  intelligible  multitude  of  parts,  which  also  it  generates; 
tome  of  these  being  more  total,  but  others  more  partial,  and  as  Tiroaeus 
says,  both  according  to  one,  and  according  to  genera.  Farther  still,  as  he 
calls  animal  itself  eternal  and  only-begotten,  so  Parraenidcs  first  attri- 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  £ 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  III. 


butes  the  ever  and  to  be  generated,  to  infinite  multitude,  when  he  says, 
"  And  thus,  according  to  the  same  reasoning,  whatever  part  is  generated 
will  always  possess  these  two  parts:  for  the  one  will  always  contain  being, 
and  being  the  one ;  so  that  two  things  will  necessarily  always  be  gene- 
rated, and  no  part  will  ever  l>e  one." 

Who,  therefore,  so  clearly  reminds  us  of  eternal  animal,  and  the  primo- 
gcnial  triad,  as  Pannenides,  first  assuming  in  this  order  generation  and  the 
ever,  and  so  continually  using  each  of  these  ?  The  same  thing,  therefore, 
is  both  an  all-perfect  animal,  and  all-powerful  intelligible  multitude.  For 
the  first  infinity  being  power,  and  every  intelligible  subsisting  according 
to  it,  and  receiving  from  it  a  division  into  parts,  I  think  it  proper  to  call 
it  all-powerful ;  thus  avoiding  the  appellation  of  the  infinite,  which  dis- 
turbs the  multitude.   That,  however,  which  in  these  things  is  both  diffi- 
cult to  understand,  and  for  which  Plato  especially  deserves  to  be  admired, 
we  must  not  omit,  but  demonstrate  to  the  genuine  lovers  of  truth.  For 
intelligible  animal  comprehends  four  intelligible  ideas,  according  to  which 
it  not  only  constitutes  the  genera  of  Gods,  but  also  the  more  excellent 
kind  of  beings  after  the  Gods,  and  also  mortal  animals  themselves ;  for 
generating  it  extends  the  idea  of  air- wandering,  the  idea  of  aquatic,  and 
the  idea  of  terrestrial  animals,  from  the  Gods  as  far  as  to  mortal  animals. 
Since  animal  itself,  therefore,  comprehends  four  ideas,  and  through  the 
same  paradigms  produces  totally  divine,  demoniacal  and  mortal  animals,, 
this  deservedly  produces  a  doubt  in  those  who  love  the  contemplation  of 
truth,  how,  the  causes  being  the  same,  and  the  same  primary  paradigms 
preexisting,  some  of  the  natures  which  arc  constituted  are  Gods,  others 
daemons,  and  others  mortal  animals.    For  all  these  being  generated  with 
reference  to  one  form,  how  is  it  possible  they  should  not  have  the  same 
form  and  nature ;  since  it  is  requisite  that  one  idea  should  every  where 
be  generative  of  things  that  have  a  similar  form  ?  For  on  this  account  we 
admit  the  hypothesis  of  ideas,  in  order  that  the  intelligible  genus  of  Gods 
may  possess  and  contain  prior  to  multitude  monads  productive  of  similar 
natures.    This  doubt,'  therefore,  being  so  difficult,  some  oue  may  solve  it 
logically  by  saying,  that  all  things  which  subsist  according  to  one  form 

■  Instead  of  mnifu>h  it  is  necessary  to  read  b»<jji«;. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXVII. 


OF  PLATO. 


219 


are  not  synoniinous,  and  that  they  do  not  similarly  participate  of  their 
common  cause,  but  some  things  primarily,  and  others  ultimately.  For 
each  form  is  the  leader  of  a  certain  scries,  beginning  supernally,  and  sub- 
siding as  fur  as  to  the  last  of  things.  For  according  to  the  oracle,  all 
things  begin  supernally  to  extend  their  admirable  rays  to  the  downward 
place.  Hence  it  will  not  be  wonderful  that  the  same  idea  should  pre- 
exist as  the  cause  of  Gods,  daemons,  and  mortal  animals,  producing  all 
things  totally,  and  delivering  the  more  partial  separation  of  things  to  the 
demiurgic  order,  in  the  same  manner  as  this  order  delivers  the  production 
of  individuals  to  the  junior  Gods.  For  intelligibles  are  the  causes  of 
whole  scries;  but  intellectuals  of  divisions  according  to  common  genera. 
Supermundane  forms  are  the  causes  of  specific  differences ;  but  mundane 
of  things  which  are  now  individuals.  For  they  are  causes  which  are 
moved,  and  are  the  leaders  of  mutation  to  their  progeny. 

If  however  it  be  requisite  to  survey  the  thing  itself  by  itself,  and  how 
one  intelligible  form  is  the  cause '  of  Gods,  and  daemons  and  mortals, 
Parmenides  alone  is  able  to  satisfy  us  about  the  parts  which  are  contained 
in  the  intelligible  multitude.  For  he  characterizes  some  things  according 
to  being,  but  others  according  to  the  one.  For  the  one  being,  indeed,  is 
absorbed  by  the  one,  but  being  which  is  one  is  rather  absorbed  by  being, 
and  the  one  being,  and  being  which  is  one,  contain  in  themselves  each  of 
the  intelligible  animals.  According  to  the  one  being,  therefore,  Parme- 
nides constitutes  the  divine  genera,  together  with  an  appropriate  peculiari- 
ty. But  according  to  being  which  is  one,  he  constitutes  the  genera  posterior 
to  the  Gods.  And  according  to  the  one  being  indeed  of  being  which  is 
one,  he  constitutes  the  genera  of  daemons,  but  according  to  being  which  is 
one,  the  mortal  genera.  And  again,  according  to  the  one  being  of  the  one 
being,  he  constitutes  the  first  and  highest  genera  of  the  Gods ;  but  accord- 
ing to  the  being  which  is  one  of  it,  the  second  genera,  and  which  have  an 
angelic  order.  And  thus  all  things  are  full  of  Gods,  angels,  daemons,  ani- 
mals, and  mortal  natures.  And  you  sec  how  the  medium  is  preserved  of 
the  more  excellent  genera.  For  being  which  is  one  is  the  angelic  boun- 
dary of  the  one  being  which  produces  the  Gods.    But  the  one  bciag  is  the 

V  It  teems  requisite  to  supply  the  word  «ino>  after  the  words  tj  id  rs^rav  n&o;. 


Digitized  by  Google 


220  ON  T,,E  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

demoniacal  summit  of  being  which  is  one,  and  which  adorns  secondary 
natures.  As  to  the  unions,  however,  of  secondary  natures,  it  is  not  im- 
manifest  that  they  approximate  to  multitude,  and  to  the  progression  of 
the  natures  placed  above  them.  Nor  must  you  wonder  if  being  w  hich  is 
one  is  the  cause  of  angels,  but  the  one  being  of  daemons.  Fof  in  one 
place,  being  which  is  one  is  a  part  of  the  one  being,  but  in  another  the 
one  being  is  a  part  of  being  which  is  one.  And  here,  indeed,  the  union 
is  essential,  but  there  essence  has  the  form  of  the  one.  For  the  summit  of 
being  which  is  one  is  a  thing  of  this  kind.  Deservedly,  therefore,  is  intel- 
ligible multitude  all-powerful,  and  intelligible  animal  all-perfect,  as  being 
at  once  the  cause  of  all  things,  and  this  as  fur  as  to  the  last  of  things,  Plato 
all  but  exclaiming,  [in  the  words  of  the  Ciialdfean  Oracle,]  "  Thence  a 
fiery  whirlwind  sweeping  along,  obscures  the  flower  of  fire,  leaping  at  the 
same  time  into  the  cavities  of  the  worlds."  For  the  divine  unities  pro- 
ceeding gradually,  generate  the  multitude  of  all  mundane  natures.  This 
triad,  therefore,  is  the  fountain  and  cause  of  all  things  :  and  from  it  all 
the  life,  and  all  the  progression  of  the  Gods,  and  the  genera  superior  to  us, 
and  of  mortal  animals  subsist.  For  it  produces  totally  and  uniformly  all 
things,  and  binds  to  itself  the  whole  principles  of  the  divisible  rivers  of 
vivification,  and  the  production  of  forms. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Again,  therefore,  let  us  recur  from  the  divided  theory  of  intelligible* 
to  the  all-perfect  and  one  science  of  them,  and  let  us  say  to  ourselves,  that 
this  intelligible  genus  of  the  Gods  is  unically  exempt  from  all  the  other  di- 
vine orders,  and  is  neither  called  intelligible  as  known  by  a  partial  intel- 
lect, nor  as  comprehended  by  intelligence  in  conjunction  with  reason,  nor 
yet  as^preexisting  in  all-perfect  intellect.   For  it  transcends  both  total 


Digitized  by  Google 


CI!A1>.  XXVIII.  OF  PLATO.  221 

and  partial  intelligible*,  and  exists  prior  to  all  intellectual  objects,  being 
an  imparticipable  and  divine  intelligible.    Hence,  also,  it  is  allotted  the 
same  transcendency  with  respect  to  all  the  intelligible  orders,  as  the  one 
with  respect  to  every  genus  of  the  Gods.    For  this  intelligible  is  impar- 
ticipable, and  supernally  fills  the  divine  and  intellectual  orders.  For 
if  every  intellect  is  intelligible  to  itself,  it  possesses  this  property  through 
the  intelligible  Gods.    For  plenitude  is  derived  to  all  tilings  from  thence. 
And  thus  the  intelligible  is  at  the  same  time  exempt  from  intellect,  exist- 
ing itself  by  itself;  and  at-tbe  same  time  the  intelligible  is  not  external  to 
intellect.    For  there  is  an  intelligible  which  is  conjoined  with  intellect; 
the  co-ordinate  being  derived  from  that  which  is  exempt,  the  participated 
from  that  which  is  imparticipable,  that  which  is  inherent  from  that  which 
is  preexistent,  and  that  which  is  multiplied  from  that  which  is  uniform. 
Intelligible  simplicity,  therefore,  must  not  be  defined  to  be  such  as  that 
which  we  are  accustomed  to  assert  of  intelligibles.    For  in  these  the  we 
becomes  equal  to  multitude,  and  separation  to  the  uniform  sameness  of 
essence.    But  intelligible  simplicity  is  uniform,  without  separation  and 
occult,  excelling  every  divisible  form  of  life,  and  intellectual  multitude. 
Hence  1  do  not  place  intelligible  simplicity  in  the  order  of  idea.  For  this 
form  b  partial,  and  is  subordinate  to  intelligible  union.    But  I  consider 
it  as  the  hypai  xis  of  divine  natures,  and  as  generative  of  the  whole  of  the 
good  which  is  distributed  to  all  divine  natures,  and  in  which  the  Gods 
themselves  subsist.    For  the  goodness  of  the  Gods,  is  neither  form  nor 
habit,  but  the  plenitude  of  divine  self-sufficiency  and  divine  power,  ac- 
cording to  which  the  Gods  fill  all  things  with  good.    In  a  much  greater 
degree,  therefore,  are  the  intelligible  Gods,  because  they  are  united  to- 
the  good,  wholly  full  of  superessential  goodness,  and  being  established  in 
this,  they  contain  in  it  the  supreme  hyparxis  of  themselves.    Very  pro- 
perly, therefore,  do  we  say  that  the  intelligible  Gods  unfold  the  ineffable 
principle  of  all  things,  and  his  admirable  transcendency  and  union;  sub- 
sisting themselves  indeed  occultly,  but  comprehending  multitude  uni- 
formly and  unically ;  reigning  over  the  whole  of  things  exemptly,  and  be- 
ing uncoordinated  with  all  the  other  Gods.    For  as  the  good  illuminates 
all  things  with  superessential  light,  and  exhibits  the  Gods  who  are  the  fa- 


Digitized  by  Google 


222  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

thers  of  all  things,  so  likewise  the  intelligible  genus  of  Gods,  according  to 
a  similitude  to  the  good,  imparts  from  itself  to  all  the  secondary  Gods, 
intelligible  plenitude.  Hence,  according  to  each  distribution  of  the  Gods, 
there  is  an  appropriate  intelligible  multitude,  just  as  a  monad  analogous 
to  the  good  exists  prior  to  each  of  the  divine  orders.  And  this  monad 
indeed  is  the  preexistent  leader  of  union  to  secondary  natures.  But  in. 
telligible  multitude  is  the  preexistent  source  of  beauty,  self-sufficiency, 
power,  essence,  and  all  intelligible  goods.  For  the  Gods  antecedently 
and  intelligibly  comprehend  all  intellectual  natures,  and  contain  in  them- 
selves  all '  things  according  to  supreme  union. 


•  Instead  of  rm  xaf  nwwiv,  it  it  requisite  to  read  varra  xoJf  tvtunv,  and  then  the  end  of  this  book 
will  be  co  mplete,  and  not  defective  is  the  Latin  translatorPortus  imagined  it  was. 


Digitized  by  Google 


BOOK  IV. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Let  the  discussion,  therefore,  of  the  intelligible  Gods,  unfolding  the 
mystic  doctrine  of  Plato  concerning  them  be  here  terminated  by  us.  But 
it  entirely  follows  in  the  next  place,  that  we  should  consider  after  the  same 
manner  the  narration  concerning  the  intellectual  Gods.  Since,  however, 
of  intellectuals  some  are  both  intelligible  and  intellectual,  viz.  such  as  ac- 
cording to  the  Oracle  perceiving  intellectually  are  at  the  same  time  intel- 
lectually perceived  ;  but  others  are  intellectual  only; — this  being  the  case, 
beginning  from  those  that  are  intellectual  and  at  the  same  time  intelligi- 
ble, we  will  in  the  6rst  place  determine  what  pertains  to  them  in  common, 
from  which  we  shall  render  the  doctrine  concerning  each  order  of  them 
more  perspicuous.  Again,  therefore,  let  us  recal  to  our  memory  those 
things  which  we  a  little  before  demonstrated,  viz.  that  there  are  three 
total  monads  which  arc  entirely  beyond  the  Gods  that  arc  divided  accord- 
ing to  parts,  viz.  essence,  life  arid  intellect.  And  these  prior  to  the  par- 
tial participate  of  the  superessential  unities.  Essence,  however,  is  exempt 
from  the  rest.  Life  is  allotted  the  middle  order.  But  intellect  converts 
the  end  of  this  triad  to  the  beginning.  -And  all  these  are  indeed  intelli- 
gibly in  essence;  but  intelligibly  and  intellectually  in  life;  and  intellec- 


Digitized  by  Google 


[ 


224  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

• 

tually  in  intellect.  And  as  secondary  natures  always  participate  of  the 
natures  placed  above  them,  but  these  prior  to  participation  presubsist 
themselves  by  themselves;  and  as  in  each  order  there  are  these  three 
things,  the  cause  of  abiding,  the  cause  of  proceeding,  and  the  cause  of  con- 
version, though  intellect  is  more  formalized  according  to  conversion,  but 
life  according  to  progression,  and  essence  according  to  permanency  ; — 
this  being  the  case,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  the  first  intellectual  Gods 
being  essentialized  according  to  life  should  conjoin  imparticipable  intel- 
lect, and  the  intelligible  genus  of  Gods,  and  that  they  should  uniformly 
connect  the  various  progressions  of  secondary,  but  unfold  and  expand  the 
stable  hyparxis  of  precedaneous  causes.  For  imparticipable  life  is  a 
thing  of  this  kind,  circumscribing  that  which  is  primarily  being  and 
intellect,  and  participating  indeed  of  being,  but  participated  by  intellect 
But  tins  is  the  same  thing  as  to  assert  that  intelligence  is  filled  indeed 
from  the  intelligible,  but  fills  intellect  from  itself.  For  being  is  the  intel- 
ligible, but  life  is  intelligence.  And  being  indeed  is  characterized  ac- 
cording to  a  divine  hyparxis;  but  Kfe  according  to  power ;  and  intellect 
according  to  intelligible  intellect.  For  as  being  is  to  byparxis,  so  is  intel- 
lect to  being.  .  And  as  intelligible  power  is  to  each  of  the  extremes,  so  n 
life  to  the  intelligible  and  to  intellect.  And  as  power  is  generated  from 
the  one  and  byparxis  but  constitutes  in  conjunction  with  the  one  the 
nature  of  being,  so  life  proceeds  indeed  from  being,  and  gives  subsistence 
to  a  power  different  from  that  which  is  in  being.  As  also  the  one  itself 
which  exists  prior  to  being,  imparts  to  being  from  itself  a  second  unity, 
so  likewise  life  being  allotted  aa  hypostasis  prior  to  intellect,  generates  in- 
tellectual life.  For  true  being  and  the  intelligible  which  precede  the  rest, 
supply  both  life  and  intellect  with  union.  Imparticipable  life,  therefore, 
but  which  participates  of  the  intelligible  monads  is  the  second  after  being, 
is  generative  of  imparticipable  intellect,  and  giving  completion  to  this 
medium,  and  containing  the  bond  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals,  is  illu- 
minated by  Gods  wlio  are  allotted  a  union  secondary  to  the  occult  sub- 
sistence of  intelligibles,  but  preceding  according  to  cause  the  separation  of 
intellectual  natures.  For  the  unical,  indivisible,  simple,  and  primary  na- 
ture of  intelligibles,  subsides,  through  the  medium  of  these  Gods* into 


■ 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  I. 


OF  PLATO. 


'2-25 


multitude  and  separation,  and  the  inexplicable  evolution  of  the  divine 
orders.  Whence  also,  I  think,  the  Gods  who  connectedly  contain  life 
which  is  infinite,  being  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual 
Gods,  and  carried  in  the  divisions  of  themselves  as  in  a  vehicle,  are  called 
intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual ;  being  filled  indeed,  from  the 
first  intelligibles,  but  filling  the  intellectual  Gods.  For  we  call  the  intelligible 
Gods  intelligible,  not  as  coordinate  with  intellect.  For  the  intelligible 
which  is  in  intellect  is  one  thing,  and  that  which  produces  the  intellectual 
Gods  another :  and  we  denominate  the  Gods  that  subsist  according  to 
life  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual,  not  as  giving  completion 
to  intellect,  nor  as  being  established  according  to  intellectual  intelligence, 
and  imparting  to  intellect  the  power  of  intellectual  perception,  but  to  the 
intelligible  the  power  of  being  intellectually  perceived,  but  we  give  them 
this  appellation,  as  deriving  their  subsistence  from  the  intelligible  monads, 
but  generating  all  the  intellectual  hebdomads.  And  because  they  are 
illuminated  indeed  with  intelligible  life,  but  subsist  prior  to  intellectuals, 
according  to  a  generative  cause,  we  think  fit  to  denominate  them  in  com- 
mon, connecting  their  names  from  the  extremes,  in  the  same  manner  as 
they  also  are  allotted  a  peculiarity  collective  of  wholes  in  the  divine  orders. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  they  subsist  according  to  this  medium,  and 
that  they  are  proximate  to  the  intelligible  Gods,  who  are  both  monadic 
and  triad ic.  For  the  intelligible  triads,  with  reference  indeed  to  the 
highest  union  and  which  is  exempt  from  all  things,  are  triads ;  but  with 
reference  to  the  divided  essence  of  triads,  they  are  monads,  unfolding  into 
light  from  themselves  total  triads.  Since  intelligibles,  therefore,  in  their 
triadic  progression,  do  not  depart  from  a  unical  hyparxis,  the  intelligible 
and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  Gods  subsist  triadically,  exhibiting  in 
themselves  the  separation  of  the  monads,  and  through  divine  difference, 
proceeding  into  multitude,  and  a  variety  of  powers  and  essences.  For 
the  natures  which  subsist  more  remote  from  the  one  principle  [of  all 
things,]  are  more  multiplied  than  the  natures  which  are  prior  to  them 
and  are  diminished  indeed  in  powers,  and  the  comprehensions  of  second- 


*  For  <am»  it  is  neceisary  to  read  w*m, 

Proc.  Vol.  I. 


226 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


ary  natures,  but  are  divided  into  more  numbers,  and  such  as  are  more 
distant  from  the  monad.  They  likewise  relinquish  the  union  which  is 
the  cause  of  primarily  efficient  natures,  and  variety  is  assumed  by  them 
in  exchange  for  the  occult  hyparxis  of  those  primary  essences.  According 
to  this  reasoning,  therefore,  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  separation  is 
greater  than  the  separation  which  is  only  intelligible.  And  of  these 
again,  the  partial  orders  are  allotted  a  much  greater  division,  so  as  to  un- 
fold to  us  a  multitude  of  Gods  which  cannot  be  comprehended  in  the 
numbers  within  the  decad.  Their  peculiarities  also  are  indescribable,  and 
inexplicable  by  our  conceptions,  and  are  manifest  only  to  the  Gods  them- 
selves, and  to  the  causes  of  them.  Such,  therefore,  are  the  intelligible 
and  intellectual  Gods,  and  such  is  the  peculiarity  which  they  are  allotted, 
a  peculiarity  connective  of  extremes,  and  which  unfolds  into  light  prece- 
daneous,  but  converts  secondary  natures.  For  they  intellectually  per- 
ceive the  Gods  prior  to  them,  but  are  objects  of  intellection  to  the  Gods 
posterior  to  them.  Hence  also  Timasus  establishes  all-perfect  animal  to 
be  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligibles,  because  there  are  intelligibles  pos- 
terior to  it,  which  it  surpasses  in  beauty,  as  being  superior  to  them,  and 
because  it  is  the  boundary  of  the  first  intelligibles,  the  natures  posterior 
to  it  subsisting  intellectually.  According  to  this  reasoning,  therefore, 
the  first  intellectual  Gods  are  also  intelligible ;  and  we  do  not,  deriving 
these  things  from  a  foreign  source,  ascribe  them  to  Plato,  but  they  are  as- 
serted by  us  in  consequence  of  receiving  auxiliaries  from  him.  This, 
however,  will  be  more  manifest  through  what  follows. 


CHAPTER  II. 


In  the  next  place,  therefore,  we  shall  discuss  the  manner  in  which  the 
Gods  who  illuminate  the  breadth  of  imparticipable  life  proceed  from  the 
intelligible  Gods.    Since  then  the  intelligible  Gods  establish  in  themselves 


CHAP.  II. 


OF  PLATO. 


uniformly  things  multiplied,  occultly  such  as  are  divided,  and  according 
to  a  certain  admirable  transcendency  of  simplicity,  the  various  genera  of 
beings, — hence  the  first  intellectual  Gods,1  unfolding  their  indistinct 
union,  and  the  unknown  nature  of  their  hypostasis,  and  being  filled 
through  intelligible  power  and  essential  life  with  the  prolific  abun- 
dance of  wholes,  are  allotted  a  kingdom  which  ranks  as  the  second  after 
them.    And  they  always  indeed  produce,  perfect,  and  connect  them- 
selves, but  receive  from  the  intelligible  Gods  an  occult  generation ;  from 
intelligible  power  indeed,  receiving  a  peculiarity  generative  of  all  things ; 
but  from  intelligible  life  which  preexists  according  to  cause  in  the  intelli- 
gible, receiving  the  nature  which  is  spread  under  them.    For  life  is  pri- 
marily indeed  in  intelligibles ;  but  secondarily  in  intelligibles  and  intel- 
lectuals ;  and  in  a  third  degree  in  intellectuals;  existing  indeed  according 
to  cause  in  the  first,  but  according  to  essence  in  the  second,  and  according 
to  participation  in  the  last  of  these.    The  first  intellectual,  therefore,  pro- 
ceed from  the  intelligible  Gods,  multiplying  indeed  their  union,  and  their 
unical  powers,  unfolding  their  occult  hyparxis,  and  through  prolific,  con- 
nective, and  perfective  causes  assimilating  themselves  to  the  essential,  en- 
tire, and  all-perfect  transcendencies  of  intelligibles.    For  in  intelligibles 
there  were  three  primarily  effective  powers ;  one  indeed  constituting  the 
essence  of  wholes ;  another  measuring  things  which  are  multiplied ;  and 
another  being  productive  of  the  forms  of  all  generated  natures. 

And  confonnably  to  these,  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  powers  sub* 
sist;  one  indeed,  by  its  very  essence  producing  the  life  of  secondary  na- 
tures, according  to  a  certain  intelligible  comprehension ;  but  another 
being  connective  of  every  thing  which  is  divided,  and  imparting  by  illu- 
mination the  intelligible  measure  to  those  natures  that  relinquish  the  one 
union  [of  all  things ;]  and  another  supplying  all  things  with  figure,  and 
form  and  perfection.  The  intelligible  and  intellectual  orders  of  the 
Gods,  therefore,  are  generated  according  to  all  the  intelligible  causes. 
From  power  indeed,  being  allotted  the  peculiarity  of  progression ;  but 
from  life  receiving  the  portion  of  being  which  is  suspended  from  them. 
For  life  is  conjoined  with  power;  since  life  is  of  itself  infinite,  all  motion 

'  It  it  necessary  to  supply  in  this  place  in  the  original,  ntyn  Sm. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


HOOK  IV 


having  infinity  consubsistent  with  its  nature,  and  the  power  of  infinity,  is 
generative  of  the  whole  of  things.    But  from  the  triadic  hypostasis  of  in- 
telligible*, they  receive  a  distribution  into  first,  middle  and  last.    For  it 
is  necessary  that  nil  things  should  be  detained  by  a  triadic  progression, 
and  that  this  should  be  the  case  prior  to  all  [other]  things  with  the  intelli- 
gible and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  genera  of  Gods.    For  because  they 
subsist  as  the  middle  of  wholes,  and  give  completion  to  the  bond  of  the 
first  orders,  according  to  their  summit  indeed,  they  are  assimilated  to  in- 
telligible*, but  according  to  their  extremity,  to  intellectuals.    And  they 
are  partly  indeed  intelligible,  and  partly  intellectual.    For  every  where 
the  progressions  of  the  divine  genera  are  effected  through  continued  simi- 
litude.   And  the  first  of  subordinate  are  united  to  the  ends  of  preexistent 
causes.    As  however,  the  first  and  the  last  in  the  middle  of  wholes  are 
both  intelligible  and  intellectual,  it  is  necessary  there  should  be  a  connec- 
tive medium  of  these,  according  to  which  medium  the  peculiarity  of  these 
Gods  is  principally  apparent.    For  that  which  is  intelligible  and  at  the 
same  time  intellectual,  in  one  part  indeed  is  more  abundant  than,  but  in 
another  equally  communicates  with  both  these.    From  these  things, 
therefore,  the  continuity  of  the  progression  of  the  divine  orders  appears 
to  be  admirable.    For  the  extremity  of  intelligibles  indeed  was  intellec- 
tual, yet  as  in  intelligibles.  But  the  summit  of  intelligibles  and  at  the  same 
time  intellectuals,  is  intelligible  indeed,  yet  it  possesses  this  peculiarity 
vitally.    And  again,  the  end  of  intelligibles  and  at  the  same  time  intel- 
lectuals, is  intellectual,  but  it  is  vitally  so.    But  the  beginning  of  intel- 
lectuals, is  intelligible,  and  presides  over  the  intellectual  Gods,  yet  it  has 
the  intelligible  intellectually.    And  thus  all  the  divine  genera  are  allotted 
an  indissoluble  connexion  and  communion,  an  admirable  friendship,  and 
well-ordered  diminution,  and  a  transcendency,  partly  coordinate  and 
partly  exempt.    That  which  proceeds  too,  is  always  in  continuity  with 
its  producing  cause ;  and  secondary  natures  together  with  a  firm  esta- 
blishment in  their  causes,  make  a  progression  from  them.  There  is  likewise 
one  series  and  alliance  of  all  things ;  secondary  natures  always  subsisting 
from  those  prior  to  them,  through  similitude.    After  what  manner,  there- 
lore,  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  Gods,  unfold  them- 


CHAP.  III.  OF  PLATO.  J29 

selves  into  light  from  the  intelligible  Gods,  may  through  these  things  be 
recollected. 


CHAPTER  III. 

In  the  next  place,  let  us  show  how  they  are  divided  in  their  progres- 
sions, and  what  difference  the  triads  of  these  Gods  are  allotted  with 
respect  to  the  intelligible  triads.  These  Gods,  therefore,  are  also  divided 
triply,  after  the  above  mentioned  manner ;  being  conjoined  indeed  to  the 
intelligible,  through  their  summit ;  but  to  the  intellectual  through  their  end ; 
and  through  the  middle  bond  of  the  extremes,  being  allotted  the  peculi- 
arity of  each  equally,  and  extending  to  both  the  intelligible  and  intellec- 
tual genera  of  Gods,  as  the  centre  of  these  two-fold  orders,  uniformly 
containing  the  communion  of  wholes.  They  are  likewise  divided  triply t 
because  in  these  all  things,  vis.  essence,  life,  and  intellect,  are  vitally,  in 
the  same  manner  as  they  are  intelligibly  in  the  Gods  prior  to  them,  and 
intellectually  in  the  Gods  that  derive  their  subsistence  from  these.  And 
essence  indeed  is  the  intelligible  of  life;  but  life  is  the  middle  and  at  the 
same  time  the  peculiarity  of  this  order ;  and  intellect  is  the  extremity,  and 
that  which  is  proximately  carried  in  intellectuals  as  in  a  vehicle.  AH 
things  therefore  subsisting  in  these  Gods,  there  will  be  a  division  of  them 
into  first,  middle,  and  last  genera.  And  in  the  third  place,  they  are  di- 
vided triply,  because  it  is  necessary  that  life  should  abide,  proceed,  and 
be  converted  to  its  principles;  since  of  beings,  the  first  triad  was  said  to 
establish  all  things,  and  prior  to  other  tilings  the  second  triad.  Eternity, 
therefore,  abides  stably  in  the  first  triad.  But  the  triad  posterior  to  this, 
is  the  supplier  to  wholes  [and  therefore  to  all  things,]  of  progression,  mo- 
tion, and  life  according  to  energy.  And  the  third  triad  is  the  supplier  of 
conversion  to  the  one,  and  of  perfection  which  convolves  all  secondary 
natures  to  their  principles.    Hence  it  is  necessary  that  the  intelligible  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


230  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV 

at  the  same  time  intellectual  Cods,  should  primarily  participate  of  these 
three  powers,  and  should  abide  indeed  in  the  summit  of  themselves ;  but 
proceeding  from  thence,  and  extending  themselves  to  all  things,  should 
again  be  converted  to  the  intelligible  place  of  survey,  and  conjoin  to  the 
beginning  of  their  generation  the  end  of  their  whole  progression. 

The  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  Gods  therefore  are, 
as  I  have  said,  triply  divided.    And  essence  indeed  is  that  which  ranks  as 
first  in  them,  but  life  is  the  middle,  and  intellect  the  extremity  of  them. 
Since  however,  each  of  these  tnree  is  perfect,  and  participates  of  the  in- 
telligible monads,  I  mean  of  the  essence  which  is  there,  of  intelligible  life, 
and  of  intelligible  intellect,  they  are  tripled  according  to  the  participation 
of  primarily  efficient  causes.    And  the  intelligible  of  life  indeed  possesses 
essence,  intellect,  and  life  intelligibly  ;  but  the  intelligible  and  intellectual 
of  it,  possesses  essence,  life  and  intellect,  intelligibly  and  at  the  same  time 
intellectually ;  and  the  intellectual  of  it  possesses  these  intellectually  and 
intelligibly. '    And  every  where  indeed,  there  is  a  triad  in  each  of  the  sec- 
tions, but  in  conjunction  with  an  appropriate  peculiarity.    Hence  three 
intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  triads  present  themselves  to 
our  view,  which  are  indeed  illuminated  by  the  divine  unities,  but  each  of 
them  contains  an  all-various  multitude.    For  since  in  intelligibles,  there 
was  an  all-powerful  and  all-perfect  multitude,  how  is  it  possible  that  this 
multitude  should  not  in  a  much  greater  degree,  be  evolved  and  multiplied, 
in  the  Gods  secondary  to  the  intelligible  order,  according  to  the  prolific 
cause  of  them  ?    Each  triad  therefore  comprehends  in  itself  a  multitude 
of  powers,  and  a  variety  of  forms,  producing  intelligible  multitude  into 
energy,  and  unfolding  into  light  the  generative  infinity  of  intelligibles. 
And  we  indeed,  being  impelled  from  the  participants,  discover  the  pecu- 
liarity of  the  participated  superessenliat  Gods.    But  according  to  the 
order  of  things,  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  monads  generate  about 
themselves  essences,  and  all  lives,  and  the  intellectual  genera.  And 
through  these,  they  unfold  the  unknown  transcendency  of  themselves, 

■  In  the  original,  after  *eu  mm  in  this  sentence,  it  is  necessary  to  supply  w^ro;  uu  rsrp»f,  t»  h 
ttffw.   A»d  after  votpm,  it  is  also  requisite  to  supply  not  vsijrwj,  as  in  the  abore  translation. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  III.  OF  PLATO.  231 

preserving  by  itself  the  preexistent  cause  of  the  whole  of  things.  There 
are  however,  as  we  have  said,  three  intelligible  triads.  And  there  are 
also  three  triads  posterior  to  these,  which  appear  to  be  tripled  from 
them,  according  to  their  prolific  perfection. 

But  it  is  necessary  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  intelligible,  and  also  of 
the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  triad,  should  be  defined 
according  to  another  mode.  For  in  the  intelligible  order  indeed,  each 
triad  had  only  the  third  part  of  being ;  for  it  consisted  of  bound,  and  in- 
finity, and  from  both  these.  But  this  was  essence  indeed  in  the  first  triad, 
intelligible  life  in  the  second,  and  intelligible  intellect  in  the  third.  The 
natures  however  prior  to  these  were  unities  and  superessential  powers, 
which  give  completion  to  the  whole  triads.  But  in  the  intelligible  and  at 
the  same  time  intellectual  order,  each  triad  has  essence,  life  and  intellect; 
one  indeed  intelligibly  and  at  the  same  time  intellectually,  but  more  in- 
telligibly, so  far  as  it  is  in  continuity  with  the  first  intelligibles ;  but  ano- 
ther intellectually  and  intelligibly,  but  more  intellectually,  because  it  is 
proximately  carried  in  intellectuals;  and  another  according  to  an  equal 
part,  as  it  comprehends  in  itself  both  the  peculiarities.  Hence  the  first 
triad,  that  we  may  speak  of  each,  was  in  intelligibles,  bound,  infinity,  and 
essence ;  for  essence  M  as  that  which  was  primarily  mixed.  But  here  the 
first  triad  is  essence,  life  and  intellect,  with  appropriate  unities.  For  es- 
sence is  suspended  from  the  first  deity  [of  this  triad,]  life  from  the  second, 
and  intellect  from  the  third.  And  these  three  superessential  monads,  unfold 
the  monads  of  the  first  triad.  But  again,  the  second  triad  after  this,  was  in 
the  intelligible  order,  a  superessential  unity,  power,  and  intelligible  and  oc- 
cult life.  Here  however,  essence,  life  and  intellect  are  all  vital,  and  are  sus- 
pended from  the  Gods  who  contain  the  one  bond  of  the  whole  of  this  or- 
der. For  as  the  first  unities  were  allotted  a  power  unific  of  the  middle 
genera,  so  the  second  unities  after  them,  exhibit  the  connective  peculia- 
rity of  primarily  efficient  causes.  After  these  therefore,  succeeds  the 
third  triad,  which  in  the  intelligible  order  indeed  was  unity,  power,  and 
intelligible  intellect ;  but  here  it  consists  of  three  superessential  Gods,  who 
close  the  termination  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
Gods,  and  begird  all  things  intellectually,  I  mean  essence,  life  and  intellect. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


They  are  likewise  the  suppliers  of  divine  perfection,  •  imitating  the  all- 
perfect  intelligible  triad,  just  as  the  connectedly  containing  Gods  imitate 
the  intelligible  measure,  and  the  Gods  prior  to  these,  the  generative  cause 
of  intelligibles.  The  three  intelligible  therefore,  and  at  the  same  time  in- 
tellectual  triads,  are  thus  generated,  and  are  allotted  such  a  difference  as 
this,  with  respect  to  the  intelligible  triads. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

- 

Again  however,  returning  to  Plato,  let  us  accord  with  him,  and  exhi- 
bit the  science  which  preexists  with  him  concerning  each  of  these  triads. 
And  in  the  first  place,  let  us  assume  what  is  written  in  the  Phsedrus,  and 
survey  from  the  words  themselves  of  Socrates,  how  he  unfolds  to  us  the 
whole  of  the  orderly  distinction  of  these  triads,  and  the  differences  which 
it  contains.  In  the  Pheedrus  therefore,  there  are  said  to  be  twelve  lead- 
ers who  preside  over  the  whole  [of  mundane  concerns,]  and  who  conduct 
all  the  mundane  Gods,  and  all  the  herds  of  daemons,  and  convert  them  to 
the  intelligible  nature.  It  is  also  said  that  Jupiter  is  the  leader  of  all 
these  twelve  Gods,  that  he  drives  a  winged  chariot,  adorns  and  takes  care 
of  all  things,  and  brings  all  the  army  of  Gods  that  follow  him,  first  indeed 
to  the  place  of  survey  within  the  heaven,  and  to  the  blessed  spectacles, 
and  discursive  energies  of  the  intelligibles  which  are  there  But  in  the 
next  place  Jupiter  brings  them  to  the  subcelestial  arch  which  proximate- 
ly begirds  the  heaven,  and  is  contained  in  it,  and  after  this  to  the  heaven 
itself,  and  the  back  of  heaven ;  where  also  divine  souls  stand,  and  being 
borne  along  together  with  the  heaven,  survey  all  the  essence  that  is  beyond 
it.  Socrates  further  adds,  that  prior  to  the  heaven  there  is  what  is  called 
the  supercelestial  place,  in  which  true  and  real  essence,  the  plain  of  truth, 

'  For  nAnwmi  it  k  neccmry  to  read  nAuontr*;. 


igitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  V. 


OF  PLATO. 


the  kingdom  of  Adrastia,  and  the  divine  choir  of  virtues  subsist,  and  that 
souls  being  nourished  through  the  intellection  of  these  monads,  are  hap- 
pily affected,  following  [in  their  contemplation}  the  circulation  of  the 
heaven. 

These  things  therefore,  are  asserted  in  the  Phsedrus,  Socrates  being 
clearly  inspired  by  divinity,  and  discussing  mystic  concerns.  It  is  ne- 
cessary however,  prior  to  other  things,  to  consider  what  the  heaven  is  of 
which  Socrates  speaks,  and  in  what  order  of  beings  it  is  established.  For 
having  discovered  this,  we  may  also  survey  the  subcelestial  arch,  and  the 
supercelestial  place. '  For  each  of  these  is  assumed  according  to  habitude 
towards  the  heaven ;  the  one  indeed  being  primarily  placed  above  it,  but 
the  other  being  primarily  arranged  under  it 


CHAPTER  V. 


What  therefore  is  the  heaven  to  which  Jupiter  leads  the  Gods?  For 
if  we  should  say  that  it  is  the  sensible  heaven,  as  certain  other  persons  say 
it  is,  it  will  be  necessary  that  the  more  excellent  genera  should  be  con- 
verted to  things  naturally  subordinate  to  themselves.  For  if  Jupiter  the 
mighty  leader  in  the  heaven  proceeds  to  this  sensible  heaven,  and  leads  to 
it  all  the  Gods  that  follow  him,  he  will  have  a  conversion  to  things  sub- 
ordinate, and  posterior  to  himself.  And  together  with  Jupiter,  this  will 
also  be  the  case  with  all  the  leaders,  and  the  Gods  and  daemons  suspend- 
ed from  these ;  though  the  same  Socrates  in  the  Phaedrus  says,  that  even 
a  partial  soul  when  perfected  is  conversant  with  sublime  concerns,  and 
governs  the  whole  world.  How  is  it  possible  therefore,  that  the  leaders 
of  whole  souls  should  be  converted  to  the  sensible  heaven,  and  exchange 

'  After  njv  unupuuv  cp\nia,  it  it  obviously  necessary  (o  add  w  «*  vrrpntfmrwr  core*. 

Proc  Vol.  I.  3G 


Digitized  by  Google 


J34  ON"  THC  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV' 

the  intelligible  place  of  survey  for  an  inferior  allotment,  when  through 
these  souls  they  preside  over  the  universe,  in  order  that  they  may  illumi- 
nate mundane  natures  with  a  liberated  and  unrestrained  power?  In  ad- 
dition to  these  things  also,  what  are  the  blessed  intellections  of  the  Gods 
within  this  sensible  heaven,  and  what  are  the  evolutions  of  all  the  know- 
ledge of  sensibles? '  For  in  short  the  Gods  know  sensibles,  not  by  a  con- 
version  to  thein,  but  by  containing  in  themselves  the  causes  of  them. 
Hence  intellectually  perceiving  themselves,  they  know  sensibles  causally, 
and  rule  over  them,  not  by  looking  to  them,  and  verging  to  the  subjects 
of  their  government,  but  by  converting  through  love  inferior  natures  to 
themselves*  Neither  therefore,  is  it  lawful  for  the  Gods  who  adorn  the 
whole  of  heaven,  and  think  it  worthy  their  providential  care,  to  be  ever 
situated  under  the  circulation  of  this  heaven ;  nor  is  there  any  blessedness 
in  the  contemplation  of  the  things  which  exist  under  it ;  nor  are  the  souk 
that  are  converted  to  this  contemplation  among  the  number  of  those  that 
are  happy,  and  that  follow  the  Gods,  but  they  rank  among  those  that  ex- 
change  intelligible  for  doxastic  nutriment,  such  as  Socrates  says,  the  souls 
are  that  are  lame,  that  have  broken  their  wings,  and  are  in  a  merged  con- 
dition. Since  therefore  passions  of  this  kind  belong  to  partial  souls,  and 
these  not  such  as  arc  happy,  how  can  we  refer  a  conversion  to  the  sensi- 
ble heaven  to  tlte  ruling  aud  leading  Gods  ? 

Farther  still,  Socrates  says  that  souls  standing  on  the  back  of  the  hea- 
ven, are  carried  round  by  the  circumvolution  itself  of  the  heaven ;  but 
Timaeus,  and  the  Athenian  guest  say,  that  souls  lead  every  thing  in  the 
heavens  by  their  own  motions,  externally  cover  bodies  with  their  motions, 
and  living  their  own  life  through  the  whole  of  time,  impart  to  bodies  se- 
condarily efficient  powers  of  motion.  Mow  therefore  do  these  things  ac- 
cord with  those  who  make  tliis  heaven  to  be  sensible?  For  souls  do  not 
contemplate  and  dance  round  intclligibles,  through  the  circulation  of  the 
heavens ;  but  through  the  unapparent  convolution  of  souls,  bodies  re- 
volve in  a  circle,  and  about  these  perform  their  circulations.  If  there- 
fore any  one  should  say  that  the  sensible  heaven  circumvolves  souls,  and 

•  The  sentence  that  immediately  follows  this  in  die  original,  is  so  defective,  as  to  be  perfectly 
unifttelliptble.    I  hire  not  therefore,  attcir.Dtcd  to  translate  it. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  V. 


OF  PLATO. 


that  it  js  divided  according  to  the  hack,  the  profundity,  and  the  subce- 
lestial  arch,  many  absurdities  must  necessarily  be  admitted. 

But  if  some  one  should  say  that  the  heaven  is  intelligible,  to  which  Ju- 
piter is  the  leader,  but  all  the  Gods,  and  together  with  these,  daemons 
follow  him,  he  will  unfold  the  divinely-inspired  narrations  of  Plato  con- 
sentaneously to  the  nature  of  things,  and  will  follow  the  most  celebrated 
of  hii  interpreters.  For  Plotinus  and  Jamblichus  are  of  opinion  that  this 
heaven  is  a  certain  intelligible.  And  prior  to  these,  Plato  himself  in  the 
Cratylus  following  the  Orphic  theogouies  calls  the  father  indeed  of  Jupiter, 
Saturn,  but  of  Saturn,  Heaven.  And  he  evinces  that  Jupiter  is  the  de- 
miurgus  of  the  whole  of  things  through  the  names  [by  which  he  is  called,] 
investigating  for  this  purpose  the  truth  concerning  them.  But  he  shows 
that  Saturn  is  connective  of  a  divine  intellect;  and  that  Heaven  is  the  in- 
telligence, or  intellectual  perception  of  the  first  intelligibles.  For  sight, 
says  he,  looking  to  the  things  above,  is  Heaven.  Hence  Heaven  subsists 
prior  to  every  divine  intellect,  with  which  the  mighty  Saturn  is  replete; 
but  it  intellectually  perceives  the  things  above,  and  such  as  are  beyond  tlte 
celestial  order.  The  mighty  Heaven  therefore,  is  allotted  a  kingdom  which 
is  between  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  orders.  For  the  circulation 
mentioned  in  the  Phsedrus  is  intelligence,  through  which  all  the  Gods  and 
souls  obtain  the  contemplation  of  intelligibles.  But  intelligence  is  a  me- 
dium between  intellect  and  the  intelligible.  It  must  be  said  therefore, 
that  the  whole  of  heaven  is  established  according  to  this  medium,  and  that 
it  contains  the  one  bond  of  the  divine  orders,  being  the  father  indeed  of 
the  intellectual  genus,  but  being  generated  from  the  kings  prior  to  it, 
which  also  it  is  said  to  see.  But  on  one  side  of  it  the  supercelestial  place, 
and  on  the  other  the  subcelestial  arch  must  be  arranged. 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Aoaik  therefore,  if  indeed  the  supercelestial  place  is  the  imparticipa- 
ble  and  occult  genus  of  the  intelligible  Gods,  how  can  we  establish  so 
great  a  divine  multitude  there,  and  this  accompanied  with  separation, 
viz.  truth,  science,  justice,  temperance,  the  meadow,  and  Adrastia  ?  For 
neither  do  the  fountains  of  the  virtues,  nor  the  separation  and  variety  of 
forms,  pertain  to  the  intelligible  Gods.  For  the  first  and  most  unical  of 
forms  extend  the  demiurgic  intellect  of  wholes  to  the  intelligible  paradigm, 
and  the  comprehension  of  forms  which  is  there.  But  Socrates  in  the 
Phaedrus  saya  that  a  partial  intellect  contemplates  the  supercelestial 
place.  For  this  intellect  is  the  governor  of  the  soul,  as  it  is  well  said  by 
the  philosophers  prior  to  us.  If  therefore,  it  be  necessary  from  this 
analogy  to  investigate  the  difference  of  intelligibles,  as  the  demiurgic  in- 
tellect indeed,  is  imparticipable,  but  a  partial  intellect  is  participate,  so 
with  respect  to  the  intelligible,  one  indeed  which  is  the  first  paradigm  of  • 
the  demiurgus,  pertains  to  the  first  intelligibles,  but  another  which  is  the 
first  paradigm  of  a  partial  intellect  pertains  to  the  second  intelligibles, 
which  are  indeed  intelligibles,  but  are  allotted  an  iutelligible  transcenden- 
cy, as  subsisting  at  the  summit  of  intellectuals.  But  if  the  supercelestial 
place  is  beyond  the  celestial  circulation,  but  is  interior  to  those  intelligi- 
ble triads,  because  it  is  more  expanded ;  for  it  is  the  plain  of  truth,  and 
h  not  unknown,  is  divided  according  to  a  multitude  of  forms,  and  pos- 
sesses a  variety  of  powers,  and  the  meadow  which  is  there  nourishes  souls,, 
and  is  visible  to  them,  the  first  intelligibles  illuminatiug  souls  with  ineffa- 
ble union,  but  not  being  known  by  them  through  intelligence ; — if  this  be 
the  case,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  the  supercelestial  place  should  sub- 
sist between  the  intelligible  nature,  and  the  celestial  circulation.  If  Plato 
himself  also  admits  that  essence  which  truly  is,  exists  in  this  place,  how  is  it 
possible  that  he  should  not  also  admit  it  to  be  intelligible,  and  to  partici- 


CHAP.  Vtt. 


OF  PLATO. 


2«7 


pate  of  the  first  intelligible*  ?  For  because  indeed  it  is  essence  it  is  intel- 
ligible ;  but  because  it  truly  is,  it  participates  of  being. 

Moreover,  possessing  in  itself  a  multitude  of  intelligibles,  it  will  not  be 
arranged  according  to  the  first  triad ;  for  the  one  being  is  there,  and  not 
the  multitude  of  beings.  But  possessing  a  various  life  which  the  meadow 
indicates,  it  is  subordinate  to  the  second  triad ;  for  intelligible  life  is  one, 
and  without  separation.  And  again,  since  it  shines  forth  to  the  view  with 
divided  forms,  all-various  orders,  and  prolific  powers,  it  falls  short  of  the 
all-perfect  triad  [in  intelligibles].  If  therefore  it  is  the  second  to  these  in 
dignity  and  power,  but  is  established  above  the  celestial  order,  it  is  iutel- 
ligible  indeed,  but  is  the  summit  of  the  intellectual  Gods.  On  this  ac- 
count also,  nutriment  is  derived  tc~  souls  from  thence.  For  the  intelligi- 
ble is  nutriment,  since  the  first  intelligibles  also,  viz.  the  beautiful,  the 
wise  and  the  good,  are  said  to  nourish  souls.  For  by  these,  says  Socrates,, 
the  wing  of  the  soul  is  nourished ;  but  by  the  contraries  to  these  it  is  cor- 
rupted and  destroyed.  These  things  however,  are  indeed  effected  by  the 
first  intelligibles  exemptly,  and  through  union  and  silence.  But  the  su» 
percelestial  place  is  said  to  nourish  through  intelligence  and  energy,  and; 
to  fill  the  happy  choir  of  souls  with- intelligible  light,  and  the  prolific  rivers 
of  life. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


After  the .  supercefestiar  place  however  and  the  heaven  itself,  is  the 
subcelestial  arch,  which  it  is  obvious  to  every  one  ought  to  be  arranged 
under  the  heaven,  and  not  in  the  heaven..  For  it  is  not  called  by  Plato 
the  celestial,,  but  the  subcelestial  arch.  That  it  is  also  proximately  situ- 
ated tiuder  the  celestial  circulation,  is  evident  from  what  is  written  con- 
cerning it.    But  if  it  be  necessary  to  make  the  subcelestial  arch  being 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


such,  the  same  with  the  summit  of  intellectuals,  and  not  with  the  end  of 
the  intelligible  aud  intellectual  Gods,  it  will  be  now  necessary  to  contem- 
plate what  remains.  For  the  summit  of  intellectuals  separates  itself  from 
the  kingdom  of  the  heaven,  but  the  subcelestial  arch  is  on  all  sides  com- 
prehended by  it.  And  the  former  indeed  constitutes  the  whole  of  intel- 
lect, intellectual  multitude,  and  as  Socrates  says,  the  blessed  discursive 
energies  of  the  Gods ;  but  the  latter  only  bounds  the  celestial  scries,  and 
supplies  the  Gods  with  the  means  of  ascending  to  the  heaven.  For  when 
the  Gods  are  elevated  to  the  bancpiet,  and  the  delicious  food,  and  are 
filled  with  intelligible  goods, -then  they  proceed  ascending,  to  the  sub- 
celestial  arch,  and  through  it  are  raised  to  the  celestial  circulation.  Hence, 
if  you  say  that  the  subcelestial  arch  is  perfective  of  the  Gods,  and  con- 
verts them  to  the  whole  of  the  heaven,  and  the  supercelestial  place,  you 
will  not  wander  from  the  meaning  of  Plato.  For  the  GodB  are  indeed 
nourished  by  the  intelligible,  by  the  meadow,  and  by  the  divine  forms, 
which  the  place  above  the  heaven  comprehends ;  but  they  are  filled  with 
this  nutriment  through  the  subcelestial  arch.  For  through  this  they  also 
participate  of  the  celestial  circulation.  Hence  they  are  converted  in- 
deed, through  the  subcelestial  arch ;  but  they  receive  a  vigorous  intellec- 
tual perception  from  the  celestial  order ;  and  they  are  filled  with  intelli- 
gible goods  from  the  supercelestial  place.  It  is  evident  therefore,  that 
the  supercelestial  place  is  allotted  an  intelligible  summit;  but  the  circula- 
tion of  the  heaven,  the  middle  breadth  ;  and  the  arch,  the  intelligible  ex- 
tremity. For  all  things  are  in  it.  And  intellect  indeed  is  convertive,  but 
the  intelligible  is  the  object  of  desire.  But  divine  intelligence  gives  com- 
pletion to  the  middle,  perfecting  indeed  the  conversions  of  divine  natures, 
and  binding  them  to^such  as  are  first,  but  unfolding  the  tendencies  to  in- 
telligibles,  and  filling  secondary  natures  with  precedaneous  goods.  I 
think  however,  that  through  these  things  we  have  sufficiently  reminded 
jthe  reader  of  the  order  of  these  three. 


CEIAP.  IX. 


OF  PLATO. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Perhaps  however,  some  one  may  ask  us,  why  we  here  characterize 
the  whole  progression  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
Gods,  according  to  the  middle,  and  why  we  call  one  of  the  extremes  su- 
percelestial,  but  the  other  subcelestial,  from  their  habitude  to  the  middle, 
indicating  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the  one,  but  the  proximate  and 
connected  diminution  of  the  other.  Perhaps  therefore,  we  may  concisely 
answer  such  a  one,  that  this  whole  genus  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the 
same  time  intellectual  Gods,  binds  together  both  the  extremes,  being  to 
the  one  the  cause  of  conversion,  but  to  the  other  of  becoming  unfolded 
into  light,  and  being  present  with  secondary  natures.  As  therefore,  we 
denominate  all  the  intelligible  Gods  paternal  and  unical,  characterizing 
them  from  the  summit,  and  as  we  say  that  they  are  the  boundaries  of  the 
whole  of  things,  viz.  those  that  are  effective  of  essence,  those  that  are  the 
causes  of  perpetuity,  and  those  that  are  the  sources  of  the  production  of 
forms,  after  the  same  manner  we  unfold  these  middle  Gods  as  the  leaders, 
of  all  bonds,  from  the  middle  which  is  in  them.  For  the  whole  of  this 
middle  order  is  vivific,  connective  and  perfective.  But  the  summit  of  it 
indeed,  unfolds  the  impressions  of  intelligible*,  and  their  ineffable  union.. 
The  termination  of  it  converts  intellectuals,  and  conjoins  them  to  intelli- 
gibles.  And  the  middle  collects  into,  and  fixes  in  itself  as  in  a  centre  the 
whole  genera  of  the  Gods.  For  to  the  extremes  also  through  reference 
to  the  middle  we  attribute  the  habitude  of  transcendency  and  diminution* 
calling  the  one  above,  but  the  other  under  the  middle. 


CUAPTKR  IX. 


THRODGir  these  things  therefore,  we  may  concisely  answer  him,  as  I 
have  said,  who  doubts  concerning  these  names.    Here  however,  it  is  fit 


240  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

that  we  should  admire  the  divine  science  of  Plato,  because  he  has  nar- 
rated the  mode  of  the  ascent  of  the  whole  of  things  to  the  intelligible  con- 
formably to  the  highest  of  initiators.  For  in  the  first  place,  he  elevates 
souls  and  the  Gods  themselves  to  the  fountains,  through  the  liberated 
leaders.  For  the  blessed  and  most  abundant  spectacles  and  discursive 
energies  are  particularly  in  these  fountains,  in  which  also  theurgists  place 
all  their  hope  of  salvation.  They  are  therefore  blessed  through  the  un- 
polluted monads;  but  they  are  most  abundant  through  the  cause  of  di- 
vine difference ;  and  they  are  spectacles  and  discursive  energies,  through 
the  intellectual  and  paternal  powers.  But  in  the  second  place,  Plato  ele- 
vates souls  and  Gods  from  the  fountains,  and  through  the  fountains  to  the 
leaders  of  perfection.  For  after  many  and  divided  intellections  the  good 
of  the  perfective  Gods  shines  forth,  being  supernally  expanded  from  the 
intellectual  Gods  themselves,  and  illuminating  us,  and  prior  to  our  souls, 
whole  souls,  and  prior  to  these,  the  Gods  themselves.  But  from  the  per- 
fective Gods  Plato  elevates  souls  and  Gods  to  the  divinities,  who  are  con- 
nective of  all  the  intellectual  orders.  For  the  perfective  Gods  are  sus- 
pended from  these  divinities,  subsist  together  with  them,  and  are  compre- 
hended by  them.  Such  also  is  the  communion  and  union  of  these  Gods, 
that  some  of  the  most  celebrated  [interpreters  of  Plato]  have  supposed 
that  there  is  an  all-perfect  and  indivisible  sameness  among  them,  in  conse- 
quence of  not  being  able  to  apprehend  by  a  reasoning  process  the  separa- 
tion which  is  in  them.  For  here  also,  it  may  appear  to  some  one  that 
Plato  calls  the  extremity  of  the  celestial  circulation,  the  arch.  This  how- 
ever is  not  the  case.  For  he  does  not  denominate  the  arch  celestial,  but 
bubcelestial.  As  therefore,  the  supercelestinl  is  essentially  exempt  from 
the  heaven,  thus  also  the  subceleslial  is  inferior  to  the  kingdom  of  the 
heaven.  For  the  former  indeed  is  indicative  of  transcendency,  but  the 
latter  of  a  proximately-arranged  diminution. 

After  this  circulation  however,  which  is  connective  of  the  whole  of 
things,  Plato  elevates  souls  and  the  Gods  to  the  supercelestiai  place,  and 
the  intelligible  union  of  intellectuals,  where  also  the  Gods  abiding,  are 
nourished,  are  in  a  happy  condition,  and  are  filled  with  ineffable  and 
uuical  goods.    For  with  theurgists  also,  the  ascent  to  the  ineffable  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IX. 


OF  PLATO. 


intelligible  powers  which  are  the  summits  of  all  intellectuals,  is  through 
the  connective  Gods.   Jn  what  manner  however,  the  Gods  are  here  con- 
joined to  the  first  intelligible*,  Plato  no  longer  unfolds  through  words; 
for  the  contact  with  them  is  ineffable,  and  through  ineflables,  as  he  also 
teaches  in  what  he  says  about  them  in  tlie  Phaedrus.    And  through  this 
order,  the  mystic  union  with  the  intelligible  and  first-producing  causes  is 
effected.    With  us  therefore,  there  is  also  the  same  mode  of  conjunction. 
And  through  this,  the  mode  of  theurgic  ascent  is  more  credible.  For 
as  wholes  ascend  to  exempt  principles,  through  the  natures  proximately 
placed  above  them,  thus  also  parts  imitating  the  ascent  of  wholes,  are 
conjoined  through  middle  steps  of  ascent,  with  the  moat  simple  and  in- 
effable causes.    For  what  Plato  has  delivered  .in  this  dialogue  concerning 
whole  «ouls,  he  afterwards  unfolds  concerning  our*.  Apd  in  the  first  place 
indeed,  he  conjoins  them  with  the  liberated  Gods.   Afterwards,  through 
these  be  elevates  them  to  the  perfective  Gods.  Afterwards,  through  these, 
to  the  connective  <Gods,  and  in  a  similar  manner,  as  far  as  to  the  intel- 
ligible Gods.    Socrates  therefore,  narrating  the  mode  of  ascent  to  intel- 
ligible beauty,  and  how  following  the  Gods,  prior  to  bodies  and  genera- 
tion, we  were  partakers  of  that  blessed  spectacle,  says:  "  For  it  was  then 
lawful  to  see  splendid  beauty,  when  we  obtained  together  with  that  happy 
choir,  this  blessed  vision  and  spectacle,  we  indeed  following  Jupiter,  but 
others  in  conjunction  with  some  other  God,  perceiving,  and  being  initiated 
in  those  mysteries,  which  it  is  lawful  to  call  the  most  blessed  of  mysteries." 
How  then  were  we  once  conjoined  with  intelligible  beauty  ?  Through 
being  initiated,  says  he,  in  the  most  blessed  of  mysteries.    What  else 
therefore,  does  this  assert,  than  that  we  were  conjoined  with  the  perfec- 
tive leaders,  and  we*e  initiated  by  them,  in  order  to  our  being  replenished 
with  beauty  ?  Of  what  goods  therefore,  is  the  initiation  the  procurer? 
"Which  orgies,"  says  he,"  were  celebrated  by  us,  when  we  were  entire  and 
impassive,  and  were  initiated  in,  and  became  spectators  of  entire,  simple, 
j»nd  quietly  stable  visions."   The  entire  therefore,  is  derived  to  souls  from 
the  celestial  circulation.    For  this  contains,  and  is  connective  of  all  the 
divine  genera,  and  also  of  our  souls.    Every  tiling  however,  which  in  the 
whole  contains  parts,  comprehends  also  that  which  is  divided,  and  col- 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  H 


g42  ON  THE  TUTOLOGY  BOOK  If. 

lects  that  which  is  various  into  union  and  simplicity.    But  the  entire, 
quietly  stable,  ami  simple  visions,  are  unfolded  to  souls  snpernally  from 
the  supercelestial  place,  through  the  connectedly-containing  Gods.  For 
the  mystic  impressions  of  intclligiblcs,  shine  forth  in  that  place,  and  also 
the  unknown  and  ineffable  beauty  of  characters.  For  munis  and  epoptcia' 
are  symbols  of  ineffable  silence,  and  of  union  with  mystic  natures  through 
intelligible  visions.    And  that  which  is  the  most  admirable  of  all  is  this, 
that  as  theurgists  order  the  whole  body  to  be  buried,  except  the  head,  in 
the  most  mystic  of  initiations,  Plato  also  has  anticipated  this,  being 
moved  by  the  Gods  themselves.  "  For  being  pure,"  says  he, "  and  liberated 
from  this  surrounding  vestment,  which  we  now  denominate  body,  we  ob- 
tained this  most  blessed  muesi$  and  epopteia,  being  full  of  intelligible 
light."    For  the  pure  splendor  [which  he  mentions]  symbolically  unfolds 
to  us  intelligible  light.    Hence,  when  we  are  situated  in  the  intelligible, 
we  shall  have  a  life  perfectly  liberated  from  the  body.    But  elevating  the 
head  of  the  charioteer  to  the  place  beyond  the  heaven,  we  shall  be  filled 
■with  the  mysteries  which  are  there,  and  with  intelligible  silence.    It  also 
appears  to  me  that  Plato  sufficiently  unfolds  the  three  elevating  causes, 
love,  truth,  and  faith,  to  those  who  do  not  negligently  read  what  he  has 
written.    For  what  besides  love  conjoins  with  beauty?    Where  is  the 
plain  of  truth,  except  in  this  place?    And  what  else  than  faith  is  the 
cause  of  this  ineffable  muesiaf    For  muesk  in  short,  is  neither  through 
intelligence  nor  judgment,  but  through  ihe  unical  silence  imparted  by 
faith,  which  is  better  than  every  gnostic  energy,  aud  which  establishes 
both  whole  souls  and  ours,  in  the  ineffable  and  unknown  nature'  of  the 

•  "The  word  nXm)  or  initiation,"  says  Hermeas,  in  his  MS.  Commentary  on  die  Phxdrus, ««  was 
so  denominated  from  rendering  the  soul  perfect.  The  soul  therefore  was  once  perfect.  But  here 
it  i»  divided,  and  is  not  able  to  energize  wholly  by  itself."  He  addsi  "  But  it  is  necessary  to 
know  that  telete,  vweiu,  and  epopteia,  rtKtrn,  funp-i;,  and  differ  from  each  other.  Telete, 

therefore,  is  analogous  to  that  which  b  preparatory  to  purifications.  But  mtesis,  which  it  so  called 
from  closing  the  eyes,  is  more  divine.  For  to  close  the  eyes  in  initiation  is  no  longer  to  receive  by 
sense  those  divine  mysteries,  but  with  the  pure  soul  itself.  And  nrcirri«x  epopteia  is  to  be  esta- 
blished in,  and  become  a  spectator  of  the  mysteries." 

'  Qont  it  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  X. 


OF  PLATO. 


Gods.  These  things  however,  have  proceeded  to  this  length  from  my 
sympathy  about  such  like  concerns. 


CHAPTER  X. 


Bwt  again  returning  to  the  proposed  theology,  let  us  unfold  the  con- 
ceptions  which  Plato  indicates  to  us  concerning  each  order  of  the  intel- 
ligible and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  Gods.  The  supercelestial  place 
therefore  is  intelligible.  Hence  also  Plato  says  that  it  is  essence  whioh 
truly  is,  and  that  it  is  visible  to  the  intellect  of  the  soul.  It  is  likewise 
the  one  comprehension  and  union  of  the  intellectual  Gods.  For  it  is  not 
intelligible  after  such  a  manner  as  animal  itself,  nor  as  the  first  eternity, 
nor  as  that  which  is  itself  primarily  the  one  being.  For  as  these  are  pri- 
marily intelligibles,  they  are  exempt  from  all  other  intelligible^,  and  pre- 
subsist  by  themselves.  But  the  supercelestial  place,  is  proximately  es- 
tablished above  the  celestial  circulation,  and  of  this  is  the  intelligible ; 
yet  it  is  not  simply  intelligible.  And  that  we  assert  these  tilings  rightly, 
Socrates  also  testifies,  imparting  the  intellection  of  this  intelligible  to  souls 
likewise,  through  the  heaven.  For  in  this  period,  according  to  which 
they  are  carried  round  together  with  the  circulation  of  the  heaven,  they 
behold  indeed  justice,  they  behold  temperance,  and  they  also  behold  sci- 
ence, and  each  of  the  beings  which  have  a  true  and  real  existence ;  so  that 
if  the  supercelestial  place  is  intelligible,  and  real  being,  yet  it  is  intelligi- 
ble, as  being  above  the  heaven.  The  first  intelligibles  however,  are  in- 
telligible according  to  their  own  essence,  and  according  to  the  exempt 
aud  first  efficient  cause  of  all  intellectual  natures.  For  the  mighty  Saturn 
likewise,  though  he  is  an  intellectual  God,  and  the  fulness  of  intellect,  is 
intelligible  as  with  reference  to  the  demiurgus ;  for  he  is  the  summit  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


244  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  UOOtt  IV. 

the  intellectual  triad.  Thus  therefore,  the  place  also  which  is  above  the 
heaven,  is  allotted  an  intelligible  transcendency  with  respect  to  the  celes- 
tial circulation,  and  is  intelligible  as  in  the  first  intellectuals. '  Hence 
also  it  subsists  analogous  to  the  first  triad  of  intelligibles.  That  triatl 
however,  was  simply  intelligible.  For  the  intelligible  which  is  in  intelli- 
gibles, at  once  exists  prior  to  all  second  and  third  intelligibles.  But  the 
supercelestial  place  is  not  simply  intelligible;  for  it  is  the  summit  of  intel- 
lectuals, and  not  of  intelligibles.  Hence  Plato  calls  the  first  triad  of  in- 
telligibles the  one  being ;  but  he  denominates  the  supercelestial  place, 
truly-existing  essence.  Tor  the  former  indeed,  antecedes  all  beings  in  an 
admirable  simplicity,  and  in  the  occult  unity  of  being.  For  that  being  is 
the  intelligible  itself,  and  is  not  in  one  respect  intelligible,  but  in  another 
intellectual,  nor  is  it  that  which  is  passive  to  [viz.  participates  of]  being ; 
but  it  is  the  seat,  and  the  most  ancient  monad  of  being.  This  order  how- 
ever, [vis.  the  supercelestial  place]  falls  short  of  the  union  of  that  triad* 
and  participates  of  being,  but  is  not  simply  being.  Hence  also  Plato 
calls  it  essence,  and  essence  which  truly  is,  as  receiving  this  intelligible 
and  essential  according  to  the  essence  of  that  which  is  primarily  being. 
And  the  first  triad  indeed  of  intelligibles  was  paternal ;  for  it  subsists  accord- 
ing to  divine  union  and  bound,  and  is  the  occult,  and  highest  boundary  of  . 
all  intelligibles.  But  the  supercelestial  place  is  maternal,  subsisting  ac- 
cording to  infinity,  and  the  power  of  infinity.  For  this  order  is  feminine 
and  prolific,  and  produces  all  things  by  intelligible  powers.  Hence  also, 
Plato  calls  it  a  place,  as  being  the  receptacle  of  the  paternal  causes,  and 
bringing  forth,  and  producing  the  generative  powers  of  the  Gods  into  the 
hypostasis  of  secondary  natures.  For  having  denominated  matter  also  a 
place,  he  calls  it  the  mother  and  nurse  of  the  reasons  [i.  c.  of  the  produc- 
tive principles],  which  proceed  into  it  from  being,  and  the  paternal 
cause. 

According  to  this  analogy,  therefore,  Plato  thus  denominates  the  super- 
celestial place,  as  feminine,  and  as  being  the  cause  of  those  things  ma- 
ternally, of  which  the  intelligible  father  is  the  cause  paternally.  Matter 

•  Instead  of  •< «  rut  »fW«rro.{  wjroif  voe^j,  It  is  accessary  to  read  w  tr  rwj  *fmtrn>(  vm$«ij 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  X. 


OF  PLATO. 


245 


however  receives  forms  alone ;  but  the  mother  and  nurse  of  the  Gods,  not 
only  receives,  but  also  constitutes  and  generates  secondary  natures,  together 
with  the  father.  Nor  does  this  generative  deity  produce  from  herself 
into  an  external  place,  her  progeny,  and  separate  them  from  Ler  own  com- 
prehension, in  the  same  manner  as  the  natures  which  generate  here, 
deliver  their  offspring  into  light  external  to  themselves;  but  she  generates, 
comprehends  and  establishes  all  things  in  herself.  Hence  also  she  is  the 
place  of  them,  as  being  a  seat  which  on  all  sides  contains  them,  and  as 
by  her  prolific,  and  primarily  efficient  powers,  preoccupying  and  con- 
taining in  herself,  all  the  progressions,  multitude  and  variety  of  secondary 
natures.  For  all  beings  subsist  in  ihe  Gods,  and  are  comprehended  and 
saved  by  them.  For  where  can  they  recede  from  tlie  Gods,  and  from  the 
comprehension  which  is  in  them?  .And  how,  if  they  depart  from  them, 
con  they  remain  even  for  the  smallest  portion  of  time?  In  a  particular 
manner  however  the  powers  which  are  generative  of  divine  natures,  are 
said  to  comprehend  their  progeny,  so  far  as  they  are  the  proximate  causes 
of  them,  and  constitute  their  essence  with  a  more  abundant  division,  and 
a  more  particular  providence.  For  paternal  causes  produce  secondary 
natures  uniformly,  exemptly,  and  without  coordination,  and  comprehend, 
but  unically  their  own  progeny.  And  in  simplicity  indeed,  they  preoccu- 
py the  variety  of  them ;  but  in  union  their  multitude.  It  is  evident 
therefore,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  the  supercelestial  place  is  intel- 
ligible, and  after  what  manner  it  is  intelligible.  In  addition  to  these 
things  also  it  is  evident,  how  it  is  feminine ;  for  place  is  adapted  to  the 
generative  Gods  through  the  above-mentioned  causes.  And  the  meadow  is 
the  fountain  of  a  vivific  nature,  as  will  be  shortly  demonstrated.  Socrates 
likewise  assumes  all  the  divine  natures  that  are  in  this  place,  to  be  of  this 
hind,  [viz.  to  be  of  the  feminine  genus]  I  mean  science  herself,  justice  her- 
self, temperance  herself,  truth  herself,  and  Adrastia ;  which  may  especi- 
ally be  considered  as  a  certain  indication,  that  Plato  particularly  attri- 
butes the  feminine  to  this  order,  and  not  only  other  theologists. 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

What  therefore  is  the  cause  through  which  Plato  in  the  first  place  ce- 
lebrates this  deity  negatively,  analogous  to  the  one  t  And  what  are  (ha 
negations  ?  For  he  denominates  it,  without  colour,  without  figure,  and 
without  contact.  And  he  takes  away  from  it  these  three  hyparxes,  colour, 
figure,  and  contact.  I  say  therefore,  that  this  order  being  the  summit  of 
the  intellectual  Gods,  is  unknown  and  ineffable,  according  to  its  peculi- 
arity, and  is  [only]  to  be  known  through  intelligible  impressions.  For 
being  the  summit  of  intellectuals,  it  conjoins  itself  with  intelligibles.  For 
how  could  intellectuals  be  conjoined  with  intelligibles,  unless  they  ante- 
cedently constituted  an  intelligible  transcendency  of  themselves  ?  But 
what  connexion  and  communion  could  be  surveyed  of  the  whole  orders 
of  things,  unless  the  extremities  of  such  as  are  first  possessed  a  certain 
similitude  to  the  beginnings  of  such  as  are  second  ?  For  on  account  of 
this  similitude,  these  are  connascent  with  each  other,  and  all  things  sub-' 
sist  according  to  one  scries.  As  therefore,  the  end  of  intelligibles  was 
intellectual,  so  likewise  the  beginning  of  intellectuals  is  allotted  an  in- 
telligible hyparxis.  And  each  of  these  indeed  is  intelligible  ;  but  the  one 
is  intelligible  simply  ;  and  the  other  is  not  intelligible  without  the  addi- 
tion of  the  intellectual.  These  therefore,  are  consubsistent  with  each 
other.  And  the  one  indeed, is  the  paternal  cause  of  the  whole  of  things, 
so  far  as  it  is  intelligible,  and  the  intellectual  which  is  in  it  is  extended  in- 
telligibly. But  the  other  is  generatively  constitutive  of  the  same  things, 
because  it  is  intellectual,  and  intelligible  good  presides  in  the  intellectual 
genus.  All  things  therefore,  are  from  both,  exeinptly  indeed,  from  the 
intellectual  of  intelligibles,  but  coordinately,  from  the  intelligible  of  in- 
tellectuals. And  both  indeed,  rejoice  in  unknown  hyparxes;  and  are 
alone,  as  Plato  says,  known  by  intelligible,  mystic,  and  ineffable  impres- 
sions, iience  also  he  calls  the  attempt  boldness  which  endeavours  to 
unfold  the  arcana  concerning  them,  and  to  explain  by  words  their  un- 
known union. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  PLATO.  24-7 

From  the  end  of  the  intelligible  order  however,  the  summit  of  intel- 
lectuals possesses  its  unknown  peculiarity.  For  so  far  as  it  conjoint 
itself  to  the  first  intelligibles,  and  is  filled  with  their  unical,  ineffable,  and 
paternal  hyparxis,  so  far  also  it  exists  in  an  unknown  manner  prior  to 
intellectuals.  Hence  it  is  incomprehensible  by  the  natures  posterior  to  it; 
but  it  is  known  by  those  prior  to  it,  being  super-expanded  into  a  continued 
union  with  them.'  It  likewise  knows  the  natures  prior  to  itself  intelligibly  ; 
but  this  does  not  at  all  differ  from  uniform  and  ineffable  knowledge. 
For  intelligible  knowledge  is  the  union,  cause,  summit,  and  unknown  and 
occult  hyparxis  of  all  knowledge.  Since  therefore,  the  one  and  united 
triad  is,  if  it  be  lawful  so  to  speak,  the  intellectual  image  of  the  unknown 
union  of  intelligibles,  and  presides  over  the  same  uniform  and  unknown 
power  in  intellectuals,  as  its  own  cause  does,  hence  Plato  mystically 
unfolds  it  through  negations.  For  every  where  that  which  is  highest, 
and  that  which  is  unknown,  are  analogous  to  the  unical  God.  As 
therefore,  we  are  taught  to  celebrate  this  God  through  negations,  after 
the  same  manner  we  endeavour  to  unfold  negatively  the  uniform  and 
unknown  summits  of  secondary  orders.  And  in  short,  since  Socrates 
in  the  Phtedrus  makes  the  ascent  as  far  as  to  the  supercelestial  place, 
arranging  it  analogous  to  the  first,  as  in  this  order,  and  in  the  ascent  of 
souls,  he  celebrates  it  by  negations.  For  in  the  Timasus,  Plato  contends 
that  the  one  demiurgus  through  whom  every  demiurgic  genus  of  Gods 
subsists  is  ineffable  and  unknown;  and  every  where  that  which  is  highest 
has  this  transcendency  with  respect  to  secondary  natures.  For  it  imi- 
tates the  cause  which  is  at  once  unically  exempt  from  all  beings.  We 
celebrate  this  cause  however,  through  negations  alone,  as  existing  prior 
to  all  things;  but  we  unfold  the  summits  which  proceed  analogous  to  it, 
affirmatively  and  at  the  same  time  negatively.  As  participating  indeed, 
the  natures  prior  to  themselves,  we  celebrate  them  affirmatively.  For 
Plato  calls  the  supercelestial  place  essence  which  truly  is,  the  plain  of 
truth,  the  meadow,  and  the  intelligible  place  of  survey  of  the  Gods,  and 
he  docs  not  only  call  it  without  colour,  without  figure,  and  without 

1  Fot  *vtv,  it  i*  necessary  to  retd  mm*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


£48  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

oontadt,  thus  mingling  affirmations  with  negations.  For  this  order  is  a 
medium  between  the  intelligible  Gods  and  the  first  intellectual  divine 
orders,  containing  the  bond  of  both.  And  it  guards  indeed  intellectual!/, 
according  to  a  uniform  and  unknown  transcendency,  but  transmits 
the  plenitudes  of  intelligibles  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things.  It  likewise 
derates  all  things  at  once,  according  to  one  common  union,  as  fa r  as  to 
the  intelligible  father,  and  generates  and  produces  them  as  far  as  to  matter. 
Being  therefore  established  between  the  unical  and  the  multiplied  Gods, 
it «  unfolded,  negatively  indeed,  through  the  unknown  manner  in  which 
it  transcends  secondary  natures,  but  affirmatively  through  its  partici- 
pation of  the  first  natures.  For  the  first  demiurgus  is  called  in  the 
Timsus  fabricator  and  father,  and  good,  and  all  such  names,  so  far  as  he 
participates  of  preexistent  causes;  but  so  far  as  he  is  the  monad  of  all 
fabrication,  Plato  leaves  him  unknown  and  ineffable,  exempt  from  all 
the  fabricators  of  things.  For  he  says,  "  it  is  difficult  to  discover  him, 
and  when  found,  it  is  impossible  to  speak  of  him  to  all  men."  Thus 
therefore  Plato  unfolds  the  supercelestial  place,  affirmatively  indeed,  as 
being  filled  from  the  first  causes,  at  one  time  indeed  calling  it  essence* 
which  truly  is,  at  another  the  plain  of  truth,  and  at  another,  something 
else  of  this  kind;  but' so  far  as  it  transcends  the  intellectual  Gods,  and 
•o  far  as  -it  is  supreme  and  unical,  he  celebrates  it  negatively,  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  principle  which  is  exempt  from  all  things. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

It  follows  therefore,  in  the  next  place,  that  we  should  consider  what 
the  negations  are,  and  from  what  orders  they  are  generated.  In  the 
Parmenides  then,  the  negations  of  the  one  are  produced  from  all  the 

•  8.  i»  omitted  in  the  original,  which  the  vme  eridently  require,  to  be  inawttA 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XII. 


OF  PLATO. 


249 


divine  orders,  because  the  me  is  die  cause  of  all  of  them.  And  every 
thing  divine-  according  to  the  hypavxis  of  itself  participates  of  the  first 
principle ;  and  the  one  in  consequence  of  transcending  these  is  in  a  much 
greater  degfee  exempt  from  the  natures  posterior  to  these.  For  from 
these  all  things  proceed;  since  they  receive  partibly  the  peculiarities  of 
these.  This  however  iB  evident  from  (he  otter  hypotheses*  in  which  Che 
same  conclusions  are  again1  eircalated,  at  one  time  being  connected 
together  negatively,  and  *t  anotlier  affirmatively.  For  what  is*  there 
wlrichr  could  be  able  to  subsist,  unless  it  was- antecedently  comprehended 
according  Vo  cause  in  wholes  ?  But  in  the  Pined r us,  the  things  which  are 
denied  of  the  intelligible  summit  of  air  intellectuals  are  the  natures  whieb 
am  proximately  established  after  this  summit,  vis.  the  sacred  genera;  the 
connective,  tike  perfective,  and  the'  paternal  of  what  are"  properly  called' 
intellectuals  For  this  summit  being  exempt  front  these,  it  also, 
transcends  all  the  intellectual  Gods.  For  what  every  genus  of  the  Gods 
is  to  Me  one,  that  the  three  orders  posterior  to  this*  summit,  arettr  it- 
Plato  therefore  denominates  the  cctestia*  order  which  connectedly  con- 
tains wholes,  and  illuminates  them  with  intelligible  light,  colour ;  because 
likewise  the  apparent  beauty  of  this  sensible  heaven  is  resplendent' with; 
all  various  colours,  and  with  light.  Hence  he  calls  that  heaven  intel- 
lectual colour,  and  light  For  the  light  proceeding  from  the  good  is  [in 
the  orders]  above  [the  heaven]  unknown  and  occult,  abiding  in-  the 
adyta  of  the  Gods ;  but  it  shines  forth  in  this  order,  and  from  being 
unapparent  becomes  manifest.  Hence  it  is  assimilated  to  colour  the 
offspring  of  light. 

Farther  still,  if  the  heaven  is  sight  beholding  the  things  above,  the 
intelligible  of  it  may  very  properly  be  called  colour  which  is- conjoined1 
with  the  sight.  The  cause  therefore  of  the  intelligibles  in  the  heaven  is- 
without  colour,  but  is  exempt  from  tfiem ;  fbr  sensible  colour  is  the 
offspri  ng  of  the  solar  light.  But  Plato  denominates  the  order  which  proxi- 
mately subsists  after  the  celestial  order,  and  which' we  have  called- the 
subcelestiat  arch,  figure.  For  the  arch  itself  is  the'  name  of  a  figure. 
And  in  short,  in  this  order,  Parmenides  also  places  intellectual  figure. 
But  Plato  first  attributes  contact  to  the  summit  of  intellectuals,  as  is 
Froc.  Vol.  I.  2  1 


250 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


evident  from  the  conclusions  of  the  Parmenides.  For  in  the  first  hypo- 
thesis taking  away  figure  from  the  one,  he  uses  this  as  a  medium,  viz. 
that  the  one  does  not  touch  itself.  "  But  the  one"  says  he,  "  does  not 
touch  itself."  And  the  conclusion  is  evident.  Here  therefore  contact 
first  subsists,  and  subsists  according  to  cause.  For  of  those  things  of 
which  the  deraiurgus  is  proximately  the  cause,  the  father  who  is  prior  to 
him  is  paradigmatically  the  cause.  In  this  order  therefore,  contact  is 
the  paradigm  of  the  liberated  Gods.  Hence  these  three  orders  are 
successive,  viz.  colour,  figure,  and  contact.  And  fromt  hese  the  super, 
celestial  place  is  essentially  exempt.  Hence  it  is  without  colour,  without 
figure,  and  without  contact.  Nor  does  it  transcend  these  three  priva.- 
tively,  but  according  to  causal  excellence.  For  it  imparts  to  colour 
from  intelligibles  the  participation  of  light ;  on  figure  it  confers  by  illu- 
mination intellectual  bound ;  and  in  contact  it  supernally  inserts  union 
and  continuity,  and  perfects  all  things  by  its  power,  things  which  are 
touched  indeed,  through  union,  those  that  are  figured,  through  the  par- 
ticipation of  bound,  and  those  that  are  coloured,  through  the  illumination 
of  light.  But  it  draws  upward,  and  allures  to  itself  every  thing  ineffably, 
and  through  intelligible  impressions,  and  fills  every  thing  with  unieai 
goods. 

.  If  therefore,  we  assert  these  things  rightly,  we  must  not  admit  the 
interpretHtion  of  those  who  are  busily  occupied  in  sensible  colours,  and 
contacts,  and  figures,  and  who  assert  that  the  supercclestia)  place  is 
exempt  from  these.  For  these  are  trifling,  and  by  no  means  adapted 
to  that  place.  For  even  nature,  not  only  that  which  exists  as  a  whole* 
but  that  also  which  \&  partial,  is  exempt  from  sensible  colours,  from 
apparent  figures,  and  from  corporeal  contact.  What  therefore  is  there 
venerable  in  this,  if  it  is  also  present  to  natures  themselves?  But  it  is 
necessary  to  extend  colours,  and  figures,  and  contacts,  from  on  high  as 
far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  and  to  evince  that  the  supercclestial  place,  is 
similarly  exempt  from  all  these.  For  soul  also  and  intellect  participate 
of  figure;  and  contact  is  frequently  in  incorporeal  natures,  according  to 
the  communion  of  first  with  secondary  beings,  and  it  is  usual  to  call 
these  communications  contacts,  and  to  denominate  the  touchings  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII. 


OF  PLATO. 


251 


intellectual  perceptions  adhesions.  We  should  not  therefore  be  carried 
from  things  first  to  things  last,  nor  compare  the  highest  order  of  intel- 
lectuals with  the  last  of  beings,  above  which  both  soul  and  nature  are 
established.  For  in  so  doing  we  shall  err,  and  shall  not  attend  to  Plato, 
who  exclaims  that  it  is  boldness  to  assert  these  things  concerning  it.  For 
where  is  the  boldness,  and  what  the  unknown  power  transcending  our 
conceptions,  in  contemplating  the  truth  of  sensible  colours,  figures,  and 
contacts.  For  an  hypostasis  of  this  kind  is  known  by  physiologists,  and 
not  by  the  sons  of  theoiogists.  Such  therefore  is  the  power  possessed  by 
the  negations  through  which  Plato  celebrates  the  supercelestial  place. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


Again  then,  let  us  in  the  next  place  survey  the  affirmations,  how  they 
exist  according  to  the  participation  of  the  first  intclligiblcs  themselves. 
The  supercelestial  place  therefore,  is  said  to  be  essence  which  truly  is, 
because  it  participates  of  that  which  is  primarily  being.  For  to  be,  and 
truly  to  be  are  present  to  all  things,  as  the  progeny  of  the  intelligible 
essence.  For  as  the  one  is  from  the  first  principle  which  is  prior  to 
intelligibles,  so  the  nature  of  being  is  from  intelligibles.  For  there  the 
one  being  subsists,  as  Parmcnides  a  little  before  taught  us.  But  the 
supercelestial  place  is  beheld  by  the  governor  of  the  soul,  because  it  is 
allotted  an  intelligible  transcendency  with  respect  to  the  other  intel- 
lectual Gods.  Hence  the  intelligible  good  of  it  is  rendered  manifest  from 
its  being  known  by  intellect.  This  intelligible  therefore,  in  the  same 
manner  as  that  which  is  truly  being,  arrives  to  it  from  the  unical  Gods. 
For  they  are  primarily  and  impnrticipably  intelligibles,  and  the  first 
efficient  causes  of  all  intelligibles.  These  things  also  concur  with  each 
other,  viz.  that  which  is  truly  being,  and  the  intelligible.     For  every 


552  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  .  BOOK  IV- 

intelligible  is  truly  being,  and  every  thing  which  is  truly  being  is 
intelligible.  For  intellect  is  intelligible  according  to  the  being  which 
is  in  it ;  but  according  to  its  gnostic  power  it  is  intellect.  Hence  also 
every  intellect  is  the  supplier  of  knowledge ;  but  every  intelligible  is  the 
supplier  of  essence.  For  that  which  each  is  primarily,  it  imparts  by 
illumination  to  tbe  secondary  orders. 


CHAFfER  XIV. 


In  tbe  third  place  therefore,  the  genus  of  true  science  is  said  to  be 
established  about  tbe  superceleslial  place.  For  these  two  things  ascend 
to  the  contemplation  of  that  essence,  viz.  intellect  the  governor  of  the 
soul  (but  this  is  a  partial  intellect  established  indeed  above  souls,  and 
elevating  them  to  their  paternal  port)  and  true  science  which  is  the 
perfection  of  the  soul.  This  therefore  energies  about  that  place,  as 
transitively  revolving  in  harmonic  measures  about  being.  But  intellect 
contemplates  it,  as  employing  simple  intellection.  Farther  still,  the 
science  which  is  in  us  is  one  thing,  but  that  which  is  in  the  supercelestial 
place  another.  And  the  former  indeed  is  true,  but  the  latter  is  truth 
itself.  What  therefore  is  it,  and  whence  does  it  subsist  ?  It  is  indeed  a 
deity  which  is  the  fountain  of  all  intellectual  knowledge,  and  the  6rst 
efficient  cause  of  undented  and  stable  intelligence.'  But  it  shines  forth 
in  the  first  triad  of  intellectuals,  because  this  is  perfective  of  all  other 
things  and  likewise  of  divine  souls.  For  these  ascending  to  this  uniform 
power  of  all  knowledge,  perfect  their  own  knowledge.  For  each  of  the 
undefined  souls,  says  Socrates,  revolving  together  with  Jupiter  and  tbe 
heaven,  surveys  justice,  temperance  and  science.  Hence,  these  three 
fountains  are  there,  being  intelligible  deities,  and  the  fountains  of  the 
'      - « 

1  For  nM»{  it  i*  neewsary  to  read  r*y«>i- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  PLATO.  253 

intellectual  virtues,  and  not  being,  as  some  think  they  are,  intellectual 
forms.  For  Plato  is  accustomed  to  characterize  these  by  the  term  itself, 
as  for  instance  science  itself  and  justice  itself;  and  this  Socrates  says 
somewhere  in  the  Phaedo.  But  here  when  he  says  justice  herself, 
temperance  herself,  and  science  herself,  he  appears  to  unfold  10  us  certain 
self-perfect  and  intelligible  deities,  which  have  a  triadic  subsistence.  And 
of  these  scienee  indeed  is  the  monad ;  but  temperance  has  the  second 
order ;  and  justice  the  third.  And  science  indeed  is  the  supplier  of 
undefiled,  firm  and  immutable  intelligence ;  but  temperance  imparts  to 
all  the  Gods  the  cause  of  conversion  to  themselves ;  and  justice  imparts 
to  them  the  cause  of  the  distribution  of  the  whole  of  good  according  to 
desert.  Aud  through  science  indeed,  each  of  the  Gods  intellectually 
pcrceives  the  natures  prior  to  himself,  and  is  filled  with  intelligible  intel- 
ligence ; '  but  through  temperance  he  is  converted  to  himself,  and  enjoys 
a  second  union,  and  a  good  coordinate  to  the  conversion  to  himself ;  and 
through  justice  he  rules  over  the  natures  posterior  to  himself,  in  a  silent 
path,  as  they  say,  measures  their  desert,  and  supplies  a  distribution  adapted 
to  each.  These  three  fountains  therefore  contain  all  the  energies  of  the 
Gods.  And  science  indeed  proceeds  analogous  to  the  first  triad  of 
intelligibles.  And  as  that  triad  imparts  essence  to  all  things,  so  this 
illuminates  the  Gods  with  knowledge.  But  temperance  proceeds 
analogous  to  the  second  triad  of  intelligibles.  For  temperance  imitates 
the  connective  and  measuring  power  of  that  triad  ;  since  it  measures  the 
energies  of  the  Gods,  and  converts  each  of  them  to  itself.  And  justice 
proceeds  analogous  to  the  third  triad  of  intelligibles.  For  it  also 
separates  secondary  natures  according  to  appropriate  desert,*  in  the 
same  manner  as  that  triad  separates  them  intelligibly  by  the  first  para- 
digms. 

•  Here  also  it  is  requisite  to  adopt  the  same  reading  as  before,  p.  258. 

*  Instead  of  xtera  tv  xyw)x»uc<cy  nuirj,  ft  seems  requisite  to  read  k«t«  m»  wftvuxarjeay 


2.54 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 

CHAPTER  XV. 


BOOK  IV. 


After  these  things  therefore,  we  may  survey  another  triad 
preexisting  in  this  place,  which  also  Socrates  celebrates,  viz.  the  plain  of 
truth,  the  meadow,  and  the  nutriment  of  the  Gods.  The  plain  of  truth 
therefore,  is  intellectually  expanded  to  intelligible  light,  and  is  splendid 
with  the  illuminations  that  proceed  from  thence.  For  as  the  one  emits 
by  illumination  intelligible  light,  so  the  intelligible  imparts  to  secondary 
natures  a  participation  productive  of  essence.  But  the  meadow  is  the 
prolific  power  of  life,  and  of  all-various  reasons,  is  the  comprehension  of 
the  first  efficient  causes  of  life,  and  is  the  cause  of  the  variety,  and 
generation  of  forms.  For  the  meadows  also  which  are  here  are  pro- 
ductive of  all-various  forms  and  reasons,  and  bear  water  which  is  the 
symbol  of  vivification.  And  the  nourishing  cau?e  of  the  Gods,  is  a 
certain  intelligible  union,  comprehending  in  itself  the  whole  perfection 
of  the  Gods,  and  filling  the  Gods  with  acme  and  power,  in  order  that 
they  may  bestow  a  providential  attention  to  secondary  natures,  and  may 
possess  an  immutable  intellectual  perception  of  such  natures  as  are  first. 
Above  however,  the  Gods  participate  of  these  uniformly;  but  in  a 
divided  manner  in  their  progressions. 

With  respect  to  the  nutriment  likewise,  one  kind  is  called  by  Plato 
ambrosia,  but  the  other  nectar.  "For  the  charioteer,"  says  he,  "  stopping 
the  horses  at  the  manger,  places  before  them  ambrosia,  and  afterwards 
gives  them  nectar  to  drink."  The  charioteer  therefore,  being  nourished 
with  intelligibles,  unically  participates  of  the  perfection  which  is 
imparted  through  illumination  by  the  Gods.  But  the  horses  participate  of 
this  divisibly ;  first  indeed  of  ambrosia,  and  afterwards  of*  nectar.  For  it 
is  necessary  that  from  ambrosia,  they  should  stably  and  undcviatingly 
abide  in  more  excellent  natures ;  but  that  through  nectar  they  should 
immutably  provide  for  secondary  natures.    For  they  say  that  ambrosia 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XV. 


OF  PLATO. 


255 


is  solid,  bul-nectar  liquid  nutriment;  which  Plato  also  indicates  when  he 
says  that  the  charioteer  places  before  the  horses  ambrosia  and  afterwards 
gives  them  nectar  to  drink.    Hence  the  nutriment  of  nectar  manifests 
the  unrestrained  and  indissoluble  nature  of  providence,  and  its  pro- 
ceeding to  all  things  in  an  unpolluted  manner.    But  the  nutriment  of 
ambrosia  manifests  stability,  and  a  firm  settlement  in  more  excellent 
natures.    From  both  these  however,  it  is  evident  that  the  Gods  both 
abide  and  proceed  to  all  things,  and  that  neither  their  undeviating 
nature,  and  which  is  without  conversion  to  subordinate  beings,  is  unpro- 
lific,  nor  their  prolific  power  and  progression  is  unstable ;  but  abiding 
they  proceed,  and  being  established  in  the  divinities  prior  to  themselves, 
they  provide  for  secondary  natures  without  being  contaminated.  Nectar 
aud  ambrosia  therefore,  are  the  perfections  of  the  Gods,  so  far  as  they 
are  Gods;  but  other  things  are  the  perfections  of  intellect,  nature,  and 
bodies.    Hence  Plato  having  assumed  these  in  souk,,  calls  the  souls 
[which  are  nourished  with  these,]  Gods.    For  so  far  as  they  also  parti- 
cipate of  the  Gods,  so  far  they  are  filled  with  nectar  and  ambrosia. 
These  however  in  their  progressions  have  a  bipartite  division ;  the  one 
hideed,  being  the  supplier  to  the  Gods  of  stable  and  firm  perfection;  but 
the  other,  of  undeviating  providence,  of  liberated  administration,  aud  of 
an  unenvving  and  abundant  communication  of  good,  according  to  the 
two  principles  of  the  whole  of  things,  which  preside  over  a  distribution 
of  this  kind.    For  it  must  be  admitted  that  ambrosia  is  indeed  analogous 
to  bound,  but  nectar  to  infinity.  Hence  the  one  is  as  it  were  humid,  and 
not  bounded  from  itself ;  but  the  other  is  as  it  were  solid,  and  has  u 
boundary  from  itself.    Nectar  therefore  is  prolific,  and  is  perfective  01 
the  secondary  presence  of  the  Gods,  and  is  the  cause  of  power,  of  a 
vigour  which  provides  for  the  whole  of  things,  and  of  infinite  and  never- 
failing  supply.    But  ambrosia  is  stable  perfection,  is  similar  to  bound, 
is  the  cause  to  the  Gods  of  an  establishment  in  themselves,  and  is  the 
supplier  of  firm  and  undeviating  intellection.    Prior  to  both  these  how- 
ever, is  the  one  fountain  of  perfection,  and  seat  to  all  the  Gods,  which 
Plato  calls  nutriment,  and  the  banquet,  and  delicious  food,  as  uuically 
perfecting  indeed  the  divided  multitude  of  the  Gods*  but  converting  all 


Digitized  by  Google 


256 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


things  to  itself  through  divine  intelligence.  For  feu*  [the  banquet]  indeed 
manifests  the  divided  distribution  of  divine  nutriment;  but  5»<^ 
[dehcious  food]  the  united  conversion  ©f  the  whole  of  things  to  it.  For 
it  w  the  intellectual  perception  of  the  Gods,  So  far  as  they  are  Gods. 
But  nutriment  connectedly  contains  both  these  powers,  being  the 
plenitude  of  intelligible  goods,  and  the  uniform  perfection  of  divine 
seltsuihaency. 


Comcebhimo  these  things  therefore,  thus  much  may  suffice  as  to  the 
present  theory.  But  it  follows  that  we  should)  discuss,  the  division  of  the 
supercelestial  place  into  three  pants.  For  the  intelligible  summit  of 
intellectuals  is,  as  we  have  before  observed,  a  triad.  Immediately  there- 
fore, according  to  the  first  conception  of  this  place,  Plato  unlblds  its 
triadic  nature,  assuming  indeed,  three  negatives,  the  uncoloured,  the 
unftgured,  and  the  untangible.  Having  likewise  established  three 
divinities  in  it,  viz.  science,  temperance,  and  justice*  our  preceptor  and 
leader  [Syrianus]  thinks  fit  to  divide  this  triad  into  three  monads,  and 
also  demonstrates  this  conformably  to  the  Orphic  theologies.  If,  however, 
it  be  requisite  to  discover  the  definite  peculiarities  of  these  three  God- 
desses, from  what  has  been  already  laid  down,  we  must  understand,  that 
the  plain  of  truth,  the  meadow,  and1  the  nourishing  cause  of  the  Gods  are 
posited  there.  To  nourish  therefore  is  the  province  of  intelligible  perfec- 
tion. Hence  the  elevating  impulse  is  given  to  the  wing  of  the  soul,  and 
also  intellectual  perfection^  according  to  the  nourishment  which  flows* 
from  thence  into  the  souh    But  the  peculiarity -ef  the  meadowy  is  te 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Digitized  t 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XVI. 


OF  PLATO. 


267 


podhess  a  power  generative  of  reasons  and  forms;  and  of  the  causes''  of 
the  production  of  animals.  Hence  also  souls  are  fed  about  the  meadow; 
and  the  pabulum  (*>/t«i)  is  indeed  nutriment,  but  in  a  divided  manner. 

The  plain  however  of  truth  is  the  expansion  and  manifestation  of 
intelligible  light,  the  evolution  of  inward  reasons,  and  perfection  pro- 
ceeding every  where.  This  therefore*  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  third 
monad.  But  fecundity  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  second  ;  and  intelligible 
plenitude  of  the  first  For  all  the  supercelestial  place  is  indeed  illumi- 
nated with  the  light  of  truth.  Hence  all  the  natures  that  are  contained 
in  it  are  called  true.  And  Socrates  says,  "  that  whatever  soul  attending 
on  divinity  has  beheld  any  thing  of  reality  shall  be  free  from  damage, 
till  another  period  takes  place."  For  every  thing  in  that  place  is  truly 
being  and  intelligible,  and  is  full  of  divine  union.  In  the  first  monads 
however  [i.  e.  in  the  plain  of  truth  and  the  meadow,]  this  intelligible 
light  subsists  contracted ly,  and  is  occultly  established  as  it  were  in  the 
adyta ;  but  in  the  third  monad  [viz.  in  the  nourishing  cause  of  the  Gods] 
it  shines  forth,  and  is  co-expanded,  and  is  co-divided  with  the  multitude 
of"  powers.  We  may  therefore  from  these  things  survey  the  differences  of 
the  three  monads,  in  a  manner  conformable  to  the  Platonic  hypotheses. 
But  if  indeed  science  pertains  to  the  first  monad,  temperance  to  the 
second,  and  justice  to  the  third,  from  these  things  also  the  triad  will  be 
perfectly  apparent.  And  does  not  science*  which  is  stable,  and  the  uni- 
form intelligence  of  wholes,  and  which  at  the  same  time  is  consubsistent 
with  intelligibles,  pertain  to  the  power  which  is  united  to  the  intelligible . 
father,  and  which  does  not  proceed,  nor  separate  its  union  from  the  deity 
of  that  father  ?  but  does  not  the  genus  of  justice  pertain  to  the  power 
which  is  divided,  which  separates  the  intellectual  genera,  leads  the 
intelligible  multitude  into  order,  and  imparts  by  illumination  distribution 
according  to  desert  ?  And  does  not  the  genus  of  temperance  pertain  to 
the  power  which  is  the  medium  of  both  these,  which  is  converted  to 
itself,  and  possesses  the  common  bond  of  this  triad  ?  For  the  harmonic, 


•  Pot  turn*  I  read  «rw>,  *  i.  e.  Perfection  proceeding  every  where. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  K 


<2.)8 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


and  a  communication  with  the  extremes  according  to  reason,  are  the 
illustrious  good  of  this  middle  power. 

That  we  may  not  therefore  be  prolix,  what  has  been  said  being  suffi- 
cient to  remind  us  of  the  meaning  of  Plato,  those  three  deities  are  , 
celebrated  by  us,  which  dividing  the  supercelestial  place,  are  indeed  all 
of  them  intelligible  as  in  intellectuals,  and  are  likewise  summits,  and 
collective  of  all  things  into  one  intelligible  union.  One  of  these  however 
is  so  stably;  another  generatively ;  and  another  convertively,  possessing 
a  primary  effective  power  in  intellectuals.  For  one  of  them  indeed, 
unites  the  monads  of  all  the  Gods  and  collects  them  about  the  intelli- 
gible ;  but  another  effects  this  about  the  progressions  of  the  Gods;  and 
another  about  their  conversions.  All  of  them  however  at  the  same  time 
collect  into  one  the  whole  of  an  hyparxis  which  always  abides,  proceeds, 
and  returns.  Heuce  also  Plato  elevates  the  Gods  that  are  distributed  in 
the  world,  to  this  one  place,  aud  converts  them  energizing  about  this  as 
collective  of  the  whole  orders  of  the  Gods  to  the  participation  of  intelli- 
gibles.  These  monads,  therefore,  educe  intelligible  forms,  fill  them  with 
the  participation  of  divine  union,  and  again  recall  the  natures  that  have 
proceeded,  and  conjoin  them  to  intelligibles.  Concerning  this  whole 
triad  however,  what  has  been  said  may  suffice. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


It  remains  therefore,  that  we  should  pass  to  the  discussion  of  Adrastia, 
Socrates  indicating  that  she  possesses  her  kingdom  in  this  place.  For  that 
which  defines  the  measures  of  a  blameless  life  to  souls  from  the  vision  of 
these  intelligible  goods,  is  certainly  there  allotted  its  first  evolution  into 
light.    For  the  elevating  cause,  being  secondary  to  the  objects  of  desire, 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XVU.  OF  PLATO  359 

may  be  able  to  raise  both  itself  and  other  things  to  the  superceleBtial 
place,  through  conversion.  Bnt  that  which  defines  and  measures  the 
fruits  of  the  vision  of  the  intelligible  to  souls,  since  it  has  its  hyparxis  in 
the  intelligible,  imparts  by  illumination  beatitude  to  them  from  thence. 
It  is  established  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  in  that  place.  But  it  rules 
over  all  the  divine  laws  uniformly,  from  on  high,  as  far  as  to  the  last  of 
things.  -  It  likewise  binds  to  the  one  sacred  law  of  itself,  all  the  sacred 
laws,  viz.  the  intellectual,  the  supermundane,  and  the  mundane.  Whe- 
ther therefore,  there  are  certain  Saturnian  laws,  as  Socrates  in  the  Gorgies 
indicates  there  are,  when  he  says,  "  The  law  therefore  which  was  in  the 
time  of  Saturn  is  now  also  among  the  Gods ;"  or  whether  there  are  Jovian 
laws,  as  the  Athenian  guest  asserts  there  are,  when  he  says,  "  But 
justice  follows  Jupiter,  which  i3  the  avenger  of  those  that  desert  the 
divine  law ;"  or  whether  there  are  fatal  laws,  as  Timaeus  teaches  there 
are,  when  he  says,  "  That  the  demiurgus  announced  to  souls  the 
laws  of  fate ;" — of  all  these  the  sacred  law  of  Adrastia  is  connective 
according  to  one  intelligible  simplicity,  and  at  the  same  time  imparts  ex- 
istence to  all  of  them,  and  the  measures  of  power.  And  if  it  be  requisite 
to  relate  my  own  opinion,  the  inevitable  guardian  power  of  this  triad,  and 
the  immutable  comprehension  of  order  pervading  every  where,  presubsist 
in  this  goddess.  For  these  three  deities  not  only  unfold  and  collect  ail 
things,  but  they  are  also  guardians  according  to  the  Oracle  of  the  works  of 
the  father,  and  of  one  intelligible  intellect. 

This  guardian  power  therefore,  the  sacred  law  of  Adrastia  indicates, 
which  nothing  is  able  to  escape.  For  with  respect  to  the  laws  of  Fate, 
not  only  the  Gods  are  superior  to  them,  but  also  partial  souls,  when  they 
live  according  to  intellect,  and  give  themselves  up  to  the  light  of  provi- 
dence. And  the  Saturnian  Gods  are  essentially  exempt  from  the  Jovian 
laws,  and  the  connective  and  perfective  Gods  from  the  Saturnian  laws; 
but  all  things  are  obedient  to  the  sacred  law  of  Adrastia,  and  all  the  dis- 
tributions of  the  Gods,  and  all  measures  and  guardianships  subsist  on 
account  of  this.  By  Orpheus  also,  she  is  said  to  guard  the  demiurgus  of 
the  universe,  and  receiving  brazen  drumsticks,  and  a  drum  made  from  the 
skin  of  a  goat,  to  produce  so  loud  a  sound  as  to  convert  all  the  Gods  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


260 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV- 


herself.  And  Socrates  imitating  this  fabulous  sound  which  extends  a 
certain  proclamation '  to  all  things,  in  a  similar  manner  produces  the  sa- 
cred law  of  Adrastia  to  all  souls.  For  he  says,  "  This  is  the  sacred  law 
of  Adrastia,  that  whatever  soul  has  perceived  any  thing  of  truth,  shall  be 
free  from  harm  till  another  period,"  all  but  expressing  the  Orphic  sound 
through  this  proclamation,  and  uttering  this  as  a  certain  hymn  of  Adras- 
tia. For  in  the  first  place  indeed,  he  calls  it  flw/*^,  a  sacred  law,  and  not 
Mpo;,  a  law,  as  he  does  the  Saturnian  and  Jovian  laws.  For  fa-p*  is  con- 
nected with  deity,  and  pertains  more  to  intelligibles  [than  to  the  intellec- 
tuals] ;  but  ycfiof  indicating  intellectual  distribution,  is  adapted  to  the  in- 
tellectual fathers.  And  in  the  second  place,  he  speaks  of  it  in  the  singular 
and  not  in  the  plural  number,  as  Timaeus  does  of  the  fatal  laws.  In  the 
third  place  therefore,  he  extends  it  to  all  the  genera  of  souls,  and  evinces 
that  it  is  the  common  measure  of  their  happy  and  blessed  life,  and  the 
true  guard  of  those  souls  that  are  able  to  abide  on  high  free  from  all 
passivity.  For  such  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  **  And  the  soul  that  is 
able  to  do  this  always,  shall  always  be  free  from  harm."  This  sacred  law 
therefore,  comprehends  all  the  undeBled  life  of  divine  souls,  and  the  tem- 
poral blessedness  of  partial  souls.  And  it  guards  the  former  indeed  in- 
telligibly, but  measures  the  latter  by  the  vision  of  intelligible  goods.  And 
thus  much  concerning  Adrastia. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


With  respect  to  what  remains  therefore,  we  shall  summarily  say,  that 
the  supercelestial  place  is  the  first  triad  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same 
time  intellectual  Gods,  possessing  three  peculiarities,  the  unfolding  into 

■  Far  xvvyp«n,  it  U  requiutc  to  read  x^uyfMi  u. 


CHAP.  XIX. 


OF  PLATO. 


261 


light,  the  collective,  and  the  defensive.  It  likewise  comprehends  all  these 
intelligibly,  and  in  an  unknown  manner,  conjoining  indeed  intellectuals  to 
intelligibles,  but  calling  forth  the  prolific  powers  of  intelligible*,  re- 
ceiving in  itself  the  plenitude  of  forms  from  the  intelligible  paradigms,  and 
producing  its  own  meadow  from  the  fontal  summit  which  is  there.  But 
from  the  one  intellect  it  gives  subsistence  to  the  three  virtues,  perfects  all 
itself  by  intelligible  impressions,  and  in  its  ineffable  bosomB  receives  the 
whole  of  intelligible  light.  At  one  and  the  same  time  also  it  abides  in  the 
occult  nature  of  the  intelligible  Gods,  and  proceeds  intelligibly  from 
thence,  shines  forth  to  the  view  of  intellectuals,  and  converts  and  draws 
upward  by  ineffable  powers  all  the  images  of  its  proper  union  which  it  has 
disseminated  in  every  thing.  To  this  place  likewise  it  is  necessary  that 
we  should  mystically  approach,  leaving  in  the  earth  all  the  generation- 
producing  life,  and  the  corporeal  nature,  with  which  on  coming  hither  we 
were  surrounded  as  with  a  wall,  but  exciting  alone  the  summit  of  the  soul 
to  the  participation  of  total  truth,  and  the  plenitude  of  intelligible  nutri- 
ment. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


After  this  intelligible  and  unknown  triad  however,  which  presides 
over  all  the  intellectual '  genera,  let  us  survey  the  triad  which  connectedly 
contains  the  bond  of  them,  intelligibly  and  at  the  same  time  intellectually. 
For  it  is  necessary  that  prior  to  intellect  and  the  intellectual  Gods,  the  - 
cause  of  connectedly  containing  should  be  in  these  Gods ;  and  that  this 
being  established  in  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  order, 
should  extend  to  all  the  divine  multitudes,  all  the  genera  of  beings,  and 


'  For  it  ia  necessary  to  read  n,f>«». 


262 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


all  the  divisions  of  the  world.  For  what  is  it  which  primarily  connects 
tilings  ?  If,  as  some  say,  the  nature  of  spirit  and  local  motion,  body  it- 
self which  is  connective  of  other  things  will  require  connexion.  For  every 
body  according  to  its  own  composition  is  dissipable  and  divisible ;  which 
also  the  Elean  guest  indicating  to  those  who  make  corporeal  principles, 
says  that  the  essence  which  is  so  much  celebrated  by  them,  is  broken  and 
dissipated.  Body  therefore,  is  not  naturally  adapted  to  be  connective  of 
other  things,  nor  even  if  a  power  of  this  kind  pertained  to  bodies,  would 
spirit  be  able  to  afford  us  this  power,  because  it  is  always  defluous  and 
dissipated,  and  diffusing  itself  beyond  that  which  bounds<it.  But  if  we 
suppose  that  habits  and  connective  forms  which  are  divided  about  bodies 
illuminate  their  subjects  with  connexion,  it  is  perfectly  necessary  that  they 
should  effect  this  by  being  present  with  them ;  but  how  will  these  habits 
and  forms  connect  themselves  ?  For  it  is  difficult  to  devise  how  this  can 
be  effected.  For  these  being  distributed  about  material  bulks,  and  di- 
vided together  with  their  subjects,  require  a  boundary  and  connexion. 
But  they  are  not  naturally  adapted  to  be  bounded  or  connected  from 
themselves;  because  they  have  not  an  essence  self-begotten  and  self- 
subsistent.  That  however,  which  neither  produces  nor  perfects  itself, 
cannot  connect  itself.  And  moreover,  every  habit,  and  every  material 
form  is  alter- motive,  and  depends  on  another  more  ancient  cause,  and  on 
this  account  is  inseparable  from  subjects,  not  being  able  to  verge  to  itself. 

But  if  abandoning  these,  we  should  assert  that  souls  which  are  incor- 
poreal and  self-begotten,  are  the  first  efficient  causes  of  connexion,  where 
shall  we  place  the  partible  and  at  the  same  time  impartible  nature  of  souls, 
that  which  is  mixed  from  the  partible  and  impartible,  that  which  partici- 
pates of  the  genera  of  being,  and  that  which  is  divided  into  harmonic 
reasons  ?  For  souls  indeed,  connect  bodies  and  natures,  because  they 
participate  of  an  impartible  peculiarity ;  but  they  are  in  want  of  another 
connective  nature  which  may  impart  the  first  principle  of  mixture  to  the 
genera,  and  of  connexion  to  divided  reasons.  For  the  self-motive  nature 
of  souls  being  transitive,  and  extended  to  time,  requires  that  which  may 
connect  its  one  life,  and  may  render  it  total  and  indivisible.  For  the 
whole  which  is  connective  of  parts,  exists  prior  to  parts ;  since  the  whole 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIX. 


OF  PLATO. 


which  consists  of  parts  receives  connexion  introduced  from  something 
different  from  itself.  But  if  proceeding  with  the  reasoning  power  beyond 
souls,  we  survey  intellect,  whether  the  intellect  which  is  participated,  or  if 
you  are  willing,  that  which  is  imparticipable  and  divine,  and  in  short,  if 
we  survey  at  once  the  intellectual  genus  of  the  Gods,  if  this  is  primarily 
connective  of  beings,  we  shall  find  also  in  this  all-various  multitude,  divi- 
sions of  genera,  and  as  Socrates  says,  many  and  blessed  visions,  and  dis- 
cussive  energies.  For  the  separation  of  divine  natures,  and  the  variety 
of  forms,  present  themselves  to  the  view  in  intellectuals,  and  also  fabulous 
sections  and  generative  powers.  How  therefore,  can  that  which  connects 
be  primarily  here,  where  the  divisive  genus  shines  forth?  And  how  is  it 
possible  that  intellectual  multitude  should  not  refer  to  another  more  an- 
cient cause  the  participation  of  its  proper  connexion  ?  For  intellectual 
multitude  is  that  which  is  primarily  connected  (since  it  is  that  which  is 
primarily  divided,  and  that  which  requires  connexion  is  divisible,  but  the 
indivisible  itself  is  beyond  the  connective  hyparxis),  but  it  is  not  that 
which  primarily  connects.  For  every  thing  which  is  connected,  is  con- 
nected by  another  thing  which  primarily  possesses  the  power  of  con- 
nexion. It  is  evident  therefore,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  the  con- 
nective order  of  beings  is  established  prior  to  the  intellectual  Gods. 

The  intelligible  indeed,  and  occult  hyparxis,  is  ihe  supplier  of  union 
to  all  things,  as  proximately  subsisting  after  the  one,  and  being  indivisible 
and  uniform.  But  connexion  is  the  contraction  of  multitude  into  impar- 
tible communion  ;  on  which  account  it  subsists  as  secondary  to  intelligi- 
bles.  For  the  medium  which  was  there  was  intelligible,  and  the  united 
primarily-efficient  cause  of  connexion.  The  connective  however,  of  in- 
telligibles  and  intellectuals,  imitates  the  unific  power  of  intelligibles.  For 
there  the  three  triadic  monads  were  the  unions  of  wholes ;  one  of  them 
indeed  according  to  transcendency;  another  according  to  the  middle 
centre ;  and  another  according  to  conversion.  But  in  the  intelligible  and 
at  the  same  time  intellectual  orders,  these  three  triads  arc  the  second  after 
those  unions,  and  are  con  nascent  with  multitude.  Hence  one  of 
these  triads  is  collective ;  another  is  connective  of  multitude ;  and  another 
is  of  a  perfective  nature.    For  that  which  is  collected,  that  which  is  con- 


264 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


nee  ted, '  and  that  which  is  perfected,  is  multitude.  Whether  therefore  it 
is  intellectual,  or  supermundane,  or  mundane,  or  any  other  multitude,  it 
is  collected,  connected,  and  perfected  through  these  three  triads.  And 
when  collected  indeed,  it  is  elevated  to  the  union  of  intelligibles,  and  is 
firmly  established  in  them.  When  it  is  connected,  it  abides  impartible 
and  undissipated  in  its  progeny.  And  when  it  is  perfected,  it  receives 
completion  from  its  proper  parts  or  powers. 

Since  however,  it  is  necessary  that  beings  abiding,  proceeding  and 
returning  should  enjoy  this  triple  providence,  there  are  indeed  three 
preexistent  collective  monads,  three  connective,  and  three  perfective 
monads.  And  we  do  not  say  this,  that  on  account  of  the  good  of 
secondary  natures,  first  natures  are  thus  divided,  and  preside  over  so 
many  orders  and  powers;  but  they  indeed  are  always  the  primary 
causes  of  good  to  things  subordinate,  while  we  from  inferior  natures  recur 
to  the  causes  of  wholes.  The  intelligible  therefore,  and  intellectual 
triads,  perfect  things  triad ically,  and  always  connect  and  collect  them 
into  union.  But  the  intelligible  monads  generate  without  separation  and 
unically,  their  permanencies,  progressions  and  conversions.  With  respect 
to  other  things  however,  we  have  partly  spoken,  and  shall  again  partly 
speak  concerning  them. 


CHAPTER  XX. 


Let  us  therefore  speak  at  present  concerning  the  connective  triad. 
This  then,  Socrates,  in  the  Phssdrus,  calls  the  celestial  circulation. 
Because  indeed,  it  possesses  the  middle  centre  of  imparticipable  life,  and 

'  For  *v«jeoy,  k  is  necesury  to  read  mjnx*/unv. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XX. 


OF  PLATO. 


is  that  which  is  most  vital  itself  of  life,  he  calls  it  circulation,  as  compre- 
hending circularly,  and  on  all  sides  all  other  lives,  and  divine  intellections. 
For  on  account  of  this,  souls  also  which  are  elevated  to  it,  are  perfected 
according,  to  intellection,  and  arc  conjoined  with  intelligible  spectacles. 
The  circulation  of  the  heaven,  however,  is  always  established  after  the  same 
manner.  For  it  is  an  eternal,  whole,  one,  and  united  intelligence.  But 
the  circulation  of  souls  is  effected  through  time,  subsists  in  a  more 
partial  manner,  and  is  not  an  at-once-collected  comprehension  of  intel- 
ligibles.  Souls,  therefore,  are  carried  round  in  a  circle,  and  are  restored 
to  their  pristine  state,  the  celestial  circulation  always  remaining  the  same. 
Because,  however,  it  gives  completion  to  the  bond  of  the  intelligible  and 
intellectual  Gods,  and  connects  all  the  orders  in  their  abiding,  pro- 
ceeding, and  returning,  Socrates  calls  it  celestial.  For  Timoeus  says, 
that  this  [sensible]  heaven  also,  compresses  on  all  sides  the  elements  ttmt 
are  under  it,  and  that  on  this  account,  no  place  is  left  for  a  vacuum. 
As,  therefore,  the  apparent  heaven  is  connective  of  all  things  that  are 
under  it,  and  is  the  cause  of  continuity,  coherence  and  sympathy,  (for 
the  intervention  of  a  vacuum  would  interrupt  the  continuity  of  things, 
and  the  subversion  of,  this  continuity  would  destroy  the  sympathy  of 
bodies)  thus  also  that  intellectual  heaven,  binds  all  the  multitudes  of 
beings  into  an  impartible  communion,  illuminating  each  with  an  appro- 
priate portion  of  connexion.  For  intellect  participates  of  the  connective 
cause  in  one  way,  the  nature  of  soul  in  another,  and  a  corporeal  state  of 
being  in  another.  For  through  the  highest  participation  of  connexion, 
intellect  is  impartible;  but  through  second  measures  of  participation, 
soul  is  partible  and  impartible,  according  to  one  mixture ;  and  through 
an  ultimate  diminution,  bodies  possessing  a  partible  hypostasis,  at  the 
same  time  remain  connected,  and  do  not  in  consequence  of  being  dissi- 
pated perish,  but  enjoy  their  own  division  and  imbecility.  The  whole 
of  the  connective  triad  therefore,  is  denominated  heaven  according  to  the 
hyparxes  of  itself;  but  the  breadth  of  life  which  is  spread  under  it  is 
called  circulation.  For  in  things  apparent  to  sense,  the  period  of  the 
heavens  is  motion,  and  is  as  it  were  the  life  of  body. 


Proc. 


Vol.  I. 


26f) 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 

CHAPTER  XXI. 


BOOK  IV. 


If  however  it  be  requisite  to  discover  the  triadic  nature  of  it  •from 
what  has  been  laid  down,  we  must  employ  the  mode  of  analogy.  Since 
therefore  Plato  himself  calls  the  back  of  the  heaven  one  thing,  and  its 
profundity  another,  it  is  evident  that  the  celestial  arch  is  the  third  thing; 
for  the  arch  which  is  under  this,  he  directly  calls  subcelestial.  But  as 
we  say  that  the  supcrcelestial  place  is  established  above  the  back  of  the 
heaven,  so  likewise  we  must  grunt  that  the  subcelestial  is  different  from 
the  celestial  arch.  For  the  heaven  is  bounded,  supernally  indeed  by  the 
back,  but  beneath  by  the  arch.  And  it  is  comprehended  indeed  by  the 
supercelestial  place,  but  it  comprehends  the  subcelestial  arch.  It  is 
evident  therefore  from  these  things,  that  the  heaven  presents  itself  to  our 
view  as  triadic,  according  to  its  back  indeed,  connectedly  containing  all 
things  in  one  simplicity  ;  but  according  to  its  arch  bounding  the  whole 
triad ;  and  according  to  its  profundity,  itself  proceeding  into  itself,  and 
constituting  the  middle  breadth  of  connexion  and  coherence.  The  back 
however,  of  the  whole  celestial  order,  is  an  intelligible  deity,  being 
perhaps  allotted  from  hence  this  appellation.  But  it  is  intelligible  as  in 
the  connective  triad,  externally  compressing,  and  connectedly  compre- 
hending all  the  kingdom  of  the  heaven.  It  likewise  imparts  to  all  the 
Gods  by  illumination  a  uniform  and  simple  comprehension  of  secondary 
natures,  and  is  supernally  filled  with  intelligible  union.  Hence  also, 
divine  souls  being  led  through  all  the  celestial  profundity,  stand  indeed 
on  the  back  of  the  heaven,  but  the  circulation  carries  them  round  as  they 
stand ;  and  thus  they  survey  what  is  called  the  supercelestial  place. 
The  station  therefore,  is  the  establishment  of  souls  in  the  intelligible 
watch  tower  of  the  heaven,  extending  to  souls  sameness,  undefiled  power, 
and  undeviating  intellection.  But  the  circumduction  is  the  participation 
of  a  life  full  of  vigour,  and  the  most  acute  energy.    And  the  common 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP%  XXI.  OF  PLATO. 


267 


presence  of  both  these,  comprehends  the  prolific  energy,  the  quiet  mo- 
tion, and  the  stable  intellection  of  intelligibles.  But  the  celestial  pro- 
fundity, is  the  one  continuity  of  the  whole  triad,  and  the  middle  deity 
■which  conjoins  the  whole'  celestial  order,  proceeding  indeed  from  the 
intelligible  comprehension,  but  ending  in  the  celestial  arch,  which  defines 
the  boundary  of  the  whole  of  the  heaven.  There  is  therefore,  one  union 
and  connexion  of  all  this  triad,  and  an  indissoluble  progression  from  the 
back  as  far  as  to  the  arch,  through  this  middle  deity  which  is  connasccnt 
with  both  the  extremes,  and  which  unfolds  indeed  the  connective  mul- 
titude, but  on  each  side  is  bounded  by  the  extremes ;  one  of  which 
comprehends  it  supernally,  but  the  other  from  beneath  bounds  its  pro- 
gression. 

The  celestial  arch  therefore  remains,  which  is  the  boundary  beneath 
of  the  triad,  and  this  is  also  the  case  with  the  intellect  which  is  in  it, 
being  filled  indeed  by  life,  but  united  by  the  intelligible,  and  converting 
all  the  triad  to  its  principle.    For  the  arch  also  is  similar  to  the  back  of 
the  heaven,  though  according  to  interval  it  is  less.    Through  subjection 
therefore  it  is  diminished  ;  but  through  similitude  it  is  converted  to  the 
celestial  summit.    And  this  is  the  celestial  intellect  which  is  the  proxi- 
mate sunochem*  of  the  subcelestial  arch.    Hence  each1  arch  is  called  the 
intellectual  boundary  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods.  The 
whole  connective  triad  therefore,  is  allotted  such  a  division  as  this ;  the 
back  (to  wbtoh)  according  to  the  intelligible  (xar*  to,  wijtwO  ;  the  profun- 
dity according  to  life ;  and  the  arch  according  to  intellect.    But  the 
whole  of  it  is  one  and  continued,  because  that  which  connects  all  other 
things,  ought  much  more  to  be  connective  of  itself.     For  each 
peculiarity  of  the  Gods  begins  its  energy  from  itself ;  the  peculiarity 
indeed,  which  is  collective,  fixing  itself  collectively  in  the  highest  union ; 
that  which  is  convcrtive  of  wholes,  converting  itself  to  the  principle ; 
and  that  which  is  undefiled  preserving  itself  prior  to  other  things  pure 
from  matter.    Hence  the  connective  peculiarity  also,  prior  to  its  parti- 

'  For  tmk  tkm  it  is  necessary  to  read  n)»  eAqn. 

*  i.  e.  That  which  connectedly  contains. 

'  For  nm$»  I  read  t*xTt$*}  in  order  that  it  may  agree  with 


Digitized  by  Google 


268 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOpK  IV. 


ci pants,  connects  itself  intelligibly  and  intellectually,  and  through  this 
connexion  the  nature  of  the  heaven  is  asserted  to  be  one  and  continued. 
For  all  the  triad  converges  to  itself,  and  preserves  its  proper  wholeness 
united,  and  most  similar  to  itself  according  to  nature.    And  the  arch 
indeed,  proximately  connects  all  intellectuals,  and  compresses  *t  hem  on 
all  sides.    But  prior  to  this,  the  celestial  profundity  itself,  which  also 
comprehends  the  arch,  binds  together  the  whole  orders.    And  prior  to 
these,  the  celestial  back  uniformly  comprehends  according  to  one  ambit 
of  simplicity,  all  the  celestial  kingdom  itself,  and  all  things  that  are  con- 
tained under  it,  and  binds  them  to  themselves,  by  connective  power  and 
hyparxis.    For  in  the  things  also  that  are  apparent  to  sense,  the  concave 
circumference  of  the  heavens,  proximately  compresses  the  elements,  and 
does  not  suffer  them  in  their  indefinite  motions  on  all  sides,  to  be 
dissipated  and  blown  away.    And  still  prior  to  these,  the  celestial  bulk 
strongly  compresses  and  impels  all  things  to  the  middle,  and  leaves  no 
void  place.    But  there  is  one  comprehension  of  all  these,  viz.  the  back 
of  the  heavens,  which  is  the  cause  to  the  heavens  of  similitude,  and  to 
the  elements  of  contact  with  the  heavens.    For  the  smooth  and  equable 
nature  of  the  back  of  the  heavens  as  Timaeus  says,  makes  the  whole  of 
heaven  similar  to  itself ;  and  always  the  natures  which  comprehend 
are  connective  of  the  natures  that  arc  comprehended.    It  is  necessary 
therefore  from  things  that  arc  apparent,  to  transfer  the  similitude  to  the 
father  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  Heaven,  and  to  survey  how  he  is  both 
one  and  triple,  supernal ly  indeed,  and  beneath,  possessing  the  intelligible 
and  intellect;  but  according  to  the  middle  possessing  life,  which  being 
the  cause  of  progressions  and  intervals,  and  generative  powers,  we  have 
properly  arranged  according  to  interval  under  the  celestial  profundity 
since  Plato  himself  also 'calls  the  summit  the  back.    "  For  those,"  says 
he,  "  that  are  called  immortals,  when  proceeding  beyond  the  heaven 
they  arrive  at  the  summit,  stand  on  the  back  of  the  heaven."    lie  calls 
therefore,  the  summit  of  the  celestial  order,  and  beyond,  the  back  of  the 
heaven ;  which  things  are  in  a  remarkable  manner  the  prerogatives  of 

1  Viz.  m  forming  the  celestial  profundity. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP,  XXII.  OF  PLATO.  269 

the  first  of  the  Synoches.    For  connectedly  containing  all  things  in  the 
one  summit  of  his  hyparxis,  according  to  the  Oracle,  he  wholly  exists 
beyond,  and  is  united  to  the  supercelestial  place,  and  to  the  ineffable 
power  of  it,  being  enclosed  on  all  sides  by  it,  and  shutting  himself  in  the 
uniform  comprehension  of  intelligibles.     For  what  difference  is  there 
between  saying  that  the  first  of  the  Synoches  is  shut  in  the  intelligible 
place  of  survey,  and  evincing  that  it  is  proximately  comprehended  by 
the  supercelestial  place,  which  was  intelligible,  but  expanded  in  intel- 
lectuals ?  If  however,  that  which  is  beyond  is  the  first,  the  summit  is 
evidently  coarranged  with  the  rest,  and  is  exempt  from  them.    But  if 
the  first  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  being  established  according  to  the 
intelligible  summit,  and  imparting  by  illumination  to  the  other  Gods, 
contact  with  the  intelligible,  and  with  the  paternal  port,  it  is  indeed 
necessary  that  there  should  be  a  middle  and  an  extremity,  the  one 
according  to  the  celestial  profundity,  but  the  other  according  to  the 
termination  of  the  whole  circulation.    If  however  the  circulation  of  the 
whole  of  the  heaven  is  one  and  continued,  the  peculiarity  of  this  order 
must  be  assigned  as  the  cause  of  this.  For  being  connective  of  the  whole 
orders  of  the  Gods,  and  prior  to  other  things  of  itself,  and  being  as  it 
were  the  centre  and  bond  of  the  divine  genera,  it  in  the  first  place  binds 
and  connects  itself,  and  extends  itself  to  one  life.    The  heaven  therefore 
is  one  and  at  the  same  time  triple,  and  proceeds  into  three  monads, 
being  both  unapparent  and  apparent,  and  that  which  is  between  these, 
and  imitating  the  intelligible  Gods  who  subside  into  intelligible  triads. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Is  you  are  willing  however  from  what  is  written  in  the  Cratylus,  to 
see  the  peculiarity  of  this  order,  in  the  first  place,  let  this  be  considered 


Digitized  by  Google 


270 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


by  you  as  an  argument  of  the  Synoche  established  in  the  middle,  that  a 
twofold  habitude  of  it  is  delivered,  one,  towards  intelligibles,  but  the 
other  towards  intellectuals.    For  it  is  said  to  see  the  things  above,  and 
to  generate  a  pure  intellect.    Hence,  of  intelligibles  it  is  the  intelligence, 
but  of  intellectuals  the  intelligible.    For  the  cause  of  intellect  subsists 
prior  to  an  intellectual  cause,  and  that  which  is  at  once  both  these, 
especially  gives  completion  to  the  middle  order  of  intelligibles  and 
intellectuals.    For  the  collective  deity,  perceiving  intelligibles,  or  rather 
being  united  to  them,  does  not  primarily  give  subsistence  to  a  divine 
intellect.    And  the  perfective  deity,  producing  together  with  the  middle 
divinity  intellectuals,  proximately  perceives  intellectually  the  celestial 
order,  and  not  the  intelligibles  prior  to  the  heaven.    But  the  middle 
divinity  alone,  occupying  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  centre,  equally 
indeed  extends  to  both,  but  perceiving  intelligibles  intellectually,  it  is 
the  cause  of  intellectuals  intelligibly.    Since  however,  habitude  to  its 
causes  precedes  the  power*  in  it  which  is  generative  of  intellectuals, 
Socrates  beginning  from  this  habitude,  delivers  also  a  second  power  as 
suspended  from  it.    But  sight  directed  to  things  above  is  very  properly 
assigned  the  appellation  of  celestial,  as  seeing  the  things  above.  This 
therefore,  perfectly  defines  for  us  a  habitude  more  ancient  than  the 
connectedly-containing  order,  jointly  assuming  it  to  be  intellectual  as 
with  reference  to  intelligibles,  and  sight  as  with  reference  to  the  objects 
of  sight,  though  it  intellectually  perceives  itself,  and  is  intelligible  in 
itself.  But  the  intelligible  of  it,  as  with  reference  to  that  which  is  primarily 
intelligible,  is  allotted  an  intellectual  order.    What  follows  however, 
unfolds  the  habitude  of  this  middle  to  intellectuals.  (For  Socrates  adds,) 
"  Whence  also,  O  Hermogenes,  those  who  are  conversant  with  things  on 
high  say  that  Heaven  generates  a  pure  intellect,  and  that  this  name  is 
properly  assigned  to  it."  The  order  therefore,  of  the  Heaven  is  expanded 
as  a  middle  in  the  middle  intellectual  and  intelligible  Gods,  compre- 
hending at  once  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  in  one  impartible 
connexion,  subsisting  similarly  with  respect  to  each  of  these,  and  being 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXII. 


OF  PLATO. 


271 


equally  distant  from  the  first  intellectuals,  and  the  unical  intelligible*. 
Hence  it  is  said  to  perceive  intellectually  the  things  above,  and  thus  to 
produce  (a  pure)  intellect. 

Assuming  this  therefore,  in  the  first  place  from  what  has  been  laid 
down,  in  the  next  place  we  should  attend  to  this,  that  the  celestial  order 
being  triple,  and  the  whole  of  it  intellectually  perceiving  intelligibles, 
and  producing  intellectuals,  the  first  monad  indeed  in  an  eminent 
manner  intellectually  perceives  intelligibles.  For  it  mingles  itself  with 
intelligibles,  knows  intelligible  intellect,  is  united  to  the  natures  prior  to 
itself,  and  is  impartible  as  in  iropartibles,  super-expanding  itself  towards 
intelligible  simplicity.  But  the  third  monad  is  especially  generative  of 
intellectuals;  since  it  is  the  intellect  of  the  whole  connective  triad. 
And  with  the  Orphic  theologists  also,  Heaven  the  father  of  Saturn  is  the 
third.  But  the  middle  monad  produces  together  with  the  third  the 
intellectual  order  of  the  Gods ;  but  is  conjoined  together  with  the  first 
to  intelligibles,  and  is  filled  indeed  with  intelligible  union  from  the  first, 
but  fills  the  third  *  with  prolific  powers.  Do  you  not  see  therefore,  how 
Plato  through  the  peculiarity  of  the  extremes,  unfolds  to  us  the  whole 
celestial  order?  Conjoining  indeed,  the  intelligible  hyparxis  of  it  to 
intelligibles ;  but  its  intellectual  hyparxis  to  intellectuals ;  and  affording 
us  the  means  of  collecting  its  hyparxis  which  is  the  middle  of  both  these, 
and  which  proceeds  according  to  a  common  peculiarity.  For  if  you 
likewise  wish  to  assume  this  from  what  has  been  said,  the  celestial  light 
is  conjoined  to  the  light  of  intelligibles.  For  sight  is  nothing  else  than 
light.  The  middle  order  therefore,  by  its  own  light,  and  by  the  divine 
summit  of  itself  is  conjoined  to  the  first  natures ;  but  by  an  intellectual 
nature,  and  the  boundary  of  the  whole  triad,  it  generates  intellect, 
and  all  the  unpolluted- deity  of  intellectuals.  For  it  does  not  produce 
intellect  by  itself,  but  in  conjunction  with  purity.  For  this  Socrates 
himself  asserts :  "  Whence  also,  they  say,  that  a  pure  intellect  is  gene- 
rated by  it."  Hence  I  he  celestial  order  is  the  first-efficient  cause  of  the 
intellectual  hyparxis,  and  of  undefilcd  power.    If  however  it  is  necessary 

'  For  Jjamtv  it  it  necessary  to  read  rf.njy 


Digitized  by  Google 


272  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

that  purity  should  not  be  inherent  in  intellect  from  accident,  it  is  the 
deity  of  those  beings  thai  are  exempt  from  secondary  natures,  and  is  the 
supplier  of  immutable  power,  which  the  mighty  Heaven  producing  in 
conjunction  with  intellect,  is  at  the  same  time  the  efficient  cause  of  the 
Gods  who  are  the  sources  of  purity,  and  of  the  intellectual  fathers. 
These  indications  therefore  of  the  truth  concerning  the  connective  Gods, 
may  also  be  assumed  from  the  Cratylus. 


CHAFFER  XXIII. 


It  remains  therefore  that  in  conformity  to  what  is  written  in  the 
Phaedrus,  we  should  survey  the  subcelestial  arch,  and  the  peculiarity  of 
the  Gods  that  are  there.  Before  however  we  begin  the  doctrine  con- 
cerning it,  I  wish  to  premise  thus  much,  that  some  of  the  most  celebrated 
of  the  interpreters  prior  to  us,  conceiving  that  this  subcelestial  arch  is  a 
divine  order  arranged  under  the  heaven,  have  thought  fit  to  rank  it 
immediately  after  the  first  God,  calling  the  first  God  Heaven.  But 
others  have  arranged  both  the  heaven,  and  the  subcelestial  arch  in  the 
breadth  of  intelligibles.  For  the  Asineean  philosopher  indeed  [Theodoras] 
being  persuaded  by  Plotinus,  calls  that  which  proximately  proceeds  from 
the  ineffable,  the  subcelestial  arch,  as  in  his  treatise  concerning  names  he 
philosophizes  about  these  things.  But  the  great  Iamblichus  conceiving 
the  mighty  heaven  to  be  a  certain  order  of  the  intelligible  Gods,  (and  in 
one  place  he  considers  it  to  be  the  same  with  the  deraiurgus,)  asserts 
that  the  order  proximately  established  under  the  heaven,  and  as  it  were 
begirding  it,  is  the  subcelestial  arch.  And  these  things  he  has  written  in 
his  Commentaries  on  the  Phaedrus.  Let  no  one  therefore  think  that  we 
make  any  innovation  concerning  the  theology  of  this  order,  and  that  we 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXITI.  OF  PLATO.  273 

ate  the  first  who  divide  the  subcelestial  arch  from  the  heaven;  but  that 
we  are  principally  persuaded  by  Plato,  who  distinguishes  these  three 
orders,  the  supercelestial  place,  the  celestial  circulation,  and  the  subce- 
lestial arch;  and  that  after  Plato,  we  are  persuaded  by  those  who 
investigate  his  theory  in  a  divinely-inspired  manner,  viz.  by  Iamblichus 
and  Theodorus.  For  why  is  it  necessary  to  speak  of  our  leader 
f_ Syrianus/j  who  was  truly  a  Bacchus,  [i.  e.  one  agitated  with  divine  fury,] 
and  who  in  a  remarkable  manner  was  full  of  deity  about  Plato,  and 
caused  as  far  as  to  us  the  admirable  nature  of  the  Platonic  theory,  and 
the  astonishment  with  which  it  is  attended,  to  shine  forth? 

He  therefore  in  his  treatise  on  the  concord  [of  Orpheus,  Pythagoras, 
and  Plato,  has  most  perfectly  unfolded  the  peculiarity  of  this  order,  the 
subcelestial  arch.]  The  two  above-mentioned  wise  men,  however,  differ 
very  much  from  each  other  in  their  theory.  For  Theodoras,  in  calling 
the  first  cause  Heaven,  does  not  any  longer  permit  Heaven  to  be  sight 
perceiving  the  things  above,  as  Socrates  in  the  Cratylus  etymologises  it 
to  be.  For  the  first  God  neither  sees,  nor  is  sight,  nor  is  inferior  to  any 
thing.  Neither  therefore  does  Theodorus  admit  this  explanation  of  the 
name,  nor  does  he  celebrate  the  supercelestial  place,  as  Socrates  does 
under  the  influence  of  divine  inspiration.  For  there  is  neither  any  place, 
nor  intelligible  of  the  owe,  nor  any  multitude  of  forms,  nor  does  the  genuS 
of  souls  ascend  beyond  the  first  God ;  since  there  is  not  any  thing  beyond 
him.  But  the  divine  Iamblichus,  us  he  supposes  that  Heaven  subsists 
indefinitely  after  the  first  cause,  and  as  he  has  not  delivered  the  peculiarity 
of  its  hyparxis,  he  is  indeed  pure  from  the  above-mentioned  doubts,  but 
he  should  teach  us  what  the  celestial  order  is,  how  it  subsists,  and  what 
genus  of  Gods  prior  to  the  demiurgus  gives  completion  to  it.  He 
however  who  has  perfected  every  thing  [on  this  subject,]  and  has 
confirmed  all  that  be  has  said  by  invincible  arguments,  is  our  preceptor 
[Syrianus,]  who  has  surveyed  all  the  orders  between  the  first  God, 
and  the  kingdom  of  the  heaven,  and  who  has  intellectually  beheld  the 
peculiarity  of  this  order,  and  has  delivered  to  us  his  mystics  the  accurate 
truth  concerning  it.  In  this  way  therefore,  our  fathers  and  grandfathers 
J*roc.  Vol*  I.  2  M 


Digitized  by  Google 


274 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 


differ  from  ench  other;  but  all  of  them  in  commou  distinguish  the 
subcelestial  arch  from  the  celestial  circulation. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


This  therefore  mu9t  also  be  supposed  by  us,  and  likewise  in  addition 
to  this,  that  this  order  of  Gods  (the  subcelestial  arch,)  is  proximately 
arranged  under  the  heaven.     Hence,  since  the  heaven  being  one  and 
triple,  is  allotted  the  connective  order,  but  the  supercelestial  place 
is  allotted  the  highest  order  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time 
intellectual  Gods,  it  is  undoubtedly  necessary  that  the  subcelestial 
arch  should  terminate  the  middle  progression  of  the  Gods,  should  close 
this  whole  order,  and  convert  it  to  its  principle,  and  that  it  should 
receive  an  order  which  is  secondary  indeed  to  the  heaven,  but  which  it 
convolves  to  the  highest  union,  and  should  be  connascently  conjoined 
with  the  middle  genera,  but  exist  prior  to  intellectuals.     For  these 
indeed  separate  their  kingdom  from   the  celestial  power;    but  the 
subcelestial  arch  is  united  to  the  heaven,  and  js  comprehended  by  the 
celestial  order.    Whence  also  it  is  denominated  subcelestial.    As  it  is 
conjoined  therefore,  to  the  celestial  circulation,  and  subsists  proximately 
from  it,  it  converts  all  secondary  natures  to  intclligibles,  and  perfects 
them  according  to  the  intellectual  place  of  survey.    For  since  the 
intellectual  Gods  are  generated  according  to  conversion,  and  are  con- 
volved to  themselves  according  to  one  spherical  union,  it  is  necessary 
that  the  perfective  empire  should  be   proximately  established  above 
them. 

Hence,  I  am  led  to  wonder  at  those  who  are  ignorant  of  this  divine 
order,  and  do  not  maintain  the  whole  fountain  of  perfection ;  but  some 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXIV. 


OF  PLATO. 


275 


of  them  betake  themselves  to  entelechias,  of  whom  we  admit  thus  much 
alone,  that  they  also  conjoin  the  perfect  with  the  form  of  connexion. 
They  are  ignorant  therefore,  of  the  perfection  which  is  separate  from 
subjects,  willingly  embrace  the  resemblances  of  true  perfections,  and  are 
conversant  with  these.  Others  again  assign  soul  as  the  cause  of  per- 
fection, who  are  ignorant  that  they  do  not  vindicate  to  themselves  a 
perfection  preexisting  in  eternity,  and  who  begin  from  the  life  which 
energizes  according  to  time,  and  possesses  its  perfection  in  periods.  It 
is  necessary,  however,  that  a  perfection  the  whole  of  which  subsists  at 
once,  should  be  prior  to  that  which  is  divided,  and  that  stable  perfection 
should  be  prior  to  that  which  is  moved.  For  the  motion  itself  which  is 
according  to  time,  is  indigent  of  end,  and  of  the  desirable,  and  is  evolved 
about  it  according  to  parts.  In  the  third  place,  after  these,  others  recur  to 
intellect,  and  suppose  the  first  perfection  to  be  intellectual.  For  intellect 
indeed,  is  energy  and  intellectual  perfection ;  but  it  aspires  after  divine 
perfection,  subsists  about  it,  and  is  converted  to  itself  through  it.  It  is 
necessary  therefore,  that  the  cause  of  conversion  should  exist  prior  to  the 
intellectual  genera  which  are  converted  to  divine  perfection,  and  that 
the  leader  of  the  perfection  which  is  one,  should  be  expanded  above  the 
natures  which  are  perfected. 

Deservedly  therefore,  does  the  subcelestial  arch  prior  to  all  intellectual " 
natures,  preestablish  an  order  of  Gods  convertive  and  perfective  of  all 
the  secondary  divine  genera.  And  on  this  account,  Plato  elevates  the 
Gods  and  daemons  that  follow  Jupiter,  to  this  arch,  and  through  this  to 
the  heaven,  and  the  supcrcelestial  place.  For  when  they  proceed  to  the 
banquet,  and  delicious  food,  they  ascend  to  the  subcelestial  arch.  Hence 
through  this  they  are  perfected,  participate  of  the  circulation  of  the 
heaven,  and  are  extended  to  the  intelligible.  For  the  intelligible  is  that 
which  nourishes  and  fills  all  things.  The  perfective  therefore  is  esta- 
blished under  the  connective  order.  And  it  perfects  indeed  all  the 
natures  that  ascend  to  the  intelligible,  dilates  souls  to  the  reception  of 
divine  goods,  and  illuminates  intellectual  light.  But  comprehending  in 
the  bosoms  of  itself,  the  second  genera  of  the  Gods,  it  establishes  all 
things  in  the  connective  circulation  of  wholes, 


Digitized  by  Google 


276 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IT. 


Through  these  things  therefore,  Socrates  also  shortly  after  saj-s,  that 
the  souls  that  are  elevated  together  with  the  twelve  Gods,  to  iotelligible 
beauty,  are  initiated  [viz.  rendered  perfect]  in  the  most  blessed  of  the 
mysteries,  and  through  this  initiation,  receive  the  mysteries  with  a  pure 
soul,  and  become  established  in,  and  spectators  of  things  ineffable. 
Hence  the  initiation  of  the  Gods  is  there;  the  first  mysteries  are  there. 
Nor  is  it  at  all  wonderful,  if  Plato  also  tolerates  us  in  calling  the  Gods 
[of  this  order]  Teletarchs,  since  he  says,  that  the  souls  that  are  there  are 
initiated,  the  Gods  themselves  indeed  initiating  them.  But  how  is  it 
possible  otherwise  to  denominate  those  who  are  the  primary  sources  of 
telete  or  initiation,  than  Teletarchsf  For  I  indeed,  perceiving  so  great  ait 
energy  even  as  far  as  to  the  names  themselves,  do  not  see  how  they  can 
be  called  differently.  Initiation  however,  being  one  and  triple,  (for  the 
perfective  are  co-divided  with  the  connective  Gods,)  Plato  calls  the  one- 
union  of  k  the  subcelestial  arch,  in  the  same  manner  as  he  calls  the- 
connective  order  Heaven.  But  the  depth  which  is  in  it  is  indicated  by 
his  admitting  that  there  is  in  it  an  extreme  subjection,  and  a  steep  path 
to  the  summit  of  the  arch.  As  therefore,  in  the  order  prior  to  this,  we 
thought  it  proper  to  arrange  the  intelligible  according  to  the  summit,  the 
vital  according  to  the  profundity,  and  the  intellectual  according  to  the 
extremity,  which  defines  the  whole  celestial,  circulation,,  so  likewise  in 
this  perfective  order,  we  must  consider  the  intelligible  of  the  arch  as  its 
summit,  denominating  it  after  the  same  manner  as  the  back  of  the 
heaven,  because  these  are  coordinate  to-  each  other;  but  we  must 
consider  the  profundity  as  coordinate  to  life,  through  which  souls  proceed 
to  the  summit;  and  the  extremity  which  closes  the  whole  arch,  as 
coordinate  to  intellect 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXV.  OF  PLATO..  277 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

This  whole  order  however,  which  i»  united  to  the  order  prior  to  irr 
we  must  analogously  divide.  For  the  perfective  Gods  are  spread  under 
all  the  connective  triad.  And  one  of  these  indeed,  is  the  supplier  to  the 
Gods  of  stable*  perfection,  establishing  aH  the  Gods  in,  and  uniting  them 
to  themselves.  But  another  is  the  primary  source  of  a  perfection 
generative  of  wholes,  exciting  things  which  precede  according  to  essence* 
to  the  providence  of  secondary  natures.  And  a  third  is  the  leader  of 
conversion  to  causes,  convolving  every  thing  which  has  proceeded,  to  its- 
proper  principle.  For  through  this  triad  every  thing  which  is  perfect  is 
self-sufficient,  and  subsists  in  itself;  every  thing  which  generates,  is 
perfect,  and  generates  full  of  vigour;  and  every  tiling  which  aspires  after 
its  proper  principle,.  i»  conjoined  to  it,  through  its  own  perfection. 
Whether  therefore,  you  assume  the  power  of  nature  which  is  perfective 
»f  things  that  are  generated,  or  the  perfect  number  of  the  restitutions  of 
the  soul  to  its  pristine  state,  or  the  perfection  of  intellect  which  is- 
established  according  to  energy  in  one,  all  these  are  suspended  from  the 
one  perfection  of  the  Gods,  and  being  referred  to  it,  some  are  allotted  a* 
greater,  but  others  a  less  portion  of  a  perfect  hyparxis;  and  every 
perfection  proceeds  from  thence.  But  in  short,  perfection  is  triple;  one 
indeed  being  prior  to  parts,  such  as  is  the  perfection  of  the  Gods.  For 
this  has  its  subsistence  in  unity,  preexisting  self-perfectly,  prior  to  all 
multitude.  For  such  indeed  is  the  one  of  the  Gods,  not  being  such  as 
the  one  of  souls,  or  of  bodies;  since  these  indeed  are  in  a  kindred  manner 
conjoined  with  multitude,  and  are  co-mingled  with  essences.  But  the 
unities  of  the  Gods  are  self-perfect,  and  subsist  prior  to  essences,. 

'  For  ywifww  it  i»  necessary  to  read  p«»p«v. 


Digitized  by  Google 


2J8  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

generating  multitudes,  and  not  being  generated  together  with  them. 
But  another  perfection  is  that  which  consists  of  parts,  and  which  derives 
its  completion  through  parts,  such  as  is  the  perfection  of  the  world ; 
for  it  possesses  the  all-perfect  from  its  plenitudes.  And  a  third  other 
perfection,  is  that  which  is  in  parts.  But  thus  also  each  part  of  the 
world  is  perfect.  For  as  this  universe  is  a  whole  consisting  of  wholes, 
so  likewise  it  is  perfect  from  the  perfect  parts  that  are  in  it,  according  to 
Timaeus.  And  in  short,  perfection  is  divided  after  the  same  manner  as 
wholeness ;  for,  as  Timasus  says,  they  are  conjoined  with  each  other. 

Hence  also  the  perfective  genus  is  connasccnt  with  the  connective, 
and  the  perfective  monad  is  arranged  under  all  the  connective  genera. 
And  as  the  wholeness  of  the  heaven  which  connectedly  contains  parts  is 
triple,  so  likewise  perfection  is  triple.    And  if  it  be  requisite  to  deliver 
my  own  opinion,  all  the  perfections  are  derived  from  all  the  leaders  ;  but 
the  perfection  which  is  prior  to  parts,  pertains  in  a  greater  degree  to  the 
first  leader;  that  which  consists  of  parts,  to  the  middle;  and  that  which 
is  in  a  part,  to  the  third  leader.    But  prior  to  this  triad,  is  the  intelligible 
triad,  which  is  uniform  perfection,  and  an  all-perfect  hyparxis,  and 
which  Timeeus  also  denominates  perfect  according  to  all  things.  There, 
however,  the  three  perfections  pre-existed  unitedly,  or  rather,  there  was 
one  fountain  of  every  perfection.    As  therefore  the  connective'  triad,  is 
the  evolution  of  the  intelligible  connexion,  and  the  collective  triad  of  the 
unific,  and  that  which  is  the  first  in  intelligibles,  so  likewise  the  per- 
fective triad  is  the  image  of  the  all-perfect  triad.    For  the  intelligible 
and  intellectual  proceed  analogous  to  the  intelligible  triads.  Perfection 
therefore  is  triple,  prior  to  parts,  from  parts,  in  a  part.    According  to 
another  mode  also,  perfection  is  stable,  generative,  convertive.  And 
according  to  another  conception,  there  is  one  perfection  of  intellectual 
and  impartible  essences,  another  of  psychical  essences,  and  another  of 
the  natures  which  are  divisible  about  bodies.    Very  properly  therefore, 
there  are  three  leaders  of  perfection  prior  to  the  intellectual  Gods,  who 
constitute  one  order  under  the  celestial  circulation,  who  elevate  through 

•  For  t*iirq  it  is  necessary  to  read  ramiw|. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXVI.  OF  PLATO.  279 

themselves  all  secondary  natures  to  the  intelligible,  perfect  them  by 
intelligible  light,  convert  and  conjoin  them  to  the  kingdom  of  the  heaven, 
impart  an  unsluggish  energy  to  the  natures  that  are  perfected,  and  are 
the  guardians  of  their  undented  perfection. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Such  are  the  conceptions  which  may  be  assumed  from  Plato  con- 
cerning the  third  triad  of  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
orders,  which  at  one  time  he  denominates  the  subcelestial  arch,  possessing 
a  summit,  middle,  and  extremity,  but  at  another  a  blessed  mystery,  and  of 
all  mysteries  the  most  ancient  and  august,  through  which  he  elevates  souls 
and  conjoins  them  to  the  mystic  plenitude  of  intelligibles.  For  this  triad 
opens  the  celestial  paths,  being  established  under  the  celestial  circulation, 
and  exhibits  the  self-splendid  appearances  of  the  Gqds,  which  are  both 
entire  and  firm,  and  expand  to  the  mystic  inspection  of  intelligible 
spectacles,  as  Socrates  says  in  the  Phaedrus.  For  telcte  precedes  muesis, 
and  muesis,  epopteia.  Hence  we  are  initiated  \jeleioumetha]  in  ascending, 
by  the  perfective  Gods.  But  we  view  with  closed  eyes  [i.  e.  with  the 
pure  soul  itself,  muoumetha]  entire  and  stable  appearances,  through  the 
connective  Gods,  with  whom  there  is  the  intellectual  wholeness,  and  the 
firm  establishment  of  souls.  And  we  become  fixed  in,  and  spectators  of 
[epopteuomen]  the  intelligible  watch  tower,  through  the  Gods  who  are 
the  collectors  of  wholes.  We  speak  indeed  of  all  these  things  as  with 
reference  to  the  intelligible,  but  we  obtain  a  different  thing  according  to 
a  different  order.  For  the  perfective  Gods  initiate  us  in  the  intelligible 
through  themselves.  And  the  collective  monads  are  through  themselves 
the  leaders  of  the  inspection  of  intelligibles.   And  there  are  indeed  many 


280 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV 


steps  of  ascent,  but  all  of  them  extend  to  the  paternal  port,  and  the 
paternal  initiation,  in  which  may  the  tdetarchs,  who  are  the  leaders  of 
all  good,  likewise  establish  us,  illuminating  us  not  by  words,  but  by 
deeds.  May  they  also  think  us  worthy  of  being  filled  with  intelligible 
beauty  under  the  mighty  Jupiter,  and  perfectly  free  us  from  those  evils 
about  generation  with  which  we  are  now  surrounded  as  with  a  wall. 
May  they  likewise  impart  to  us  by  illumination  this  most  beautiful  fruit 
of  the  present  theory,  which,  following  the  divine  Plato,  we  have 
sufficiently  delivered  to  those  who  love  the  contemplation  of  truth. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 


Let  us  now  therefore  again  follow  Parmenides  in  another  way,  who 
after  the  intelligible  triads  generates  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same 
time,  intellectual  orders,  and  unfolds  the  continued  progression  of  divine 
natures,  through  successive  conclusions.  For  the  connexion  of  the 
words,  and  their  dependance  on  each  other,  imitates  the  indissoluble 
order  of  things,  which  always  conjoins  middles  to  extremes,  and  proceeds 
through  middle  genera  to  the  last  progressions  of  beings.  This  therefore 
we  must  survey  prior  to  the  several  intellectual  conceptions,  how  the 
intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time,  intellectual  triads,  proceed  analogous 
to  the  intelligible  triads,  that  we  may  comprehend  by  a  reasoning  process 
the  well-arranged  order  of  things.  There  were  three  intelligible  triads 
therefore,  via.  the  one  being,  whole,  and  infinite  multitude.  And  three 
intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time,  intellectual  triads,  have  also  presented 
themselves  to  our  view,  viz.  number,  whole,  and  the  perfect.  Hence  from 
the  one  being,  number  is  derived ;  from  the  intelligible  whole,  the  whole 
that  is  in  these;  and  from  infinite  multitude,  the  perfect.    For  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


chap.  xxvn. 


OF  PLATO. 


infinite  which  is  there  was  all-powerful,  and  all-perfect,  comprehending 
indeed  all  tilings,  but  being  itself  incomprehensible.  To  the  all-powerful 
therefore  and  all-perfect,  the  perfect  is  analogous,  possessing  a  perfection 
which  is  intellectual,  and  secondary  to  the  first  effective  and  intelligible 
perfection.  The  whole  also  which  is  both  intelligible  and  intellectual  is 
allied  to  the  intelligible  whole,  but  it  differs  from  it,  so  far  as  the  latter 
possesses  wholeness  according  to  the  one  union  of  the  one  being ;  but 
the  one  of  the  former  appears  to  be  itself  by  itself  a  whole,  consisting  of 
unical  parts,  and  being  appears  to  consist  of  many  beings.  These 
wholenesses  therefore,  being  divided,  differ  from  the  wholeness  which 
precedes  according  to  union  and  is  intelligible.  For  the  wholenesses  of 
this  whole  are  parts  of  the  intelligible  wholeness. 

In  the  third  place  therefore,  we  must  consider  number  as  analogous 
to  the  one  being.  For  the  one  being  is  there  indeed  occultly,  intelligibly, 
and  paternally ;  but  here  in  conjunction  with  difference  it  generates 
number,  which  constitutes  the  separation  of  forms  and  reasons.'  For 
difference  itself  first  shines  forth  in  this  order,  being  power  indeed,  and 
the  duad  in  intelligibles ;  but  here  it  is  maternal,  and  a  prolific  fountain. 
For  there  power  was  collective  of  the  one,  and  the  one  being ;  on  which 
account  also  it  was  ineffable,  as  existing  occultly  in  the  one  and  in 
hyparxis.  But  here  difference  separates  indeed  being  and  the  one. 
After  this  likewise,  it  multiplies  the  one  proceeding  generatively,  and 
calls  forth  being  into  second  and  third  progressions ;  breaking  indeed 
being  into  many  beings,  and  dividing  the  one  into  more  partial  unities. 
But  according  to  each  of  these  completing  the  decrements,  the  wholes 
remaining.  Very  properly  therefore  does  Plato  make  the  negations  of 
the  one  from  this.  For  here  the  many  subsist,  through  difference  which 
divides  being  and  the  one ;  since  the  whole  also  which  is  denied  of  the 
one,  is  intellectual  and  not  intelligible.  The  negation  therefore  says  that 
the  one  is  not  a  whole,  so  that  the  affirmation  is,  the  one  is  a  whole. 
This  whole  however  is  intellectual  and  not  intelligible.  Parmenides  also 
denies  the  many  as  follows :  "  The  one  is  not  many  ;"  but  the  opposite 

■ 

'  For  Kyyvr  it  is  necessary  to  reid  toywr. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  N 


Digitized  by  Google 


182  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

to  thfe  is,  the  me »  many.  The  multitude  of  intelligible*,  however,  does, 
not  make  the  one  to  be  many,  but  causes  the  one  being  to  be  many. 
And  in  short,  every  intelligible  is  characterized  by  the  one  being.  For 
in  the  intelligible  being  and  the  one  are  complicated,  and  are  eonnascent 
with  each  other ;  and  being  is  most  unical.  But  when  each  of  these 
proceeds  into  murtitnde,  they  me  separated  from  each  other,  and  evince 
a  greater  difference  with  respect  to  each  other.  Each  of  these  also  i» 
divided  into  multitude  through  the  prolific  nature  of  difference.  From 
these  things  therefore,  it  is  evident  that  the  intelligible  and  intellectual 
orders,  being  analogous  to  the  intelligible  orders,  proceed  in  conjunction 


CHAPTER  XXVIIT. 


After  this  however,  let  us  discuss  each  of  them,  beginning  according* 
to  nature.  First,  therefore,  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time,  intel- 
lectual number  presents  itself  to  our  view;  and  which  is  connected  with, 
multitude.  For  every  number  is  multitude.  But  with  respect  to 
multitude,  one  kind  subsists  unitedly,  and  another  kind  with  separation. 
Number,  however,  is  separate  multitude;  for  there  is  difference  in  it. 
For  in  the  intelligible  there  was  power,  and  not  difference,  and  this 
power  generated  multitude,  and  conjoined  it  to  the  monads.  Number 
therefore  is  in  continuity  with  intelligible  multitude ;  and  this  is  neces- 
sary. For  the  monad  was  there,  and  also  the  duad ;  since  whole  also 
was  there,  and  was  always  monadic;  and  becoming  to  be  two,  has  no 
cessation.  Hence  the  monad  and  the  duad  were  there,  which  are  the 
first  and  exempt  principles  of  numbers.  And  in  these  multitude  was 
unitedly ;  since  the  monad  which  is  the  fountain  of  numbers,  and  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


chap,  xxvur. 


OF  PLATO. 


283 


duad  possess  all  multitude  according  to  cause;  the  former  paternally,  but 
the  latter  maternally.  And  on  this  account  intelligible  multitude  is  not 
yet  number,  but  is  intelligibly  established  in  the  uniform  principles*  I 
mean  the  monad  and  the  duad ;  generatively  indeed,  in  the  duad,  but 
paternally  in  the  monad.  For  the  third  God  was  father  and  mother; 
since  if  animal  itself  is  in  it,  it  is  also  necessary  that  the  cause  of  the 
male  and  the  female  should  there  primarily  preexist.  For  these  are  in 
animals.  Hence  according  to  Timoeus,  and  according  to  Parraenides,  the 
maternal  and  the  paternal  cause  are  there.  And  in  these,  intelligible 
animals,  and  intelligible  multitudes  are  comprehended.  From  these  first 
principles  also  number  together  with  difference  proceed,  and  they  generate 
the  monads  and  the  duads  which  are  in  number,  and  all  numbers.  For 
both  the  generative  and  the  paternal  subsist  in  these  in  a  femkikke 
manner. 

All  the  monads  likewise  of  this  triad  are  paternal.  Hence  prior  to 
other  tilings  they  participate  of  the  monadic  cause,  but  according  to  the 
power  of  difference.  For  there  indeed,  I  mean  in  the  intelligible,  the 
maternal  was  paternally;  but  here  the  paternal  subsists-  maternally  ;  just 
as  there,  the  intellectual  subsists  intelligibly,  but  here  the  intelligible,  in- 
tellectually. From  that  order  therefore,  the  first  number  subsists  proxi- 
mately, but  being  generated  analogous  to  the  first  triad  of  intelligibles*  it 
also  evidently  proceeds  from  it.  Hence  also,  Parmenides  beginning  his 
discourse  about  number,  reminds  us  of  the  first  hypothesis  through  which 
he  generates  the  one  being,  asserting  that  the  one  participates  of  essence, 
and  essence  of  the  one,  in  consequence  of  this  subsisting  according  to  that 
triad.  And  this  very  properly.  For  being  intelligible  and  intellectual, 
so  far  indeed,  as  it  is  allotted  an  intelligible  order  in  intellectuals,  it  pro- 
ceeds from  the  summit  of  intelligibles,  but  so  far  as  it  precedes  the  intel- 
lectual orders,  it  proceeds  from  the  intellectual  of  intelligibles.  In  that 
intelligible  triad,  however,  the  one  was  of  being,  and  being  of  the  one* 
through  the  ineffable  and  occult  union  of  these  two,  and  their  subsistence 
in  each  other.  But  in  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
triad,  difference  presenting  itself  to  the  view,  which  is  the  image  of  the 
concealed  and  ineffable  power  in  the  first  triad  of  intelligibles,  and  lumi- 


284 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


rook  ir. 


nously  exerting  its  own  energy,  separates  the  one  from  being,  and  being 
front  the  one,  leads  each  into  divided  multitude,  and  thus  generates  total 
number.  For  number,  as  we  have  frequently  said,  is  divided  and  not 
united  multitude,  and  subsists  from  the  principles  according  to  a  second 
progression,  but  is  not  occultly  established  in  the  principles.  Hence  also, 
it  is  simply  different  from  multitude.  And  in  intelligibles  indeed,  there 
is  multitude;  but  in  intellectuals  number.  For  there  indeed,  number  is 
according  to  cause ;  but.  here  multitude  is  according  to  participation. 
For  there  indeed,  division  subsists  intelligibly ;  but  here  union  has  an  in- 
tellectual subsistence.  If  therefore  number  proceeds  from  these,  and  is- 
allotted  such  an  order,  Parmeuides  very  properly  especially  mentions 
these  triads,  asserting  that  the  one  participates  of  essence,  and  essence  of 
the  otte,  '  and  that  through  these  the  many  become  apparent.  For  one 
of  these  indeed,  is  the  illustrious  property  of  the  first  triad,  but  the  other, 
of  the  third  triad.  And  in  the  first  triad  indeed,  participation 4  was  the 
presubsistence  of  the  union  of  the  one  and  being ;  but  in  the  third  triad' 
many  intelligibles  present  themselves  to  the  view,  Plato  all  but  proclaim- 
ing that  the  most  splendid  of  intelligibles  subsists  according  to  intelligible 


multitude,  though  multitude  is  tlicre  occult,  and  uniformly.  For  accord- 
ing to  each  order  of  divine  natures,  multitude  is  appropriately  generated 
in  the  eitremities. 


Th*  intelligible  number  therefore  of  the  intellectual  genera,  proceeds 
from  these,  and  through  these.    And  it  possesses  indeed  properties  in- 


CH AFTER  XXIX. 


'  It  is  here 


CHAP.  XXIX.  OF  PLATO.  285 

comprehensible  by  human  reasonings,  but  which  are  divided  into  two  first 
effective  powers,  viz.  the  power  generative  of  wholes,  and  the  power 
which  collects  into  union  all  progressions.  For  according  to  the  monad 
indeed,  it  collects  intellectual  multitude,  and  conjoins  it  to  intelligibles ; 
but  according  to  the  duad  it  produces  multitude,  and  separates  it  accord- 
ing to  difference.  And  according  to  the  odd  number  indeed,  it  collects 
the  many  orders  into  indivisible  union  ;  but  according  to  the  even  num- 
ber, it  prolifically  produces  into  light  all  the  genera  of  the  Gods.  For 
being  established  as  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods, 
and  giving  completion  to  the  one  bond  of  them,  it  is  carried  in  its  summit 
indeed,  in  intellectuals  as  in  a  vehicle,  but  being  united  to  intelligibles,  it 
evolves  intelligible  multitude,  and  calls  forth  its  occult  and  unical  nature 
into  separation,  and  prolific  generation.  It  also  collects  that  which  is  in- 
tellectual into  union  and  impartible  communion.  And  not  this  only,  but 
generating  all  things  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  according  to  the  in- 
comprehensible cause  of  the  duad  and  the  nature  of  the  even  number,  it 
again  unites  the  proceeding  natures  and  convolves  them  according  to  the 
monad,  and  the  sameness  of  the  odd  number.  Through  unity  indeed,  and 
the  duad,  it  produces, '  collects  and  binds  all  things  intelligibly,  occultly, 
and  in  an  unknown  manner  to  the  intelligible,  and  effects  this  even  in  the 
last  matter  and  the  vestigies  of  forms  which  it  contains.  But  through  the 
even  and  odd  number  it  constitutes  the  two  coordinations,  vis.  the 
vivific  and  the  immutable,  the  prolific  and  the  effective,  all  the  impartible 
genera  of  fabricating  and  animal-producing  powers,  those  powers  that 
preside  over  a  partible  life,  or  partible  production,  the  more  intellectual 
and  singular  mundane  natures,  and  which  belong  to  the  better  coordina- 
tion, and  those  natures  that  are  more  irrational  and  multiplied,  and  which 
give  completion  to  the  subordinate  series.  And  again,  through  this 
divided  generation  we  may  see  that  each  of  the  proceeding  natures,  is 
united  and  at  the  same  time  multiplied,  is  indivisible  and  divided  in  its 
causes,  and  through  diminution  is  separated  from  them.  And  we  attri- 
bute indeed  things  that  are  more  excellent  and  more  simple  to  the  nature 

'  It  appears  to  me  that  the  word  *pmyt>  is  wanting  in  the  original,  and  I  have  therefore  supplied 
it  in  the  translation. 


Digitized  by  Google 


286 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


of  the  odd  asmber,  but  things  tliai  are  less  excellent  and  more  various,  to 
the  aalure  of  the  eve*  number.  For  every  where  indeed,,  the  odd  number 
is  the  leader  ot  impartible,  simple,  and  unheal  goods;  bnt  the  even  num- 
ber is  the  cause  of  divided,  various,  and  generative  progressions.  And 
thus  we  may  see  all  the  orders  of  beings  woven  together  according  to  di- 
vine number  which  is  moat  ancient,  intellectual,  and  exempt  irorn  all 
the  dinumerated  genera.  For  it  is  necessary  that  number  should  exist 
prior  to  the  things  that  are  numbered,  and  that  prior  to  things  which  are 
separated  there  should  be  the  cause  of  all  separation,  according  to  which 
the  genera  of  the  Gods  are  divided,  and  arc  distinguished  in  an  orderly 
manner  by  appropriate  numbers. 

If  therefore  in  intellectuals  there  are  divisions,  contacts,  and  separa- 
tions of  the  proceeding  natures,  and  likewise  communications  of  coordi- 
nate natures,  it  is  necessary  that  number  should  be  prior  to  intellectuals, 
which  divides  and.  collects  all  things  intelligibly  by  the  powers  of  itself. 
And  if  all  things  subsist  occultly,  intelligibly,  in  an  unknown  manner  and 
exeraptly  in  this  summit, '  there  is  a  number  of  them*  and  a  peculiarity 
unical  and  without  separation.  Number  therefore  subsists  according  to 
the  middle  bond  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals,  being  indeed  expanded 
above  intellectuals  through;  intelligible  goods  but  subordinate  to  intelligi- 
bles through  intellectual  separations.  And  it  is  assimilated  indeed  to 
intelligibles  according  to  the  power  which  is  collective  of  many  things 
into  union,  but  to  intellectuals  according  to  the  power  which  is  generative 
of  the  many  from  the  otic.  But  from  this  highest  place  of  survey  of  the 
intellectual  Gods,  it  constitutes  the  first  intellectual  numbers  themselves 
which  have,  the  nature  of  forms,  arc  universal,  and  preside  over  the  whole 
of  generation  and  production.  It  likewise  constitutes  the  second  num- 
bers, which  are  supermundane,  and  vivific,  and  measure  the  Gods  that 
ure  in  the  world.  But  it  constitutes  as  the  third  numbers,  these  celestial 
governors  of  the  perpetual  circulations,  and  who  convolve  all  the  orbs 
according  to  the  intellectual  causes  of  them.  And  it  constitutes  as  the 
last  numbers  those  powers  that  in  the  sublunary  region  connect  and 

■  It  is  requisite  to  supply  ia  this  place  n  tj  <wfon|T»  rwrj. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXIX. 


OF  PLATO. 


287 


bound  the  infinity  and  unstable  nature  of  matter  by  forms,  and  numbers 
and  reasons,  through  which  both  the  wholes  and  parts  of  ah*  mortal  na- 
tures are  variegated  with  proper  numbers.  But  it  every  where  connects 
the  precedancous  and  more  perfect  genera  of  the  Gods  by  the  odd  num- 
ber, but  the  subordinate  and  secondary  genera,  by  the  even  number. 
Thus  for  instance,  in  the  intellectual  orders,  it  produces  the  female  and 
the  prolific  according  to  the  even  number,  but  the  male  and  the  paternal 
according  to  the  odd  number.  But  in  the  supermundane  orders,  it  cha- 
racterizes similitude  and  the  immutable  according  to  the  odd  number, 
but  dissimilitude  and  a  progression  into  secondary  natures,  according  to 
the  even  number.  For  thus  the  Athenian  guest  also,  orders  that  in  sacred 
worship  odd  things  should  be  distributed  to  the  celestial,  but  even  to  the 
terrestrial  powers.  And  according  to  each  of  these  genera  that  which  is 
of  a  more  ruling  nature  must  be  referred  to  the  odd  number,  but  that 
which  is  subordinate,  to  the  even  number. 

The  nature  of  number,  therefore,  pervades  from  on  high,  as  far  as  to  the 
last  of  things,  adorning  all  things,  and  connecting  them  by  appropriate 
forms.  For  how  could  a  perfect  number  comprehend  the  period  of  the 
whole  world,  as  the  Muses  in  Plato  assert  that  it  does?  Or  how  could 
numbers,  some  of  which  are  productive  of  fertility,  and  others  of  sterility, 
comprehend  the  descents  of  souls?  Or  how  could  some  of  them  define 
the  ascents  of  souls  in  less,  but  others  in  greater  periods,  as  Socrates  says 
in  the  Phaedrus,  where  he  delivers  to  us  restitutions  consisting  of  three 
thousand  and  ten  thousand  years  ?  Or  how  could  time  itself  which  is 
nnically  comprehensive  of  the  psychical  measures,  proceed  according  to 
number,  as  Timaus  says  it  does,  unless  divine  number  exists  prior  to  all 
these,  which  imparts  to  all  tilings  a  principal  cause  of  order  according  to 
numbers?  Since  all  things  therefore  subsist  through  numbers  and  forms, 
numbers  are  allotted  a  -progression  from  the  intellectual  summit.  But 
forms  have  their  generation  from  intelligible*  forms.  For  forms  subsist 
primarily  in  the  third  triad  of  intelligibles.  But  numbers  are  primarily 
in  the  first  triad  of  intellectuals ;  6ince  also  in  the  effects  of  these,  every 
number  indeed  is  form,  but  not  every  form  is  number. 

'  Tot  vtipwr,  it  is  iKtttswrj  to  Tttd  vc^Ta*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


288  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

If,  however,  it  be  requisite  clearly  to  unfold  the  truth,  numbers  are  also 
prior  to  forms.    For  there  are  indeed  superessential  numbers,  but  there 
are  not  superessential  forms.    And  according  to  this  reasoning  every  form 
is  number,  as  also  the  Pythagoreans  said.    For  Timaeus  being  a  Pytha- 
gorean, not  only  asserts  that  there  are  intelligible  forms,  but  also  intelli- 
gible numbers;  for  he  says  that  the  intelligible  forms  are  four.  There 
however,  number  is  intelligibly,  and  monadically  according  to  cause.  For 
intelligible  animal  is  a  monad,  occultly  containing  the  whole  of  number. 
But  in  the  summit  of  intellectuals,  number  subsists  separately,  evolving 
the  number  which  preexists  in  the  monad  according  to  cause  and  uni- 
formly.   For  there  is  a  difference,  I  think,  between  saying  multitude  in 
its  cause,  and  multitude  from  its  cause,  and  between  saying  united,  and 
saying  separated  multitude.    And  the  one  indeed  is  prior  to  number, 
but  the  other  is  number.    So  that  according  to  Timaeus  there  are  intelli- 
gible numbers  together  with  forms,  and  prior  to  forms.    And  according 
to  Parmenides,  number  is  after  multitude.   For  Timaeus  calls  uniform 
and  occult  multitude  the  number  of  forms.    But  since  number  is  prima- 
rily in  the  Gods,  but  forms  participate  of  the  divine  unities,  he  denomi- 
nates the  first  ideas  four.    For  monad  and  triad,  were  primarily  indeed  in 
the  Gods  themselves,  but  secondarily  in  intellectuals ;  and  superessentially 
indeed  in  the  former,  but  formally  in  the  latter.   In  intelligibles  therefore, 
multitude  was  unically ;  but  in  intellectuals  it  subsists  separately.  But 
where  there  is  separation  there  also  there  is  number,  as  we  have  frequently 
observed.    Hence  likewise  all  the  genera  of  the  Gods  are  from  hence 
generated.   And  they  are  divided,  the  paternal  indeed  and  generative, 
among  intelligibles  and  intellectuals;  but  the  demiurgic  and  vivitic, 
among  intellectuals.    And  the  genera  indeed,  that  bind  through  simili- 
tude, are  divided  among  supermundane  natures ;  but  those  that  are 
both  exempt  and  distributed,  are  divided  among  the  liberated  Gods. 
And  the  celestial '  and  sublunary  genera,  are  divided  among  the  mundane 
Gods.    And  in  short,  all  the  coordinations  of  beings  receive  their  dis- 
tinction and  separation  from  this  order.    From  these  things  therefore,  it 
is  evident  what  the  peculiarities  are  which  intelligible  and  at  the  same 

'  For  wnv^tyw,  it  »eepu  to  be  nocemry  that  we  should  read  wpmu.. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXX.  OF  PLATO. 


289 


time  intellectual  number  possesses,  and  of  what  it  is  the  cause  to  the 
Gods. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

• 

Iw  the  next  place,  we  must  likewise  assert  that  the  first  number  '  is  of 
a  feminine  nature.  For  in  this,  difference  first  shines  forth,  separating  the 
•one  from  being,  and  dividing  the  one  into  many  unities,  and  being  into 
many  beings.  What  therefore  is  the  difference  which  is  the  cause  of  these 
things  to  the  Gods?  For  if  we  should  call  it  a  genus  of  being,  in  the  first 
place  indeed,  how  is  it  prior  to  being?  For  separating  being  and  the  one, 
it  is  arranged  between  both  of  them.  But  existing  as  a  middle,  it  calls 
forth  indeed  Me  one  into  generations,  but  it  fills  being  with  generative  cause. 
If  therefore,  it  is  prior  to  being,  how  will  it  be  one  certain  genus  of  being  ? 
And  [in  the  second  place,  after  this,  the  different  which  is  a  genus  of 
being,  is  every  where  essential,  and  is  by  no  means  inherent  in  superes- 
sential  natures.  But  difference  itself  is  primarily  present  with  the  uni- 
ties themselves,  and  separates  and  produces  many  unities  from  one.  Plow 
iherefore,  can  superessential  difference  ever  come  to  be  the  same  with 
the  difference  which  gives  completion  to  essences? 

In  the  third  place,  that  different  [[which  is  a  genus  of  being,]  presents 
itself  to  the  view  in  intellectuals,  according  to  the  demiurgic  order.  But 
difference  itself  is  the  intelligible  summit  of  intellectuals.  And  the  for- 
mer indeed,  subsists  together  with  sameness ;  but  the  latter  has  by  itself 
a  subsistence  in  the  intclligibles  of  intellectuals.  To  which  also  may  be 
added,  that  in  Avhat  follows,  Plato  as  he  proceeds  makes  mention  of  dif- 
ference, and  generates  it  in  conjunction  with  sameness.  How  therefore, 
does  he  effect  the  same  conclusion  twice?    For  he  does  not  employ  such 

'  In  the  original  «*  omitted. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  ,20 


Digitized  by  Google 


290 


ON  THE  THBOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


a  repetition  as  this  in  any  one  of  the  other  conclusions.  For  whole, 
which  he  seems  to  assume  twice,  is  not  the  same  whole,  viz.  the  intel- 
lectual is  not  the  same  with  the  intelligible ;  but  these,  as  we  have  said, 
differ  from  each  other.  For  how  could  he  unfold  to  us  the  different 
progressions  of  divine  natures,  if  he  collected  the  same  conclusions? 
According  to  all  these  conceptions,  therefore,  we  must  separate  the 
difference  which  is  generative  of  numbers  from  the  genus  of  beings. 

But  if  difference  itself  is  not  the  nature  of  the  different,  but  a  power 
generative  of  beings,  it  will  be  collective  of  being  and  the  one.  For 
every  where  power  is  allotted  an  hyparxis  of  this  kind.  For  through 
power  the  otie  participates  of  being,  and  being  of  the  one.  Power 
therefore  was  the  cause,  not  of  division,  but  of  communion,  of  contact 
without  separation,  and  of  the  habitude  of  the  one  to  being,  and  of  being 
to  the  one.  Hence  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  neither  be  arranged 
according  to  intelligible  power,  nor  according  to  the  intellectual  differ- 
ence of  beings ;  but  that  being  the  middle  of  both,  it  should  subsist 
analogous  to  intelligible  power,  but  should  generate  in  the  extremities  of 
intellectuals  the  portion  of  the  different.  What  else  therefore  is  it  than 
the  feminine  nature  of  the  Gods?  Hence  also  it  imitates  intelligible 
power,  and  is  prolific  of  many  unities,  and  of  many  beings.  And  how 
could  it  otherwise  separate  number  from  itself,  and  the  forms  and  powers 
of  number,  unless  it  was  the  cause  of  the  divine  progressions  in  a 
feminine  manner.  Multitude  therefore  is  paternally  in  intelligibles,  but 
maternally  in  intellectuals.  Hence,  in  the  former  indeed,  it  subsists 
inouadically,  but  in  the  latter  according  to  number.  Very  properly 
therefore,  in  the  second  genera  of  the  Cods  also,  union  is  derived  from 
the  male,  but  separation  from  the  female  divinities.  And  bound  indeed 
proceeds  from  the  males,  but  infinity  from  the  females.  For  the  male  is 
analogous  to  bound,  but  the  female  to  infinity.  The  female,  however, 
differs  from  infinite  power,  so  far  as  power  indeed,  is  united  to  the  father, 
and  is  in  him  ;  but  the  female  is  divided  from  the  paternal  cause.  For 
power  is  not  only  in  the  female  divinities,  but  is  also  prior  to  them,  since 
the  intelligible  powers  are  in  the  male  divinities,  according  to  Timaeus, 
who  says  that  the  power  of  the  demiurgus  is  the  cause  of  the  generation 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXI. 


OF  PLATO. 


291 


of  perpetual  natures.  For  [the  demiurgus  says  to  the  junior  Gods] 
44  imitating  my  power,  produce  and  generate  animals."  Power  therefore, 
is  prior  to  the  male  and  the  female,  and  is  in  both,  and  posterior  to  both. 
For  it  pervades  through  all  beings,  and  every  being  participates  of 
power,  as  the  Elean  guest  says.  For  power  is  every  where.  But  the 
female  participates  in  a  greater  degree  of  its  peculiarity,  and  the  male 
of  union  according  to  bound.  That  the  first  number  therefore,  which 
presents  itself  to  the  view  from  intelligibles,  is  of  a  feminine  nature,  is 
through  these  things  evident 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


It  remains  then,  that  we  should  speak  concerning  the  triadic  division 
of  it,  following  Parmenides.  These  three  things  therefore,  have  appeared 
to  us  from  the  beginning,  according  to  the  separation  of  the  one  from 
being,  viz.  the  one,  difference,  and  being ;  difference  not  being  tha  same 
either  with  the  one  or  being.  For  though  the  one  and  being  were  in 
intelligibles,  yet  difference  first  subsists  here.  Since  however  power 
above  [i.  e.  in  intelligibles]  was  collective,  but  here  is  the  separator  of  the 
extremes,  there  are  not  only  three  monads,  but  also  three  duads,  viz.  the 
one  in  conjunction  with  difference,  difference  in  conjunction  with  being, 
and  the  one  in  conjunction  with  being.  For  difference  also  is  the  cause 
of  a  separation  of  this  kind,  not  preserving  the  union  of  the  one  being 
with  genuine  purity.  There  arc  therefore  three  monads,  and  three 
duads.  But  these  likewise  may  become  three  triads,  when  we  begin,  at 
one  time  from  the  one,  at  another  time  from  being,  and  at  another  from 
difference.  Hence  this  triad  subsists  monadically,  and  triadically.  But 
this  is  the  same  thing  as  to  assert  that  difference  and  the  first  feminine 
nature  generates  in  itself,  monads,  duads,  and  triads.    For  the  divided 


» 


Digitized  by  Google 


292 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV 


assumption,  generates  for  us  different  monads;  but  the  conjoined 
assumption,  duads'and  triads,  some  indeed  being  vanquished  by  the  one, 
others  by  difference,  and  others  by  being.  And  thus  far  the  first  deity 
presents  itself  to  the  view,  being  prolific  of  the  first  numbers;  according 
to  the  one  indeed,  of  unical  numbers,  but  according  to  difference  of 
generative,  and  according  to  l>eing,  of  essential  numbers. 

Since  however,  from  this  deity  which  is  intelligible,  that  which  is 
posterior  to  it  proceeds,  it  is  evidently  necessary  that  the  monad,  duad, 
and  triad,  should  severally  have  prolific  power.  These  powers  therefore; 
Parmenides  calls  once,  twice,  thrice.  For  each  of  these  is  a  power 
which  is  the  cause  of  the  above-mentioned  essences  that  produce  either 
separately,  or  connectedly.  For  there  with  respect  to  the  generations  of 
them,  some  of  them  are  entirely  peculiar,  but  others  are  common  to 
secondary  natures.  The  progeny  therefore  of  these  are,  the  oddly-odd, 
the  evenly-even  and  the  evenly-odd.'  And  of  these,  the  oddly-odd 
indeed,  as  we  have  before  observed,  is  collective  into  union  of  the  divine 
progressions.  But  the  evenly-even  is  generative  of  wholes,  and  proceeds 
as  for  as  to  the  last  of  things.  The  evenly-odd  however,  is  mixed,  having 
its  subsistence  from  both  the  even  and  the  odd.  Hence  we  must 
establish  the  first  as  analogous  to  bound,  but  the  second  as  analogous  to 
power,  and  the  third  as  analogous  to  being.  And  you  may  see,  how 
indeed  in  the  first  order  all  things  had  a  primary  subsistence,  viz.  monad, 
duad,  triad;  but  how  in  this  order,  all  things  arc  secondarily  and  subordi- 
nate^. And  the  mixture  which  is  the  triad,  subsisted  there  indeed  in 
one  way,  but  here  the  evenly-odd  subsists  in  another  way.  For  there 
the  extremes  were  odd,  because  they  were  intelligible;  but  here  the  even 
is  more  abundant,  and  the  intelligible  summit  only  is  odd.  For  the 
middle  of  the  triad  is  analogous  to  power.  And  there  indeed,  is  the 
monad,  which  has  all  the  forms  of  odd  numbers  according  to  cause,  and 
the  duad  is  there,  which  is  occultly  all  the  forms  of  even  numbers, 
and  also  the  triad,  which  is  number  primarily.  But  here  both  the  odd 
and  the  even  number  now  subsist  in  a  twofold  respect,  in  one  place  ir* 


«  t»  «{rMff|irra  is  omitted  in  the  original. 


I 


CHAP.  XXXI.  OF  PLATO.  293 

an  unmingled,  and  in  another  in  a  mingled  manner.  All  tilings  there- 
fore, are  here  prolifically,  but  there,  paternally  and  intelligibly.  But  that 
monad  docs  not  proceed  from  intelligiblcs,  but  subsists  in  them  in 
unprocceding  union.  Hence,  after  these,  and  from  these,  we  may  survey 
the  whole  of  number  subsisting  according  to  a  third  progression.  "For 
these  things,"  says  Parmenides,  "  preexisting,  no  number  will  be  absent." 
Every  number  therefore,  is  generated  through  these  in  the  third  monad, 
and  both  the  one  and  being  become  many,  difference  separating  each  of 
them.  And  every  part  indeed  of  being  participates  of  the  one;  but 
every  unity  is  carried  as  in  a  vehicle  in  a  certain  portion  of  being. 
Each  of  these  however,  is  multiplied,  intellectually  separated,  divided 
into  minute  parts,  and  proceeds  to  infinity.  For  as  in  intelligibles,  we 
attribute  infinite  multitude  to  the  third  triad,  so  here,  in  this  triad  we 
assign  infinite  number  to  the  third  part  of  the  triad.  For  in  short  every 
where,  the  infinite  is  the  extremity,  as  proceeding  in  an  all-perfect 
manner,  and  comprehending  indeed  all  secondary  natures,  but  being 
itself  participated  by  none  of  them.  In  the  first  monad  therefore,  there 
were  powers,  but  intelligibly.  In  the  second,  there  were  progressions 
and  generations,  but  both  intelligibly  and  intellectually.  And  in  the 
third,  there  was  all-powerful  number,  unfolding  the  whole  of  itself  into 
light;  and  which  also  Parmenides  denominates  infinite.  It  is  likewise 
especially  manifest  that  it  is  not  proper  to  transfer  this  infinity  to 
quantity.  For  how  can  there  be  an  infinite  number,  since  infinity  is 
hostile  to  the  nature  of  number?  And  how  are  the  parts  of  the  one  equal 
to  the  minute  parts  of  being?  For  in  infinites  there  is  not  the  equal.  But 
this  indeed  has  been  thought  worthy  of  attention  by  those  who  were 
prior  to  us* 


* 

Digitized  by  Google 


294 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 


The  division  therefore  into  three,  having  been  demonstrated  by  us,  we 
shall  briefly  observe,  that  the  one  appears  to  be  many  according  to  this 
order,  the  one  itself  proceeding  into  a  multitude  of  unities,  and  being  in 
a  similar  manner  becoming  generated  in  conjunction  with  the  one.  For 
those  three  monads  are  the  intelligible  comprehensions  of  all  orders,  and 
they  at  once  preside  over  all  the  progressions  from  intelligibles,  produce 
all  of  them  in  an  exempt  manner,  and  collect  them  to  the  intelligible 
causes.  Since  however,  Plotinus  admits  that  number  is  prior  to  animal 
itself,  and  says  that  the  first  being  produces  from  itself  number,  and  that 
this  is  established  as  a  medium  between  the  one  being,  and  animal  itself, 
but  is  the  basis  and  place  of  beings,  it  is  worth  while  to  speak  likewise 
concisely  about  this.  For  if  he  says  that  animal  itself  has  intelligible 
and  occult  number,  as  comprehended  in  the  monad,  he  speaks  rightly, 
and  accords  with  Plato.  But  if  he  says  that  animal  itself  comprehends 
number,  now  separated,  or  which  has  a  multiform  subsistence,  and  is  the 
progeny  of  difference,  intelligible  multitude  is  not  a  thing  of  this  kind. 
For  there  indeed,  the  one.  is  being,  and  being  is  the  one.  Hence  animal 
itself  is  according  to  all  things  perfect.  But  in  number,  the  one  is 
separated  from  being,  and  being  from  the  one,  and  each  of  the  parts  is  no 
longer  an  intelligible  whole,  as  an  animal  itself.  For  that  is  a  whole  of 
wholes;  and  every  where  the  one  was  with  being  in  the  parts  of  it,  and 
animal  itself  was  only-begotten.  But  number  proceeded  after  the  two- 
fold coordinations,  I  mean  the  monad  and  duad,  the  odd  and  the  even 
number.  How  therefore,  can  we  place  in  animal  itself  the  first  number? 
If  however,  some  one  should  say  that  number  exists  there,  it  i8  according 
to  cause  and  intelligibly.  But  it  is  intellectually  separated  by  diflerence. 
And  farther  still,  in  addition  to  these  things,  if  animal  itself  is  surveyed 
by  some  one  in  the  demiurgic  order,  and  he  denominates  it  the  plenitude 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXII. 


OF  PLATO. 


of  forms,  and  the  intelligible  of  the  demiurgic  intellect,  it  will  thus  have 
intellectual  number,  as  being  arranged  near  the  intellectual  end.  But  if 
he  should  call  intelligible  animal  number,  in  this  case  there  will  be 
separation  and  difference  in  the  Gods,  whom  we  have  asserted  to  be 
established  above  the  whole  of  things,  according  to  supreme  union.  For 
all  section  and  division  originate  from  the  intellectual  Gods;  since  here 
difference  proceeds,  adorning  things  in  conjunction  with  the  one  and 
being.  How  therefore,  does  the  division  of  the  unities  into  minute  parts, 
or  the  multiform  nature  of  beings  pertain  to  intelligibles?  And  how  can 
the  multitude  of  all  forms  accord  with  the  first  animal  itself?  For  the 
tetrad  was  there,  divided  by  the  monad  and  triad,  a  division  of  this  kind 
being  adapted  to  the  third  order  of  intelligible  forms.  For  as  the  one 
being  is  a  monad,  but  eternity  is  a  monad  and  duad,  (for  to  be  is  con- 
joined with  the  ever)  so  animal  itself  is  a  monad  and  triad.  Since 
however,  it  comprehends  in  itself  the  cause  of  all  number,  Timoeus 
denominates  it  the  tetrad  which  is  comprehensive  of  the  four  first- 
effective  causes.  For  the  tetrad  itself  preexists  as  the  fountain  of  all  the 
production  of  forms.  But  in  intelligibles  the  monad,  duad  and  triad 
subsist  unically;  but  in  intellectuals  in  a  divided  manner. 

Difference  therefore  necessarily  generates  all  these  for  us  with  sepa- 
ration. For  every  where,  the  first  of  subordinate  natures  have  the  peculiar 
form  of  the  natures  that  exist  prior  to  them.'  Hence,  the  first  multitudes 
proceed  indeed  from  the  one,  but  they  are  unical,  without  separation, 
and  without  number,  imitating  the  one  principle  of  the  whole  of  things. 
Very  properly  therefore,  does  Parmenitles  constitute  multitude  in  intelli- 
gibles, according  to  the  end  [of  the  intelligible  order];  but  number  in 
intellectuals  accordiug  to  the  beginning  [of  the  intelligible  and  at  the 
same  time  intellectual  order.]  And  these  are  conjoined  with  each  other. 
Parmcnidcs  also  pre-establishes  unical  and  intelligible  multitude,  as  the 
cause  of  intellectual  numbers.  And  Timneus  shows  that  animal  itself  is 
only-begotten,  because  it  was  monadically  the  cause  of  the  whole  of 

•  Instead  of  «««-<tXw  y«j  t«  wgwrtrru  rm  t*pi«rafmwv,  np>  <£i«r  w  /w{fi|»,  it  is  necessary  to  read 
■xxrrxxw  yttf  ra  wjgutj<tt«  ran  vf fi/wwv,  tw  sfOu^wrajMWv,       iltar  rj^.  fu>ff ir. 


Digitized  by  Google 


296  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

things,  and  not  dyadically,  nor  according  to  divine  difference.  That 
number  however,  is  the  first  thing  in  intellectuals,  wc  have  abundant!/ 
shown. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 


But  Parmenides  begins  to  speak  about  it  as  follows:  "  Proceed 
therefore,  and  still  farther  consider  this.    What?  We  have  said  that 
the  one  participates  of  essence,  so  far  as  it  is  being.    We  have  said  so. 
And  on  this  account  the  one  being  appears  to  be  many."    But  he 
completes  his  discourse  about  the  first  monad  thus  :  **  Are  not  three 
things  odd,  and  two  even  ?   How  should  they  not  ?'    And  about  the 
second  monad,  as  follows :  "  Hence  there  will  be  the  evenly-even,  and 
.the  oddly-odd,  and  the  oddly-even,  and  the  evenly-odd."     But  he 
.completes  his  discourse  about  the  third  and  all  the  succeeding  triad,  as 
follows  :  "  The  one  being  therefore,  is  not  only  many,  but  it  is  likewise 
necessary  that  the  one  which  is  distributed  by  being  should  be  many. 
Entirely  so."   The  first  triad,  therefore,  of  the  intelligible,  and  at  the 
same  time,  intellectual  Gods,  is  through  these  things  unfolded  to  us  by 
Plato,  and  which  possesses  indeed,  according  to  the  first  monad  the 
first  powers  of  numbers,  I  mean  the  odd  and  the  even,  and  is  completed 
through  these  principles  which  were  in  intelligibies  occultly,  viz.  monad, 
duad,  triad.   But  according  to  the  second  monad  it  possesses  the  second 
powers  of  numbers  which  subsist  from  these  [i.  e.  from  the  first  powers]. 
For  the  section  of  the  forms  of  the  even  number,  is  allotted  a  second 
order.    And  the  oddly-odd  is  subordinate  to  the  first  odd  numbers. 
But  according  to  the  third  monad,  it  possesses  the  more  partial  causes  of 
divine  numbers.    Hence  also,  a  separation  into  minute  parts,  infinity, 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  OF  PLATO.  297 

all-perfect  division,  and  unical  and  essential  number  are  here ;  receiving 
indeed,  the  unical  and  the  essential  from  unity  and  being,  but  the  sepa- 
ration of  number  from  difference.  For  every  where  difference  is  in  the 
three  monads,  but  it  particularly  unfolds  the  multitudes  of  numbers, 
according  to  the  third  monad,  generates  more  partial  Gods,  and  divides 
being  in  conjunction  with  the  Gods.  For  neither  is  deity  in  these 
imparticipable,  because  unity  is  not  separate  from  being,  nor  is  essence 
destitute  of  deity,  because  neither  is  being  deprived  of  the  one. 

Since  however,  all  things  are  in  each  of  the  monads,  but  unically  and 
intelligibly  in  the  first,  generative!}',  and  according  to  the  peculiarity  of 
difference  in  the  second,  and  intellectually,  and  according  to  being  in  the 
third ;— this  being  the  case,  Plato  when  unfolding  to  us  the  first  monad, 
very  properly  begins  from  the  monad,  and  proceeds  as  far  as  to  the  triad; 
but  when  teaching  about  the  second,  he  begins  from  evenly-even  num- 
bers, and  proceeds  as  far  as  to  those  that  are  evenly-odd,  both  which 
belong  to  the  nature  of  the  even  number.  Aud  when  he  adds  the  third 
monad,  he  begins  from  being,  and  recurs  through  difference  to  the  one* 
For  having  shown  that  being  participates  of  number,  he  from  hence  leads 
us  round  to  unical  number,  employing  the  mode  of  conversion  in  the 
conception  of  this  monad. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


If,  however,  it  be  requisite  to  survey  the  unknown  peculiarity  of  divine 
numbers,  and  how  the  first  order  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals,  and 
number  which  subsists  according  to  this  order,  is  the  most  ancient  of  all 
numbers,  in  the  first  place,  we  should  consider  the  infinity  mentioned  by 
Parmenides,  and  see  whether  he  does  not  say  that  intelligible  multitude 
is  infinite  on  account  of  this  number,  in  consequence  of  its  being  unknown 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  P 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


and  incomprehensible  by  partial  conceptions.  For  the  all-perfect,  and 
all-powerful  peculiarity  of  divine  numbers  is  exempt  from  the  compre- 
hension of  partible  natures,  [such  as  ours].  They  are  therefore  unknown, 
and  on  this  account  are  said  to  be  inexplicable,  and  not  to  be  investigated. 
For  number  also  in  the  last  of  things,  and  multitude,  together  with  the 
known  have  likewise  the  unknown.  And  we  are  notable  to  comprehend 
the  progression  of  every  number  iu  consequence  of  being  vanquished  by 
infinity.  The  incomprehensibility  therefore,  of  this  power  which  is  un- 
known according  to  a  discursive  energy,  is  comprehended  according  to 
cause,  in  intelligible  numbers  and  multitudes.  For  there  would  not  be  a 
thing  of  this  kind  in  the  last  of  numbers,  unless  the  unknown  preexisted 
in  intelligible  numbers,  and  unless  the  former  were  ultimate  imitations  of 
the  exempt  incomprehensibility  of  the  latter. 

In  the  second  place,  after  this,  we  may  also  add,  that  unical  numbers 
are  likewise  of  themselves  unknown.  For  they  are  more  ancient  than 
beings,  more  single  than  forms,  and  being  generative  of,  exist  prior  to  the 
forms  which  we  call  intelligible.  But  the  most  venerable  of  divine  ope- 
rations manifest  this,  since  they  employ  numbers,  as  possessing  an  ineffa- 
ble efficacy,  and  through  these  effect  the  greatest,  and  most  arcane  of 
works.  And  prior  to  these  nature  ineffably,  according  to  sympathy,  im- 
parts different  powers  to  different  '  things,  to  some  solar,  but  to  others 
lunar  powers,  and  renders  the  productions  of  these  concordant  with* 
numbers.  For  in  these  monadic  numbers  also,  the  forms  of  numbers,, 
such  as  the  triad,  the  pentad,  and  the  heptad,  are  one  thing,  but  the 
unions  of  the  forms  another  thing.  For  each  of  these  forms  is  both  one,, 
and  multitude.    Hence  form  is  unknown  according  to  the  highest  union. 

If  therefore,  monadic  number  participates  of  a  certain  unknown  power, 
much  more  must  the  first  number  possess  this  peculiarity  unically  exempt 
from  the  whole  of  things.  And  besides  this,  we  may  also  assume  the 
anagogic  power  of  numbers,  not  only  because  they  define  the  periods  of  the 
physical  restitutions,  circumscribing  our  indefinite  lation  by  appropriate 
measures,  perfecting  us  according  to  these  measures,  and  conjoining  us. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXIV. 


OF  PLATO. 


299 


to  our  first  causes,  but  because  likewise,  number  in  a  remarkable  manner 
possesses  a  certain  power  of  attracting  to  truth,  as  Socrates  says  in  the 
Republic,  leading  us  to  intelligibles  from  a  sensible  nature. '  As  there* 
fore,  the  last  number  is  allotted  this  peculiarity,  what  ought  we  to  say 
about  the  first  number?  Is  it  not  this,  that  it  unfolds  intelligible  light, 
especially  persuades  to  an  establishment  in  intelligibles,  and  through  its 
own  order  announces  to  us  the  uniform  power  of  principles?  If  there- 
fore, we  rightly  assert  these  things,  we  shall  in  a  greater  degree  admire 
Timaeus,  who  having  placed  time  over  the  perfections  of  souls,  and  the 
whole  world,  through  which  it  would  become  move  similar  to  animal 
itself  says,  that  time  proceeds  according  to  number,  and  by  number  mea- 
sures the  existence  of  total  souls.  And  as  in  intellectuals,  number  is 
established  above  the  celestial  circulation,  collecting  and  causing  it  to  be 
one,  thus  also  in  sensibles  Timaeus  says,  that  time  being  number  measures 
the  celestial  periods,  and  comprehends  in  itself  the  first  causes  of  the  per- 
fection of  the  periods.  If  also,  Socrates  in  the  Republic,  in  the  speech  of 
the  Muses,  speaks  about  the  one  and  entire  period  of  the  universe,  which 
he  says  a  perfect  number  comprehends,  does  it  not  through  these  things 
appear  that  divine  number  is  perfective  of  wholes,  and  restores  them  to 
their  pristine  state,  and  that  it  measures  all  periods?  The  power  likewise 
of  collecting  things  imperfect  to  the  perfect,  accedes  to  all  things  from 
number,  which  elevates  souls  from  things  apparent  to  those  that  are  un* 
apparent,  illuminates  the  whole  world  with  the  perfection  of  motion,  and 
defines  to  all  things  measures,  and  the  order  of  periods.  But  if  not  only 
a  perfect  number  contains  the  period  of  a  divine  generated 1  nature,  but 
another  second  number  after  this  is  the  lord  of  better  and  worse  genera- 
tions, as  the  same  Socrates  says,  number  will  not  only  restore  things  to 
their  pristine  state, but  will  also  be  of  a  generative  nature.  And  it  is  evident 
that  these  things  subsist  in  a  divided  manner,  according  to  the  second  and 
third  periods  of  numbers;  but  at  once,  and  contractedly  inthefirstof 

'  Instead  of  *w*yw>  ^t  «T«  tuj*  v^tw  on  ri|v  *i»*ifti)f  fun*,  it  U  necetaary  to  read  ira*/»» 
rti  To)*  voijtx*  **a  ttj;  ai«4qn|{  $u<m>i. 

"  Eyery  perpetually  circulating  body  is  called  by  Plato,  a  divine  generated  nature. 


Digitized  by  Google 


30Q  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

numbers,  The  first  number  therefore,  is  generative,  mensurative,  and 
perfective  of  generated  natures. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 


The  first  order  therefore  of  mtelligiblcs  and  intellectuals  is  thus  sur- 
veyed by  Parmenides.    But  after  this  the  order  which  possesses  the 
middle  place  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals,  and  which  a  little  before  wc 
called  connective,  presents  itself  to  the  view.    It  is  however  denominated 
in  a  three-fold  respect,  viz.  one,  many,  whole,  parts,  finite,  infinite.  For 
since  the  separation  of  unities  and  beings  from  number,  extends  to  it,  the 
one  and  being,  which  we  have  said  difference  divides,  become  wholes. 
But  the  thing*  proceeding  from  these,  are  the  parts  of  these.  And 
wholeness  indeed  connectedly  contains  parts,  but  these  are  contained  by 
their  wholeness,  in  one  way  indeed,  by  the  one,  but  in  another  by  being. 
For  there  indeed,  I  mean  in  the  summit  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  unity 
was  the  cause  of  multitude,  at  the  same  time  being  exempt  from  multi- 
tude, and  generative  of  the  many.    But  here  unity  is  coarranged  with 
multitude.    Hence  also  it  is  a  whole  which  has  reference  to  many  unities 
as  to  parts.    Since  however,  the  connective  order  is  triple,  one  division 
of  it  being  intelligible,  another  intelligible  and  intellectual,  and  anotheF 
intellectual,  the  first  monad  indeed  subsists  according  to  the  one  and  the 
many  ;  but  the  second,  according  to  whole  and  parts  ;  and  the  third,  ac- 
cording to  the  finite  and  the  infinite.    For  where  the  first  triad  ends, 
there  the  second  has  its  beginning.    Hence,  in  the  triad  prior  to  this> 
Parmenides  infers  that  the  one  is  many.    And  in  this  triad,  he  concludes 
the  same  thing  together  with  what  remains.    There  however,  the  one  was 
generative  of  infinites;  but  here  the  one  is  comprehensive  of  many,  the 
whole  of  parts,  and  the  finite  of  infinites.    Hence,  there  indeed,  unity  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXV. 


OF  PLATO. 


301 


exempt  from  the  many ;  but  here  it  is  coarranged  with  multitude.  Hence 
also,  the  first  coarrangement  generates  whole  together  with  parts;  but  the 
subsistence  of  whole  and  parts  produces  the  finite  and  at  the  same  time 
infinite.  For  these  are  successive  to  each  other,  viz.  the  one,  the  whole, 
the  finite,  and  the  things  which  are  as  it  were  in  an  opposite  arrangement 
to  these,  the  many,  parts,  infinites.  And  the  one  itself  is  indeed  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  rest.  But  whole  has  now  a  habitude  Avith  respect  to  parts, 
and  a  representation  of  the  duad,  and  proceeds  into  a  coarrangement  with 
reference  to  the  parts.  The  finite  however,  is  now  multitude,  participating 
of  bound  and  the  one,  and  is  as  it  were  a  triad.  For  it  is  neither  bound 
alone,  as  the  monad,  nor  infinite  alone,  as  the  duad,  but  it  participates  of 
bound,  which  is  primarily  a  triad.  Every  thing  finite  therefore,  is  a 
whole,  but  not  every  whole  is  finite.  For  the  infinite  is  a  whole,  whether 
it  is  multitude,  or  magnitude.  And  every  whole  indeed,  is  one,  but  not 
every  one  is  a  whole.  For  that  which  is  without  habitude  to  multitude 
is  not  a  whole.  The  one  therefore,  is  beyond  whole ;  but  whole  is  beyond 
the  finite. 

After  the  same  manner  also,  infinite  parts  are  said  to  be  the  parts  of 
that  which  is  finite.  For  the  infinite  of  itself  has  no  subsistence;  by 
which  also  it  is  evident  that  the  infinite  is  not  in  quantity  in  energy,'  but 
in  capacity.  All  parts  however  are  not  infinite.  For  according  to  bound 
they  are  characterized  by  one  of  the  parts.  And  again,  parts  indeed  are 
many,  but  the  many  are  not  entirely  parts.  The  niauy  therefore,  arc 
prior  to  parts :  and  parts  are  prior  to  infinites.  Hence,  as  the  many  are 
to  the  one,  so  are  parts  to  whole,  and  so  are  infinites  to  the  finite.  And 
these  three  connectedly-containing  monads,  give  completion  to  the  middle 
order  of  inlelligibles  and  intellectuals.  For  unity  indeed,  is  the  supplier 
of  stable  and  intelligible  connection  to  all  the  secondary  orders.  But 
wholeness  connects  the  progressions  of  divine  natures,  and  produces  one 
habitude  of  the  orderly  distribution  of  wholes.  And  the  finite  monad 
imparts  by  illumination  to  the  conversions  of  second  natures,  connection 
with  the  natures  prior  to  them.    And  one  of  these  iudced  is  analogous* 

'  iv  Tfl  mfytix  is  omitted  is  the  original- 


Digitized  by  Google 


302 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


to  the  one  being,  on  which  account  also  it  is  intelligible.  But  another  is 
analogous  to  the  third  order,  in  which  there  wns  the  one,  and  the  duad 
which  generates  inBnite  multitude.  Such  is  the  connective  triad,  which 
Parmenidcs  exhibits  to  us  through  these  things.  The  one  therefore,  is 
one  and  many,  whole  and  parts,  finite  and  infinite  multitude.  Let  no 
one  however,  be  disturbed  that  Plato  calls  the  one  or  being  infinite  mul- 
titude. For  he  calls  the  one  and  being  when  they  have  proceeded  and 
are  divided,  infinite  in  multitude.  For  all  multitude  indeed,  is  referred 
to  the  intelligible  infinity.  But  divided  multitude,  and  which  has  pro- 
ceeded perfectly,  is  most  signally  infinite. 

Since  therefore,  all  the  primary  causes  of  intellectuals  are  in  this  triad, 
and  all  things  are  disseminated  in  its  bosoms,  the  first  Synocheus  indeed, 
comprehends  these  causes  as  multitude,  being  himself  an  intelligible  unity, 
and  the  flower  as  it  were  of  the  triad.  But  the  second  comprehends 
indeed  secondarily  these  causes,  but  co-arranged  and  co-multiplied  with 
them.  And  the  third,  together  with  all-perfect  division,  connects  the 
multitude,  comprehended  in  himself.  Each  of  them  also  is  connective, 
but  one  as  bounding,  another  as  giving  completion  to  a  whole,  and  ano- 
ther as  uniting.  Plato  therefore  made,  and  makes  as  he  proceeds  his 
demonstrations  of  the  one.  For  the  whole  theory  is  concerning  the  one. 
But  it  is  evident  that  being  is  co-divided  with  the  one.  For  universally, 
it  has  been  before  observed,  that  every  deity  proceeding  thence  is  parti- 
cipate, und  that  every  portion  of  being  participates  of  deity.  It  is  ne- 
cessary however,  not  to  stop  in  the  one  alone,  but  to  consider  the  same 
peculiarity  *  as  imparted  to  being  in  a  secondary  degree,  since  Plato  also 
produces  the  one  itself  ' by  itself  according  to  the  differences  of  the  divine 
orders ;  which  occasions  me  to  wonder  at  those  who  think  that  all  the 
conclusions  of  the  second  hypothesis  are  concerning  intellect,  and  do  not 
perceive  that  Plato  omitting  being  surveys  the  one  itself  by  itself,  as  pro- 
ceeding and  generated,  and  receiving  different  peculiarities.  For  how  in 
discoursing  concerning  intellect  could  he  omit  being,  according  to  which 
intellect  has  its  subsistence,  power,  and  energy.    For  the  one  is  beyond 

'  For  M&i«ngr*c,  h  is  necessary  tofead  iSionjTo;. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXVI. 


OF  PLATO. 


303 


the  nature  of  intellect;  but  being  gives  hyparxis  to  intellect,  and  intellect 
is  nothing  else  than  being.  This  opinion  however  of  these  men  may  be 
confuted  by  many  other  arguments.  But  if  the  three  connective  Gods 
are  divided  after  the  above-mentioned  manner,  and  the  intelligible  con- 
nective deity  is  one  many,  but  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intel- 
lectual deity  is  whole  and  parts,  and  the  intellectual  is  finite  and  infinite, 
each  of  them  is  very  properly  called  much.  For  each  of  the  Synoches 
according  to  his  own  peculiarity  is  a  multitude.  For  the  first  about  the 
many,  receives  many  Synoches  of  a  more  partial  nature.  The  second 
receives  these  according  to  parts.  And  the  third,  according  to  infinites. 
If  therefore,  there  are  certain  partial  Gods  who  are  allotted  this  peculia- 
rity, they  are  comprehended  in  this  first  triad. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

Mo r bo v En,  it  is  easy  for  every  one  to  sec  how  these  things  accord 
with  what  is  written  in  the  Phaedrus.  For  the  connective  one  accords 
with  the  back  of  the  heaven  that  comprehends  these.  For  the  one  and 
the  back  are  the  same,  comprehending  according  to  one  simplicity  the 
whole  circulation.  But  whole  is  the  same  with  the  profundity  of  the 
heaven,  and  with  as  it  were  the  bulk  of  it.  For  the  celestial  profundity 
is  a  whole  extended  from  the  back  as  far  as  to  the  arch.  And  end  is 
the  same  with  the  arch.  This  therefore,  is  evident  beyond  every  thing, 
and  each  of  the  other  conclusions,  is  to  be  referred  to  the  same  concep- 
tions. Hence  from  what  has  been  said,  it  may  be  collected,  that  these 
three  things  pertain  in  a  remarkable  degree  to  the  Synoches,  viz.  theoney 
whole,  and  the  end  [or  the  finite].  For  what  is  so  able  to  connect  multi- 
tude as  the  one  which  is  co-arranged  with  it  ?  What  is  so  connectedly- 
compreheusive  of  parts  as  whole  ?  And  how  is  it  possible  that  the  end 


Digitized  by  Google 


304 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


{or  bound,]  should  not  be  the  cause  of  binding  together  things  which  arc 
borne  along  to  in6nity.  It  terminates  therefore,  their  progression,  and 
brings  back  their  dispersed  section  to  the  one  essence  of  connection.  And 
thus  much  concerning  the  connective  triad. 


CHATTER  XXXVII. 


But  the  third,  as  they  say,  to  the  saviour,  and  let  us  also  following 
Plato  in  what  remains  celebrate  the  perfective  order  of  the  Gods. 
Because,  therefore,  the  end  of  the  connective  order  was  the  finite,  [or  the 
bounded]  the  perfective  order  has  extremes.  For  the  end  [or  bound]  is 
the  extremity.  There  however  indeed  the  one  was  said  to  be  the  finite, 
but  here  it  is  said  to  have  an  extremity,  as  receiving  according  to 
participation  that  which  has  the  power  of  terminating  many  things.  And 
there  indeed,  the  one  was  end  or  bound,  which  also  connectedly  contains 
the  infinite ;  but  here  having  an  extremity,  it  will  also  have  a  middle 
and  beginning,  and  will  be  perfect.  For  that  which  receives  its  com- 
pletion from  all  these,  is  perfect.  Here,  therefore,  the  perfection  which 
consists  of  parts  is  apparent.  For  the  consummation  of  the  parts, 
produces  the  perfect.  Moreover,  because  such  a  one  as  this  has  a 
middle  and  extremes,  it  will  have  the  figure  of  a  circumference,  or  it  will 
be  rectilinear,  or  it  will  be  mixed  (jfroui  the  right  and  circular  line]. 
For  all  these  require  a  middle  and  extremes ;  some  indeed  with  sim- 
plicity, but  others  with  connexion.  Three  peculiarities,  therefore,  again 
present  themselves  to  our  view ;  the  first,  indeed,  being  that  which  we 
said  was  to  have  extremes ;  the  second,  being  according  to  the  perfect ; 
and  the  third,  according  to  figure.    And  there  are  also  three  perfective 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXVIII.  OF  PLATO.  305 

leaders  of  wholes ;  one  indeed  being  intelligible ;  another,  intelligible  and 
intellectual ;  and  the  third,  intellectual. 

The  intelligible  leader,  therefore,  is  said  to  have  extremes,  as  being 
directly  arranged  under  the  end  of  the  connective  Gods,  and  in  the 
boundaries  of  himself  intelligibly  comprehending  all  the  intellectual 
orders.  But  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  leader,  is  defined  according 
to  the  perfect,  comprehending  in  himself  the  beginnings,  middles,  and 
ends  of  beings,  and  giving  completion  to  the  middle  bond  of  the  whole 
perfective  triad.  And  the  intellectual  leader  proceeds  according  to 
triadic  figure,  being  the  cause  of  bound  and  divine  perfection ;  and 
imparting  termination  to  things  indefinite,  but  intellectual  perfection  to 
things  imperfect.  And  this  triad  indeed  is  produced  according  to  the 
connective  triad.  For  the  end  in  them  is  the  cause  of  the  possession  of 
the  extremity.  But  it  is  also  produced  from  itself.  For  that  which  has 
extremes,  having  become  a  whole,  constitutes  the  perfect  through  end 
[or  bound].  But  the  perfect  comprehending  beginnings,  middles  and 
ends,  unfolds  figure.  And  thus  the  perfective  triad  proceeds  supernally, 
as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  pervading  to  all  things,  and  perfecting 
both  whole  and  partial  causes. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 


And  do  you  not  see  how  each  of  the  triads  conjoins  the  summit  of 
itself  with  the  ends  placed  above  it?  For  the  one  many  was  the  end  of 
the  collective  and  unknown  triad ;  and  the  same  is  the  beginning  of  the 
connective  triad.  The  end  of  the  connective  triad  was  the  finite;  and 
this  again  is  the  beginning  of  the  perfective  triad.  For  to  have  extremes 
manifests  that  which  consists  of  ends  or  bounds.  And  thus  the  whole 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  Q 


Digitized  by  Google 


3(H) 


ON  TlllS  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


middle  order  is  connected  with  and  united  to  itself,  and  is  truly  the  bond 
of  total  orders,  itself  establishing  an  admirable  communion  with  itself; 
but  conjoining  intellectuals  to  intelligibles,  and  convolving  them  to  one 
impartible  union ;  above  indeed,  having  the  intelligible  and  unknown 
triad,  but  in  the  middle  producing  the  triad  which  is  connective  of 
progressions,  and  at  the  end,  the  convertive  empire,  through  which  it 
proximately  converts  the  intellectual  to  the  intelligible  Gods. 

For  on  what  account  does  intellect  look  to  itself,  and  is  in  itself?  Is 
it  not  because  it  is  on  all  sides  finite  or  bounded,  converges  to  itself,  and 
convolves  its  appropriate  energies  about  itself?  But  why  is  it  perfect,, 
and  full  of  intellectual  goods  ?  Is  it  not  because  it  first  participates  of 
the  perfection  [of  the  above  mentioned]  leaders,  and  subsists  according 
to  them,  possessing  a  self-perfect  essence  and  intellectual  perception? 
After  what  manner  likewise,  is  it  Baid  to  be  a  sphere,  both  by  Plato, 
and  other  theologiste?  Is  it  not  because  it  is  the  first  participant  of 
figure,  and  is  intellectually  figured  according  to  it?  All  conversion, 
therefore,  all  perfection,  and  every  intellectual  figure,  accede  to  the 
intellectual  Gods,  from  the  perfective  triad.  For  the  intelligible  leader 
of  perfection,  gives  perfection  to  the  ends  and  summits  and  hyparxes  of" 
wholes.  But  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  leader  terminates  their 
progressions  which  extend  from  on  high  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things. 
And  the  intellectual  leader  comprehends  in  his  own  perfection,  the 
conversions  of  all  the  Gods,  and  bounds  and  perfects  through  figures 
their  progressions  to  infinity. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 


Looking  therefore  to  this  division,  we  may  be  able  to  survey  causally 
many  things  which  are  to  be  found  among  other  theologiste.   For  why 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXIX. 


OF  PLATO. 


307 


is  one  of  the  deities  of  tbe  unknown  triad  carried  in  the  first  of  the 
worlds,  but  another  in  the  middle  breadth,  and  another  in  the  extremity  ? 
It  is  because  the  first  of  these  was  uniform,  but  the  second  proceeded 
according  to  difference,  and  the  third,  according  to  the  infinite  number 
of  beings.  But  why  of  the  three  connective  Gods,  is  the  first  empyrean, 
the  second  etheria],  and  the  third  material  ?  It  is  because  the  first  indeed 
subsists  according  to  the  one,  and  connectedly  contains  the  one  world. 
But  the  second  subsists  according  to  whole,  and  divides  the  etherial 
world.  And  the  third  according  to  the  finite,  and  rules  over  material 
infinity.  But  why  again,  are  the  Teletarchs  co-divided  with  the 
Synoches?  Because  the  first  having  extremes  governs  like  a  charioteer 
the  wing  of  fire.  But  the  middle  comprehending  beginnings,  ends  and 
middles,  perfects  ether,  which  is  also  itself  triple.  And  the  third,  which 
comprehends  according  to  one  union,  the  orbicular,  the  rectilinear,  and  the 
mixed*  figure,  perfects  unfigured  and  fbrmlcM  matter;  giving  form  indeed 
(/^wp«(r«f)  to  the  inerratic  sphere,  and  the  first  matter,  by  the  orbicular ; 
but  to  the  planetary  sphere,  and  the  second  matter,  by  the  mixed  figure. 
For  the  spiral  is  there.  And  it  gives  form  to  the  sublunary  region,  and 
the  last  matter  by  the  rectilinear.  For  the  motions  according  to  a  right 
line  are  in  this  region.  Hence,  the  first  triad  is  uniformly  the  cause  of 
the  division  of  the  worlds.  But  the  second  has  a  more  abundant 
representation  of  section,  and  of  progression  into  parts ;  yet  does  not 
exhibit  to  us  tbe  multitude  of  the  worlds.  And  the  third  unfolds  the 
seven  worlds,  and  the  monad  together  with  two  triads.  So  great  is  the 
divine  conception  of  Plato,  that  from  these  things  we  may  survey  the 
causes  of  what  after  his  time  became  apparent. 

For  this,  indeed,  from  what  has  been  said  appears  to  be  very  admir- 
able* that  according  to  each  of  the  triads,  the  middle  is  characteristic  of 
the  whole  triad.  Thus  for  instance,  in  the  unknown  triad,  difference 
is  established  as  the  middle  between  the  one  and  being.  But  in  the 
connective  triad  whole  is  the  characteristic,  which  is  the  middle  of 
the  one,  and  the  finite.    And  in  the  perfective  triad,  the  perfect  is  the 

'  r*  ftixror  is  omitted  in  the  origitut. 


Digitized  by  Google 


308 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  IV. 


characteristic,  which  is  itself  established  as  the  middle  of  that  which  has 
extremes,  and  of  figure.  For  difference  is  the  feminine  itself,  and  the 
prolific  nature  of  the  Gods.  And  whole  is  itself  the  form  of  connected 
comprehension,  binding  together  many  parts.  And  the  perfect  is  itself 
the  good  of  perfection,  possessing  a  beginning,  middle,  and  end,  and 
conjoining  the  end  to  the  beginning,  according  to  the  peculiarity  of 
conversion.  Being  also  nothing  else  than  a  perfect  governor  it  is  the 
cause  of  the  peculiarity  of  these  Gods  subsisting  every  where  according 
to  the  middle  centres.  Hence  the  whole  order  of  the  intelligible,  and 
at  the  same  lime,  intellectual  Gods,  may  be  surveyed  as  having  its 
subsistence  in  the  middle.  For  the  intelligible  Gods,  indeed,  are 
especially  defined  according  to  hyparxes  and  summits ;  on  which  account 
also,  they  are  called  fathers,  and  unical  Gods.  For  the  one  and  father 
are  in  them  the  same.  But  the  intellectual  Gods  are  defined  according 
to  ends  or  extremities ;  and  on  this  account,  all  of  them  are  denominated 
intellects  and  intellectual.  The  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time, 
intellectual  Gods,  however,  being  middles,  especially  present  themseLves 
to  the  view  according  to  the  middles  of  the  triads. 

Farther  still,  this  also  may  be  considered  in  common  about  all  these 
triads,  that  each  according  to  the  end  proceeds  to  infinity.  For  the 
end  of  the  first  triad  is  number ;  of  the  second,  the  infinite  in  multitude; 
and  of  the  third,  the  rectilinear,  which  itself  participates  of  the  nature  of 
the  infinite.  And  of  this  the  cause  is,  that  each  of  the  triads  according 
to  its  extremity  is  curried  as  in  a  vehicle  in  the  material  worlds,  and 
comprehends  according  to  one  cause  the  infinity  of  the  natures  that  are 
generated  in  them.  In  addition,  likewise,  to  what  has  been  said,  we 
may  survey  the  order  of  the  triads,  from  the  ends  that  are  in  them.  For 
the  end  of  the  first  triad,  is  number :  but  of  the  second,  the  finite  and  the 
infinite;  and  of  the  third,  the  orbicular,  the  mixed  figure,  and  the 
rectilinear.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  first  triad  is  monadic ;  but 
the  second  dyadic;  and  the  third  triadic.  And  the  first  of  these  indeed 
is  analogous  to  the  one  being ;  but  the  second  to  the  intelligible  whole; 
and  the  third,  to  the  all-perfect  whole.  But  that  these  have  this  order 
with  respect  to  each  other,  has  been  before  pbserved.    In  short,  there- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXIX. 


OF  PLATO. 


fore,  every  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  triad,  is  according 
to  its  summit  indeed  conjoined  to  the  intelligible ;  but  according  to  its 
middle,  unfolds  its  proper  power;  and  according  to  its  termination, 
comprehends  the  infinity  of  secondary  natures.  And  here  we  shall  end 
the  doctrine  concerning  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods. 


S10  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 


BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  I. 


In  the  next  place,  let  us  survey  another  order  of  Gods,  which  is  called 
intellectual,  being  indeed  conjoined  to  the  orders  prior  to  it,  but  termi- 
nating the  total  progressions  of  the  Gods,  converting  them  to  their 
principle,  and  producing  one  circle  of  the  primarily-efficient  and  all- 
perfect  orders.  Let  us  also  extend  the  intellect  that  is  in  us  to  the 
imparticipable  and  divine  intellect,  and  distinguish  the  orders  and 
diminutions  of  essence  that  are  in  it,  according  to  the  narration  of 
Plato. 

This  intellectual  hypostasis  therefore  of  the  Gods,  is  suspended  indeed 
from  more  ancient  causes,  and  is  filled  from  them  with  total  goodness 
and  self-sufficiency.  But  after  these  causes,  it  establishes  an  illustrious 
empire  over  all  secondary  natures,  binding  to  its  dominion  all  the  partial 
progressions  of  the  Gods.  And  it  is  denominated  indeed  intellectual, 
because  it  generates  an  impartible  and  divine  intellect.  But  it  is  filled 
from  intelligibles,  not  as  from  those  intelligibles  which  are  co-arranged 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  I. 


OF  PLATO. 


311 


with  intellect,  nor  as  with  those  which  are  alone  divided  from  intellect 
by  the  conception  of  the  mind,  but  as  establishing  in  itself  unically  all 
multitudes,  and  occultly  containing  the  evolutions  of  the  Cods  into  light, 
and  the  hyparxes  of  intelligibles.   It  is  likewise  allotted  the  total  intellect 
of  intellectuals,  the  variety  of  beings,  and  the  multiform  orders  of  divine 
natures;  and  it  convolves  the  end  of  the  whole  progression*  [of  the 
Gods]  to  the  one  intelligible  principle.    For  intellectuals  are  converted 
to  intelligibles.    And  some  intellectuals  indeed  are  united  and  *  firmly 
established  prior  to  the  divided  Gods;  but  others  are  multiplied  and' 
through  conversion  are  conjoined  to  primarily-efficient  causes.  The 
intellectual  Gods  however  proceed  from  all  the  Gods  prior  to  them,, 
receiving  indeed  unions  from  the  one  that  is  prior  to  intelligibles;  but 
essences  from  intelligibles;  and  being  allotted  lives  all-perfect,  connective 
and  generative  of  divine  natures,  from  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same 
time  intellectual  Gods;  but  the  intellectual  peculiarity  from  themselves. 
They  likewise  convert  to  themselves  all  the  divided  orders,  but  establish 
themselves  in  intelligibles,  existing  wholly  through  the  whole,  pure  and 
unknown  knowledges,  and  fervid  lives.    Besides  these  things  also,  they, 
are  all-perfect  essences,  producing  all  secondary  natures  through  sub- 
sisting from  themselves,  and  being  neither  diminished  by  their  progres- 
sion, nor  receiving  an  addition  by  their  progeny;  but  through  their  own. 
never-failing  and  infinite  powers,  being  the  fathers,  causes,  and  leaders  of 
all  things.    Nor  are  they  co-divided  with  their  progeny,  nor  do  they 
depart  from  themselves  in  their  progressions;  but  at  once,  and  according 
to  union  they  govern  total  multitudes,  and  all  orders,  and  convolve  them, 
to  the  intelligible,  and  to  occult  good. 

"Whether  therefore  I  may  speak  of  life,  it  is  not  proper  to  think  that  it 
is  such  a  life  as  we  surveyed  a  little  before.  For  that  was  impartici* 
pable,  but  this  is  participated.  And  that  indeed,  was  generative,  but 
this  is  vivific.  But  it  is  not  immanifest  that  these  differ  from  each  other. 
For  the  vivific  cause  indeed,  is  also  evidently  generative;  but  the 
generative  cause  is  not  entirely  vivific.    For  it  imparts  figure  to  things 

'  For  nfMiov  it  it  necessary  to  read  »foeio«. 

*  After  km  it  is  necessary  to  supply  m  ftn  nwrtu  km.  • 


312  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

unfiguted,  bound  to  things  indefinite,  and  perfection  to  tilings  imperfect. 
Or  whether  I  may  denominate  the  cause  in  intellectuals  intelligible,  it 
must  not  immediately  be  conceived  to  be  such  an  intelligible,  as  that  of 
which  we  have  before  spoken.  For  that  was  imparticipable,  and  prior 
to  intellectuals,  itself  pre-existing  by  itself,  and  exempt  from  wholes;  not 
being  denominated  intelligible,  as  the  plenitude  of  intellect,  but  as  the 
prior-cause  of  it,  and  the  object  of  desire  and  love  to  it,  subsisting 
uniformly  uncoordinated  with  it.  The  intelligible  however  which  is  now 
the  subject  of  consideration,  is  participated,  and  co-arranged  with 
intellect,  is  multiform,  and  contains  in  itself  the  divided  causes  of  all 
things.  Or  whether  we  may  call  the  Gods  in  this  order  fathers  and 
fabricators,  it  must  be  admitted  that  this  paternal  and  fabricative 
characteristic,  is  different  from  the  hyparxis  of  the  intelligible'  fathers. 
For  they  indeed  were  generative  of  whole  essences;  but  these  pre-exist 
as  the  causes  of  divisible  emanations,  and  of  definite  productions  of  form. 
And  they  indeed  contained  in  themselves  powers  fabricative  of  the  divine 
progressions;  but  these  separate  from  themselves  prolific  causes,  and  are 
not  conjoined  to  them  according  to  union,  but  according  to  a  commu- 
nion subordinate  to  union.  For  the  marriages  which  arc  celebrated  by 
fables,  and  the  concordant  conjunction  of  divine  natures,  arc  in  the 
intellectual  Gods.  But  the  demiurgic  being  mingled  with  the  vivific 
effluxions,  every  genus  of  the  Gods  is  unfolded  into  light,  both  the 
supermundane,  and  the  mundane.  This,  however,  will  be  hereafter 
■discussed. 

i 

'  For  ntiw,  it  is  necemrr  to  read  »«^t«*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  II. 


OF  PLATO. 


31S 


CHAPTER  II. 


Since  however,  we  have,  in  short,  surveyed  the  peculiarity  of  the 
intellectual  Gods,  it  remains  that  we  should  deliver  an  appropriate  theory 
concerning  the  division  of  them.  For  the  intellectual  order  is  not  one 
and  indivisible,  but  is  allotted  progressions  more  various  than  those  of 
the  more  elevated  genera.  There  will  therefore  be  here  also  three 
fathers,  who  divide  the  whole  intellectual  essence;  one  indeed,  being 
arranged  according  to  the  intelligible,  but  another  according  to  life,  and 
another  according  to  intellect.  They  also  imitate  the  intelligible  fathers, 
who  divide  the  intelligible  breadth  in  a  threefold  manner,  and  who  are 
allotted  a  difference  of  this  kind  with  respect  to  each  other.  For  one  of 
these  intellectual  fathers  proceeds  analogous  to  the  first  [intelligible] 
father,  and  is  intelligible.  But  another  proceeds  analogous  to  the  second 
[intelligible]  father,  and  binds  to  himself  the  whole  of  intellectual  life. 
And  another  proceeds  analogous  to  the  third  father,  and  closes  the 
whole  intellectual,  in  the  same  manner  as  he  closes  the  intelligible 
order.  ' 

But  these  fathers  being  three,  and  the  first  indeed,  abiding  in  himself, 
but  the  sccoud  proceeding  and  vivifying  all  things,  and  the  third  glit- 
tering with  fabricative  productions,  it  is  evidently  necessary,  that  other 
triple  Gods  should  be  conjoined  with  them;  of  which,  one  indeed  will 
be  the  source  to  the  first  intellectual  God,  of  stable  purity ;  but  another, 
of  undefiled  progression,  to  the  second  God;  and  another  of  exempt 
fabrication,  to  the  third.  For  in  the  Gods  prior  to  these,  the  un defiled 
deities  were  according  to  cause,  through  union  without  separation,  and  a 
sameness  collective  of  powers  which  are  not  in  want  of  the  communion 
of  these.  But  in  the  intellectual  Gods,  where  there  is  an  all-perfect 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  R 


314 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


separation,  as  in  total  orders,  and  a  greater  habitude  to  secondary 
natures,  unpolluted  deity  or  power  is  necessary,  which  has  the  ratio  of 
sameness,  and  undeviating  subsistence,  to  the  paternal  cause,  and  which 
is  co-divided  with  the  fathers,  so  that  each  of  the  undefiled  Gods  is 
conjoined  with  a  peculiar  father. 

These  two  triads  therefore  have  presented  themselves  to  our  view,  one 
indeed,  of  the  intellectual  fathers,  but  the  other  of  the  undefiled  Gods. 
There  is  however,  besides  these  two,  a  third  other  triadic  monad,  which 
is  the  cause  of  separation  to  intellectuals,  and  which  subsists  together 
with  the  above  mentioned  triads.  For  the  fathers  indeed  are  the 
suppliers  of  all  essence;  but  the  inflexible  Gods,  of  sameness.  But  it  is 
evidently  fit  that  there  should  be  also  the  cause  of  separation,  and  that 
this  should  be  one  and  at  the  same  time  triple,  separating  the  intellectual 
Gods  from  the  above  mentioned  orders,  from  themselves,  and  from 
inferior  natures.  For  why  are  they  the  leaders  of  another  order,  if  they 
are  not  divided  from  the  first  orders?  Why  are  they  multiplied,  and  why 
do  they  differ  from  each  other  in  their  kingdoms,  unless  they  are 
separated?  Why  also  do  they  transcend  the  partial  [Gods]  unless  they 
are  also  separated  from  these?  The  cause  of  separation  therefore,  will  be 
for  us  one  and  a  triple  monad.  But  the  paternal  and  undefiled  causes  will 
be  each  of  them  a  uniform  triad.  And  what  is  most  paradoxical  of  all, 
the  separative  cause  is  more  monadic;  but  the  paternal  and  also  the 
undefiled  cause,  are  each  of  them  more  triadic.  For  the  separative 
monad  indeed,  is  the  cause  of  separation  to  the  other  monads;  but 
the  others  are  the  sources  of  communion  and  union  to  it  Hence  each 
of  these,  being  separated,  becomes  triadic;  but  the  separative  monad  is 
monadic,  in  consequence  of  being  united  by  these.  For  all  intellectuals 
pervade  through  each  other,  and  are  in  each  other,  according  to  a  certain 
admirable  communion,  imitating  the  union  of  intelligibles,  through  being 
present  and  mingled  with  each  other.  The  sphere  also  which  is  there,  is 
the  intellectual  order,  energizing  in  and  about  itself,  and  proceeding  into 
itself  hebdomatically,  being  a  monad  and  a  hebdomad,  the  image,  if  it 
be  lawful  so  to  speak,  of  the  all-perfect  intelligible  monad,  and  unfolding 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IL 


OF  PLATO. 


315 


its  occult  union,  through  progression  and  separation.  This  first  pro- 
gression therefore  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  which  is  separated  by  us  into 
a  heptad,  we  have  perfectly  celebrated. 

Other  secondary  seven  hebdomads,  however,  are  to  be  considered 
under  this,  which  produce  as' far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  the  monads  of 
this  heptad.  For  each  monad  is  the  leader  of  an  intellectual  hebdomad 
conjoined  with  it,  and  extends  this  hebdomad  from  on  high,  from  the 
summit  of  Olympus,  as  far  as  to  the  last,  and  terrestrial  orders.  I  say, 
for  instance,  the  first  paternal  monad,  indeed,  constitutes  seven  such 
monads.  But  the  second  again  constitutes  seven  vivific  monads.  And 
the  third,  seven  demiurgic  monads.  Each  likewise  of  the  un defiled 
monads  constitutes  a  number  equal  to  that  produced  by  the  fathers. 
And  the  monad  of  separation  constitutes  seven  [separative  monads]. 
For  all  these  causes  proceed  in  conjunction  with  each  other.  And  aa 
the  first  triad  of  the  fathers  subsists  together  with  the  uudefiled  triad,, 
and  the  divisive  monad,  after  the  same  manner  also,  the  second  triads 
are  allotted  seven  coordinate  undefiled  triads,  and  separative  monads* 
Whence,  therefore,  does  so  great  a  number  of  intellectual  Gods  present 
itself  to  our  view  ?  It  is  evident,  indeed,  from  what  has  been  said.  For 
the  first  hebdomad,  indeed,  the  cause  of  the  second  hebdomads,  and 
which  has  the  relation  of  a  monad  to  them,  and  which  u  little  before  wc 
denominated  an  intellectual  sphere,  subsists  according  to  the  intelligible 
breadth,  imitating  the  paternal  nature  of  it  through  the  paternal  triad  ; 
but  the  eternity  of  its  power,  through  undefiled  sameness;  and  the 
multitude  shining  forth  in  its  extremities,  through  the  monad  which  is 
divisive  of  wholes.  The  remaining  hebdomads,  however,  which  are 
derived  from  this,  proceed  according  to  the  intelligible  and  intellectual 
genera.  For  each  monad,  conformably  to  the  summits  of  those  genera, 
constitutes  a  monad  co-arranged  with  the  multitude  proceeding  from  it ; 
since  every  summit  is  uniform  [i.  e.  has  the  form  of  the  onc,J  as  we 
have  before  demonstrated.  But  according  to  the  middle  and  third 
progressions  of  those  genera,  each  monad  generates  two  triads.  For 
the  separation  of  them  was  apparent  in  the  middle  and  ultimate 
progressions,  as  we  have  before  observed.   As,  therefore,  the  intelligible* 


Digitized  by  Google 


316 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


ROOK  V. 


and  at  the  same  time,  intellectual  genera,  prodaccd  the  intelligible 
breadth,  which  is  of  a  unical  nature,  into  a  triad ic  multitude,  after  the 
same  manner  also  the  intellectual  monads  call  forth  the  intelligible,  and 
at  the  same  time  intellectual  triads,  into  intellectual  hebdomads.  And 
they  constitute  indeed  the  monads  which  are  coarranged  with  the 
hebdomads,  according  to  the  summits  of  the  triads ;  but  the  two  triads, 
according  to  the  second  and  third  decrements  of  those  triads.  Hence 
every  hebdomad  has  the  first  monad  indeed  intelligible ;  but  the  second 
after  this,  and  which  is  triad  ic,  intelligible  and  intellectual;  and  the 
third  triad,  which  is  the  next  in  order,  intellectual.  All  these  likewise 
subsist  as  in  intellectuals.  For  they  are  characterized  according  to  the 
peculiarity  of  the  constitutive  monad. 

In  short,  the  intellectual  powers  proceed  according  to  the  intelligible 
orders ;  but  they  constitute  these  seven  hebdomads  according  to  the  first 
intellectual  orders.  For  it  is  indeed  necessary  that  exempt  causes  should 
he  assimilated  to  the  intelligible  Gods ;  but  that  co-arranged  causes,  and 
which  proceed  every  where,  should  be  assimilated  to  the  intelligible,  and 
at  the  same  time,  intellectual  Gods ;  since  these  also  are  the  first  that 
divide  the  worlds  triadically,  and  pervade  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things, 
connectedly  containing  and  perfecting  all  things.  But  the  intelligible 
Gods  contain  the  causes  of  wholes  uniformly,  and  occultly.  You  may 
also  say,  that  the  intelligible  Gods  produce  all  things  uniformly ;  for 
numbers  subsist  in  them  monadically.  But  the  intelligible  and  intel- 
lectual Gods  produce  all  things  triadically.  For  the  monads  in  these  are 
divided  according  to  number.  And  what  the  monad  was  in  the  former, 
that  number  is  in  the  latter.  And  the  intellectual  Gods  produce  all 
things  hebdomad ically.  For  they  evolve  the  intelligible,  and  at  the 
same  time,  intellectual  triads,  into  intellectual  hebdomads,  and  expand 
their  contracted  powers  into  intellectual  variety ;  since  they  define 
multitude  itself  and  variety  by  numbers  which  are  nearest  to  the  monad. 
For  the  numbers  of  the  partial  are  different  from  the  numbers  of  the 
total  orders  in  the  Gods.  And  the  whole  of  this  intellectual  number  is 
indeed  more  expanded  than  the  natures  prior  to  it,  and  is  divided  into 
more  various  progressions,  yet  it  docs  not  desert  its  alliance  with  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  III.  OF  PLATO.  317 

monad.  For  hebdomad ic  multitude  has  an  abundant  affinity  with  the 
nature  of  the  monad  ;  since  it  is  measured  according  to  it,  and  primarily 
subsists  from  it.  And  the  Pythagoreans,  when  they  denominate  the 
heptad  light  according  to  intellect,  evidently  admit  its  hyparxis  to  be 
intellectual,  and  on  this  account  suspended  from  the  monad.  For  the 
unical,  which  light  manifests,  is  inherent  from  this  in  all  the  divine 
numbers.  And  thus  much  concerning  the  division  of  these  intellectual 
Gods. 


CHAPTER  III. 


It  follows  in  the  next  place,  that  we  should  adapt  the  theory  of  Plato 
to  this  order,  and  show  that  he  does  not  dissent  from  any  of  the  theological 
dogmas  concerning  it.  Since,  therefore,  we  have  demonstrated,  that  the 
celestial  order,  which  wc  find  in  the  Cratylus  perfectly  celebrated, 
possesses  the  middle  bond  of  the  intellectual,  and  at  the  same  time, 
intelligible  Gods,  but  that  under  this  another  order  of  Gods  is  imme- 
diately arranged,  as  Socrates  shows  in  the  Pheedrus,  called  the  subce- 
lestial  arch,  and  which  we  have  considered  as  not  divided  from  the 
heaven, — this  being  the  case,  what  order  is  it  which  divides  itself  from 
the  kingdom  of  the  heaven,  but  is  the  leader  of  the  intellectual  order  of 
the  Gods,  and  is  primarily  the  supplier  of  intellect,  according  to  the 
doctrine  of  Plato,  as  Socrates  says  in  the  Cratylus,  except  that  which 
the  mighty  Saturn  comprehends  ?  For  he  calls  this  God  the  first  and 
most  pure  intellect.  This  God,  therefore,  is  the  summit  of  a  divine 
intellect,  and,  as  he  says,  the  purest  part  of  it ;  separating  himself  indeed 
from  the  celestial  order,  but  reigning  over  all  the  intellectual  Gods ; 


Digitized  by  Google 


313 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V\ 


because  he  is  full  of  intellect,  but  of  a  pure  intellect,  and  is  a  God 
extended  to  the  summit  of  the  iutellectual  hypostasis.  Hence  also,  he 
is  the  father  of  the  mighty  Jupiter,  and  is  simply  father.  For  Ue  who  is 
tlie  father  of  the  father  of  all  things,  is  evidently  allotted  in  a  much 
greater  degree  the  paternal  dignity.  Saturn,  therefore,  is  the  first 
intellect;  but  the  mighty  Jupiter  is  also  an  intellect,  containing,  as 
Socrates  says  in  the  Philebus,  a  royal  soul,  and  a  royal  intellect. 

And  these  Gods  are  two  intellects,  and  intellectual  fathers  ;  the  one* 
indeed,  being  intellectual ;  but  the  other  intelligible,  iu  intellectuals. 
For  the  Saturn ian  bonds  which  Socrates  mentions  in  the  Cratylus,  are 
unific  of  the  intelligence  of  Jupiter  about  the  intelligible  of  his  father* 
and  fill  the  Jovian  intellect  with  the  all-perfect  intelligence  of  the 
Saturnian  intellect.  And  this  I  think  is  likewise  evident  from  the 
analogy  of  souls  to  Pluto.  For  as  he  binds  souls  about  himself,  filling 
them  with  wisdom  and  intelligence,  thus  also  Saturn  being  the  object  of 
desire  and  love  to  Jupiter,  contains  him  in  himself  by  indissoluble  bonds.. 
And  these  things  Socrates  indicates  in  the  Cratylus,  jesting,  and  at  the 
same  time  being  serious  in  what  he  says.  The  object  of  desire  therefore* 
and  the  intelligible  to  Jupiter,  is  Saturn.  But  the  mighty  Jupiter 
himself  is  a  divine  and  demiurgic  intellect.  Hence,  it  is  necessary  that 
there  should  be  a  third  other  intellectual  cause,  generative  of  life.  For 
Jupiter  indeed  is  the  cause  of  life,  as  Socrates  says,  but  intellectually- 
and  secondarily.  But  we  say  that  life  is  every  where  arranged  prior  to 
intellect.  Hence,  we  roust  say  that  the  queen  Rhea,  being  the  mother 
of  Jupiter,  but  subordinate  to  the  father  Saturn,  gives  completion  to  this 
middle,  existing  as  a  vivific  world,  and  establishing  in  herself  the  causes 
of  the  whole  of  life.  These  three  paternal  orders,  therefore,  have 
appeared  to  us  in  intellectuals :  one  of  them  indeed  subsisting  according 
to  the  intelligible  power  of  intellectuals;'  but  another  according  to 
divine  and  intellectual  life;  and  another  according  to  intellectual 
intellect.  For  we  celebrate  the  middle  deity,  herself  by  herself,  as  the 
mother  of  the  demiurgus,  and  of  wholes.    When,  however,  we  survey 

'  It  appears  from  the  version  of  Porta*,  that  the  words  o  pr»  tuna  rr/t  yoynjv  twafui  rm  ntfm, 
are  omitted  in  the  original.    Indeed,  the  sense  requires  that  they  should  be  inserted. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  III. 


OF  PLATO. 


319 


her  together  with  the  extremes,  we  denominate  her  a  paternal  cause, 
as  being  comprehended  in  the  fathers ;  and  as  generating  some  things 
together  with  Saturn,  but  others  in  conjunction  with  Jupiter. 

Moreover,  Plato  following  Orpheus,  calls  the  inflexible  and  undefiled 
triad  of  the  intellectual  Gods  Curetic,  as  is  evident  from  what  the  Athe* 
nian  guest  sajs  in  the  Laws,  celebrating  the  armed  sports  of  the  Curetes, 
and  their  rythmical  dance.  For  Orpheus  represents  the  Curetes  who  are 
three,  as  the  guards  of  Jupiter.  And  the  sacred  laws  of  the  Cretans, 
and  all  the  Grecian  theology,  refer  a  pure  and  undefiled  life  and  energy 
to  this  order.  For  ro  x«p«*  to  koron,  indicates  nothing  else  than  the  pure 
and  incorruptible.  Hence,  we  hare  before  said,  that  the  mighty  Saturn, 
as  being  essentially  united  to  the  cause  of  undefiled  purity,  is  a  pure 
intellect.  The  paternal  Gods  therefore  are  three,  and  the  undefined  Gods 
also  are  three,  Hence  it  remains  that  we  should  survey  the  seventh 
monad. 

If,  therefore,  we  consider  the  fabulous  elections,  both  the  Saturn ian 
and  the  Celestial,  of  which  Plato  makes  mention,  and  thinks  that  such 
like  narrations  should  always  be  concealed  in  silence,  that  the  arcane  truth 
of  them  should  be  surveyed,  and  that  they  are  indicative  of  mystic  con- 
ceptions, because  these  things  are  not  fit  for  young  men  to  hear,— [if  we 
consider  these]  we  may  obtain  from  them  what  the  separative  deity  is, 
who  accomplishes  the  divisions,  and  segregates  the  Saturnian  genera 
indeed  from  the  Celestial,  and  the  Jovian  from  the  Saturnian,  and  who 
separates  the  whole  intellectual  order  from  the  natures  prior  and  posterior 
to  it,  disjoins  the  different  causes  in  it  from  each  other,  and  always  im- 
parts to  secondary  natures,  secondary  measures  of  dominion.  And  let 
not  any  one  be  disturbed,  or  oppose  me  on  hearing  these  things.  How 
therefore  does  Plato  reject  exertions*  bonds,  and  the  tragical  apparatus 
of  fables  ?  For  he  thinks  that  all  such  particulars  will  be  condemned  by 
the  multitude  and  the  stupid,  through  ignorance  of  the  arcana  they  con- 
tain ;  but  that  they  will  exhibit  to  the  wise  certain  admirable  opinions. 
Hence,  he  indeed  does  not  admit  such  a  mode  of  fiction,  but  thinks  it 
proper  to  be  persuaded  by  the  ancients  who  were  the  offspring  of  the 
Gods,  and  to  investigate  their  arcane  conceptions.    As  therefore  he 


320  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

rejects  the  Saturnian  fables,  when  they  are  narrated  to  Euthyprhon,  aud 
the  auditors  of  the  Republic,  yet  at  the  same  time  admits  them  in  the 
Cratylus,  placing  about  the  mighty  Saturn  and  Pluto,  other  secondary 
bonds, — thus  also,  I  think  he  forbids  exections  to  be  introduced  to  those 
who  know  only  the  apparent  meaning  of  what  is  said,  and  does  not  admit 
that  there  is  illegal  conduct  in  the  Gods,  nnd  nefarious  aggressions  of 
children  against  their  parents,  but  he  opposes,  and  confutes  as  much  as 
possible  such  like  opinions.  He  assents  however  to  their  being  narrated 
to  those  who  arc  able  to  penetrate  into  the  mystic  truth,  and  investigate 
the  concealed  meaning  of  fables,  and  admits  the  separation  of  wholes, 
whether  [mythologists]  are  willing  to  denominate  them  exections  for  the 
purpose  of  concealment,  or  in  whatever  other  way  they  may  think  fit  to 
call  them.  For  bonds  and  exections  are  symbols  of  communion  and  se- 
paration, and  each  is  the  progeny  of  the  same  divine  mythology.  Nor  is 
there  any  occasion  to  wonder,  if  from  these  things  we  endeavour  to  confirm 
the  opinion  of  Plato;  but  it  is  requisite  to  know  how  the  philosophy  of 
Plato  admits  all  such  particulars,  and  how  it  rejects  them,  and  in  what 
manner  he  apprehends  they  may  be  the  causes  of  the  greatest  evils,  and 
of  an  impious  life  to  those  that  hear  them.  The  seven  intellectual  Gods, 
therefore,  will  through  these,  conceptions  appear  to  have  been  thought 
worthy  of  being  mentioned  by  Plato. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


It  is,  however,  1  think,  necessary  syllogistically  to  collect  the  progres- 
sion of  them  according  to  hebdomads,  from  images.  The  demiurgus 
therefore,  [in  the  Timaeus]  fabricates  the  soul  of  the  universe  an  image  or 
all  the  divine  orders,  in  the  same  manner  as  he  fabricates  this  sensible 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  IV. 


OF  PLATO. 


world  an  image  of  intelligibles.  And  in  the  first '  place  indeed,  he  consti- 
tutes the  whole  essence  of  the  soul,  and  afterwards  divides  it  into  numbers, 
binds  it  by  harmonies,  and  adorns  it  with  figures,  I  mean  the  rectilinear  and 
the  circular.  After  this  also,  he  divides  it  into  one  circle  and  seven  circles. 
Whence  therefore,  arc  this  monad  and  hebdomad  derived,  except  from 
the  intellectual  Gods?  For  figure,  number,  and  true  being,  are  prior  to 
them.  And  as  in  the  fabrication  of  the  soul,  after  the  subsistence  of  the 
psychical  figure,  the  division  of  the  circles  according  to  the  monad  and 
hebdomad  follows,  thus  also  in  the  Gods,  after  intellectual  and  intelligible 
figure,  the  intellectual  breadth,  and  that  sphere  of  the  Gods  succeed. 
The  multitude  therefore  of  the  seven  hebdomads  subsist  from  the  divine 
intellectual  hebdomad  entering  into  itself.  And  on  this  account,  the 
demiurgus  thus  divides  the  circles  in  the  soul,  because  he,  and  every 
intellectual  order,  produce  an  intellectual  hebdomad  from  each  monad. 
I  do  not  however  assert,  and  now  contend,  that  the  seven  circles  are 
allotted  an  hyparxis  similar  to  the  seven  Gods  that  proceed  from  the 
demiurgus,  but  that  the  demiurgus  dividing  the  soul  according  to  circles, 
introduces  number  to  the  sections  from  the  intellectual  Gods,  I  mean  the 
monadic  and  the  hebdomadic  number.  For  the  monad  indeed  subsists 
according  to  the  circle  of  sameness,  but  the  division,  according  to  the 
circle  of  difference.  Shorly  after  however,  it  will  appear  that  same  and 
different  belong  to  the  demiurgic  order. 

Farther  still, after  the  division  of  the  circles,  the  demiurgus  assumes  some 
things  which  are  symbols  of  the  assimilative,  and  others  which  are  sym- 
bols of  the  liberated  Gods,  and  through  these,  he  refers  the  soul  to  these 
orders  of  the  Gods.  If  therefore  figure  is  prior  to  the  intellectual  Gods, 
but  the  similar  and  dissimilar  are  posterior  to  them,  it  is  evidently  neces- 
sary that  the  monadic  and  at  the  same  time  hebdomadic,  should  be 
referred  to  this  order,  and  that  the  progression  from  the  monad  to  the 
hebdomad  should  pertain  to  this  order.  Each  therefore  of  the  seven 
intellectual  Gods,  is  the  leader  of  an  intellectual  hebdomad,  as  we  may 

'  For  Tjaornt,  it  is  necessary  to  read  nprnra;.    It  was  also  requisite  to  alter  the  punctuation  in 
the  preceding  sentence. 

Pioc.  Vol.  I.  2  S 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


HOOK  V. 


learn  from  images.  There  however  indeed,  the  hebdomad  is  one,  and 
allied  to  itself.  But  in  souls,  the  circles  differ  from  each  other,  according 
to  the  divine  peculiarities.  For  they  receive  number  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  preserve  the  proper  nature  which  they  are  allotted,  connectedly 
containing  mundane  natures,  and  convolving  the  apparent  by  their  own 
circles.  And  thus  much  concerning  these  particulars,  which  afford  argu- 
ments that  are  not  obscure  of  the  arrangement  of  them  by  Plato. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Again  however,  making  another  beginning,  let  us  speak  about  each 
f_of  the  intellectual  Gods,]  as  much  as  is  sufficient  to  the  present  theology. 
Let  Saturn  therefore,  the  first  king  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  be  now  cele- 
brated by  us,  who  according  to  Socrates  in  the  Cratylus  illuminates  the 
pure  and  incorruptible  nature  of  intellect,  and  establishing  his  own  all- 
perfect  power  in  his  own  summit  of  intellectuals,  abides  in,  and  at  the 
same  time  proceeds  from  his  father  f_HeavenJ.  He  likewise  divides  the 
intellectual  government  from  the  connective,  and  establishes  the  tran- 
scendency of  the  other  intellectual  Gods  in  connexion  with  his  own; 
but  comprehends  in  himself  the  intelligible  of  the  demiurgic  intellect, 
and  the  plenitude  of  beings.  Hence  the  Saturnian  bonds,  mystically, 
and  obscurely  signify  the  comprehension  of  this  intelligible,  and  a  union 
with  it.    For  the  intelligible  is  comprehended  in  intellect. 

As  therefore,  the  intelligible  is  indeed  exempt  from  intellect,  but  intel- 
lect is  said  to  comprehend  it,  thus  also  Jupiter  is  said  to  bind  his  father. 
And  in  placing  bonds  about  his  father,  he  at  the  same  time  binds  himself 
[to  him}.  For  a  bond  is  the  comprehension  of  the  things  that  are  bound. 
But  the  truth  is  as  follows :  Saturn  is  indeed  an  all-perfect  intellect ;  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  V.  OF  PLATO.  333 

the  mighty  Jupiter  is  likewise  an  intellect.  Each  therefore  being  an 
intellect,  each  is  also  evidently  an  intelligible-  For  every  intellect  is' 
converted  to  itself ;  but  being  converted  to  it  energizes  towards  itself. 
Energizing  however  towards  itself,  and  not  towards  externals,  it  is  intel- 
ligible and  at  the  same  time  intellectual ;  being  indeed  intellectual,  so 
far  as  it  intellectually  perceives,  but  intelligible,  so  far  as  it  is  intellectu- 
ally perceived.  Hence  also  the  Jovian  intellect  is  to  itself  intellect,  and 
to  itself  intelligible.  And  in  a  similar  manner  the  Saturnian  intellect  is 
to  itself  intelligible,  and  to  itself  intellect.  But  Jupiter  indeed  is  more 
intellect,  and  Saturn  is  more  intelligible.  For  the  latter  is  established 
according  to  the  intellectual  summit,  but  the  former  according  to  the 
intellectual  end.  And  the  one  indeed  is  the  object  of  desire,  but  the 
other  desires.    And  the  one  fills,  hut  the  other  is  filled. 

Saturn  therefore  being  intellect  and  intelligible,  Jupiter  also  is  in  the 
second  place  intellect  and  intelligible.  The  intellectual  however  of  Sa- 
turn is  intelligible ;  but  the  intelligible  of  Jupiter  is  intellectual.  Jupiter 
therefore,  being  at  the  same  time  intellectual  and  intelligible,  intellectu- 
ally perceives  and  comprehends  himself,  and  binds  the  intelligible  in 
himself.  But  binding  this  in  himself,  he  is  said  to  bind  the  intelligible 
prior  to  himself,  and  to  comprehend  it  on  all  sides.  For  entering  into 
himself,  he  proceeds  into  the  intelligible  prior  to  himself,  and  by  the 
intelligible  which  is  in  himself,  intellectually  perceives  that  which  is  prior 
to  himself.  And  thus  the  intelligible  is  not  external  to  intellect  For 
every  intellect  possesses  that  which  is  in  itself  without  any  difference 
with  respect  to  itself.  But  again,  it  intellectually  perceives  in  itself  that 
which  is  prior  to  itself.  For  every  thing  which  is  external  to  intellect,  is 
foreign  and  adventitious,  and  pertains  to  an  inferior  nature.  But  that 
which  is  pre-established  in  the  order  of  cause,  and  which  pre-exists  as  the 
object  of  desire,  is  in  the  desiring  natures  themselves.  For  being  con- 
verted to,  and  verging  to  themselves,  they  discover  the  causes  of  them- 
selves, and  all  more  ancient  natures.  And  by  how  much  more  perfect 
and  uniform  the  conversion  of  the  desiring  natures  is  about  the  objects  of 
desire,  by  so  much  the  more  are  they  present  with  their  own  desirables. 
Hence  every  intellect,  by  intellectually  perceiving  itself,  intellectually 


Digitized  by  Google 


324 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


perceives  likewise,  all  the  natures  prior  to  itself.  And  by  how  much  the 
more  it  is  united  to  itself,  in  a  so  much  greater  degree  it  is  established  in 
the  intelligibles  prior  to  itself.  For  the  cause  of  any  being,  and  which 
is  the  source  of  essence  or  of  perfection  to  it,  is  not  external  to  that 
being ;  but  that  which  is  subordinate  to  any  being,  is  external  to  it,  and 
is  not  the  intelligible.  On  this  account  also,  each  of  the  divine  natures  is 
unconverted  lo  that  which  is  inferior  to  itself,  but  is  converted  to  itself, 
and  through  itself  reverts  to  that  which  is  more  excellent.  And  the  in- 
telligible indeed  is  not  inferior  to  any  intellect ;  but  every  intellect  ener- 
gizing towards  itself,  and  comprehending  the  intelligibles  prior  to  itself, 
intellectually  perceives  them. 

Some  intelligibles  likewise  are  such  as  are  conjoined  with  intellect. 
But  others  are  such  as  are  proximately  participated  by  it.  And  others 
are  such  as  it  sees  more  remotely,  and  which  are  more  exempt  from  its 
nature.  On  this  account,  the  demiurgic  intellect  is  indeed  at  the  same 
time  intelligible  and  intellect,  but  has  the  intelligible  of  his  father,  which 
he  binds  as  the  fable  says.  He  sees  however  animal  itself,  which  is, 
according  to  Timaeus,  the  most  beautiful  of  all  intelligibles,  And  if  the 
illustrious  Amelius,  forming  such  conceptions  as  these,  said  that  in- 
tellect is  threefold,  one  being  that  which  is,  another  that  which  has,  and 
another  that  which  sees,  lie  rightly  apprehends  the  conception  of  Plato, 
according  to  my  opinion.  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  second  intellect 
should  not  only  have  the  intelligible,  but  that  it  should  be  and  have  the 
intelligible;  that  it  should  be  indeed  the  intelligible  coordinate  with 
itself,  but  have  the  intelligible  prior  to  itself,  so  far  as  it  participates  of  it. 
And  it  is  necessary  that  the  third  intellect  should  see  the  intelligible,  and 
should  alsoie  and  hate  it ;  that  it  should  see  indeed  the  first  intelligible; 
but  have  that  which  is  proximately  beyond  itself ;  and  that  it  should  be 
the  intelligible  which  is  in  itself,  and  which  is  conjoined  with  its  own  in- 
telligence, and  should  be  inseparable  from  it. 

If  therefore,  as  we  said  from  the  beginning,  Jupiter  intellectually  per- 
ceives his  father  Saturn,  Saturn  is  indeed  intelligible,  but  Jupiter  is 
intellect;  being  one  intelligible  himself,  but  participating  of  another. 
Hence  also  Plato  does  not  simply  call  Saturn  intellect,  but  a  pure  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  VI. 


OF  PLATO. 


incorruptible  intellect.  For  he '  in  the  intellectual  is  intelligible.  Since 
however,  he  is  not  simply  intelligible,  but  as  in  intellectuals,  he  is 
intellect,  and  is  himself  paternally  so,  being  both  father  and  intellect,  and 
having  the  paternal  intellectually.  In  intelligibles  therefore,  intellect  is 
also  father ;  but  in  intellectuals  father  is  intellect.  Hence  Saturn  is  a 
pure,  immaterial  and  perfect  intellect,  established  above  fabrication  in 
the  order  of  the  desirable.  But  possessing  such  a  peculiarity  as  this,  he 
is  full  of  all  intelligibles  intellectually,  is  as  it  were  exuberant  with 
intellections,  and  establishes  twofold  genera  of  Gods,  some  indeed  in 
himself,  but  others  posterior  to  himself.  And  he  leads  forth,  indeed,  the 
prolific  powers  of  his  father  Heaven  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things ;  but 
fills  the  demiurgic  order  with  generative  goods. 


CHAFFER  VI. 


Saturn  however  is  the  only  one  of  the  Gods  who  is  said  both  to 
receive  and  give  the  royal  dignity  with  a  certain  necessity,  and  as  it 
were  violence,  cutting  off  the  genitals  of  his  father,  and  being  himself 
castrated  by  the  mighty  Jupiter.  For  he  bounds  the  kingdom  of  his 
father,  and  is  bounded  by  the  God  posterior  to  himself.  He  is  also  filled 
from  the  natures  placed  above  him,  but  fills  the  whole  fabrication  [of  the 
universej'with  prolific  perfection.  But  separating  himself  from  his  father, 
he  is  exempt  from  his  progeny.  Being  however  one  all-perfect  intel- 
lect, he  contains  in  himself  the  multitude  of  total  intelligibles.  And  as 
he  deifies  the  intellectual  summit,  he  illuminates  all  things  with  intelli- 
gible light. 

'  For  t»  yaf  it  ia  necessary  to  read  tn*m{  yaq. 


Digitized  by  Google 


326  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Very  properly  therefore,  has  this  universe  twofold  lives,  periods,  and 
convolutions;  the  one  being  Saturnian,  but  the  other  Jovian,  as  tl»e 
fable  in  the  Politicus  says.  And  according  to  one  of  the  periods  indeed, 
it  produces  all  goods  spontaneously,  and  possesses  an  innoxious  and 
unwearied  life.  But  according  to  the  other  it  participates  of  material 
error,  and  a  very  mutable  nature.  For  the  life  in  the  world  beiug 
twofold,  the  one  unapparent,  and  more  intellectual,  but  the  other  more 
physical  aud  apparent,  and  the  one  being  defined  according  to  provi- 
dence, but  the  other  proceeding  in  a  disorderly  manner  according  to 
fate  ; — this  being  the  case,  the  second  life  indeed,  which  is  multiform, 
and  perfected  through  nature,  is  suspended  from  the  Jovian  order ;  but 
the  more  simple,  intellectual,  and  unapparent  life,  is  suspended  from  the 
Saturnian  order.  And  these  things  the  Elean  guest  clearly  teaches, 
calling  one  of  the  circulations  Jovian,  but  the  other,  Saturnian ;  though 
Jupiter  also  is  the  cause  of  the  unapparent  life  of  the  universe,  is  the 
supplier  of  intellect,  and  the  leader  of  intellectual  perfection ;  but  he 
elevates  all  things  to  the  kingdom  of  Saturn,  and  being  a  leader  in 
conjunction  with  his  father,  constitutes  the  whole  mundane  intellect. 
And  if  it  be  requisite  to  speak  the  truth  clearly,  each  of  the  periods 
indeed,  I  mean  the  apparent,  and  the  unapparent,  participates  of  both 
these  Gods;  but  the  one  indeed  is  more  Saturnian,  and  the  other  is 
perfected  under  the  kingdom  of  Jupiter. 

That  the  mighty  Saturn  therefore  is  allotted  a  kingdom  different  from 
that  of  the  Gods  prior  to  him,  the  Elean  guest  clearly  manifests  in  what 
he  asserts  prior  to  the  fable.  For  he  says,  "  We  have  heard  from  many 
respecting  the  kingdom  of  which  Saturn  was  the  founder."  According 
to  this  wise  man  therefore,  Saturn  is  one  of  the  royal  Gods.    Hence  also 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  VII. 


OF  PLATO. 


327 


he  presides  over  a  kingdom  different  from  that  of  his  father.  And  while 
his  father  connectedly  contains  the  middle  centres  of  the  intelligible  and 
intellectual  Gods,  he  is  the  leader  of  the  intellectual  orders  and  supplies 
all  intellectual  life,  first  indeed,  to  the  Gods,  but  secondarily  to  the 
natures  more  excellent  than  ours,  and  in  the  last  place  to  partial  souk, 
when  they  are  able  to  be  extended  to  the  Saturnian  place  of  survey. 
For  this  universe,  and  all  the  mundane  Gods,  always  possess  this  two- 
fold life,  and  imitate  the  Saturnian  intelligence  indeed  through  unapparent 
and  intellectual  energy,  but  the  demiurgic  intellect  of  Jupiter,  through 
a  providential  attention  to  secondary  natures,  and  in  short,  through  the 
visible  fabrication.  But  partial  souls  at  one  time  energize  intellectually, 
and  consecrate  themselves  to  Saturn,  but  at  another  time  after  a  Jovian 
manner,  and  pay  a  providential  attention  to  secondary  natures,  without 
restraint.  When  however  they  revolve  analogous  to  those"  deities 
[Saturn  and  Jupiter]  they  intellectually  perceive  intelligibles,  and  dispose 
sensibles  in  an  orderly  manner,  and  live  both  these  lives,  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  Gods  and  the  more  excellent  genera.  For  their  periods 
are  twofold ;  one  being  intellectual,  but  the  other  providential.  Their 
paradigms  also  are  twofold ;  the  Saturnian  intellect  being  the  paradigm 
of  the  one,  but  the  Jovian  intellect  of  the  other.  For  the  mighty  Jupiter 
himself  has  a  twofold  energy,  containing  indeed  intelligibles  in  intellect, 
but  adorning  sensibles  by  demiurgic  production. 

Since  however  the  circulations  are  twofold,  not  only  in  wholes,  but 
also  in  partial  souls,  the  Elean  guest  says  that  in  the  Saturnian  period, 
the  generation  of  these  souls  is  not  from  each  other,  as  in  men  which  are 
the  objects  of  sensible  inspection,  nor  as  the  first  man  with  us  is  alone 
earth-begotten,  so  in  partial  souls  one  first  soul  is  the  offspring  of  man, 
but  all  of  them  are  earth-begotten.  For  they  are  elevated  from  ultimate 
and  terrestrial  bodies,  and  embrace  an  unapparent,*  relinquishing  a  sen- 
sible life.  He  also  says  that  neither  do  they  verge  to  old  age,  and  change 
from  being  younger  to  becoming  older ;  but  on  the  contrary,  they  are 

'  For  ,w.wif,  it  U  necessary  to  read 
*  For  ru*cMvf  it  is  Decenary  to  read 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


rendered  more  vigorous,  proceed  intellectually  in  a  way  contrary  to 
generation,  and  as  it  were,  divest  themselves  of  the  variety  of  life  with 
which  in  descending  they  became  invested.  Hence  likewise  all  the 
symbols  which  are  adapted  to  youth  are  present  with  these  souls,  when 
they  pass  into  this  condition,  such  as  a  privation  of  hair,  and  a  smooth- 
ness of  the  cheek  instead  of  hoariness  and  beards.  For  they  lay  aside 
every  thing  which  adheres  to  them  from  generation.  But  being  situated 
there  with  Saturn,  and  living  the  life  which  is  there,  he  says  that  there 
are  abundance  of  fruits  from  trees,  and  many  other  [vegetable]  sub- 
stances, which  the  earth  spontaneously  produces.  Being  likewise  naked, 
and  without  coverlets,  they  are  for  the  most  part  fed  in  the  open  air ;  for 
they  have  a  temperament  of  the  seasons  which  is  always  the  same.  But 
they  make  use  of  soft  beds,  grass  in  abundance  being  produced  for  them 
from  the  earth.  Souls  therefore  derive  these  and  such  like  goods  from 
this  mighty  God,  in  the  Saturnian  period.  For  they  are  thence  filled 
indeed  with  vivific  goods,  and  gather  intellectual  fruits  from  wholes ;  but 
do  not  procure  for  themselves  perfection  and  blessedness,  from  partial 
energies.  For  doxastic  nutriment  indeed  has  divisible  and  material 
conceptions ;  but  intellectual  nutriment  has  pure,  impartible,  and  native 
conceptions,  which  the  spontaneous  obscurely  signifies. 

The  production  from  the  earth  also  signifies  the  prolific  intellect  of  the 
Gods,  which  imparts  to  souls  by  illumination  perfection  and  self- 
sufficiency.  For  on  account  of  the  exuberant  abundance  of  good,  they 
are  able  to  impart  an  influx  of  it,  according  to  the  measure  of  felicity 
adapted  to  them.  Hence,  they  are  neither  covered  with  garments,  as 
when  they  proceeded  into  generation,  nor  have  they  superabundant 
additions  of  life,  but  they  are  purified  themselves  by  themselves  from  all 
composition  and  variety,  and  extending  their  intellect  to  total  good,  they 
participate  of  it  from  the  intellectual  father,  being  guarded  by  the 
intellectual  Gods,  and  receiving  from  them  the  measures  of  a  happy  life. 
They  likewise  pass  through  the  whole  of  their  existence  with  facility,  lead 
a  sleepless  and  pure  life,  being  established  in  the  generative  powers  of 
intelligibles ;  and  being  filled  with  intellectual  goods,  and  nourished  with 
immaterial  and  divine  fonns,  they  are  said  to  live  a  life  under  Saturn, 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  VIII.  OF. PLATO. 


329 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


Because,  therefore,  this  God  is  the  leader  of  all  intellectual  life,  and 
every  intellect  as  well  that  which  is  im participate,  as  that  which  is 
participate  proceeds  from  this  cause,  hence  it  lielongs  to  this  mightj 
God  to  feed  in  a  distributed  manner,  and  to  nourish  souls.  For  because 
indeed  he  is  intelligible  in  intellectuals,  he  nourishes  souls,  and  souls  are 
called  the  nurselings  of  Saturn.  But  because  he  does  not  fill  them  with 
first,  and  unical  intelligibles,  but  with  those  that  are  multiplied  by  his 
own  cause  of  separation,  he  is  said  to  feed  them  distributedly,  and  as  it 
were  in  a  divided  manner.  And  do  you  not  see  how  through  these 
things,  this  God  appears  to  be  coordinate  to  the  first  triad  of  the 
intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods  ?  For  as  Socrates,  in  the  Phaedrus,  say*, 
that  souls  are  nourished  in  the  supercelestial  place,  and  in  the  intelligible 
meadow,  so  the  Elean  guest  asserts  that  the  souls  that  are  fed  under 
Saturn,  are  filled  with  intelligible  goods.  And  it  is  not  at  all  wonderful 
if  souls  are  perfected  by  both  these;  intellectually  indeed,  under  the 
kingdom  of  Saturn  ;  but  intelligibly  under  the  order  of  the  first  intel- 
lectual Gods.  For  this  God  himself  is  nourished  by  that  order.  And 
on  this  account  he  is  allotted  a  leading  and  primary  transcendency  in 
intellectuals,  because  they  are  filled  •  from  that  order  (^through  him]  with 
occult  and  unapparent  powers.  And  he  is  that  among  the  intellectual 
fathers,  which  the  order  of  the  first  intellectual  Gods  is  in  the  intelligible 
and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  orders.  Hence  the  intelligible  every 
where  becomes  nutriment  to  ascending  souls,  but  the  connexion  with  it 
is  effected  through  the  second  and  third  Gods. 

As  therefore,  the  demiurgic  order  elevates  souls  to  the  Saturnian  place 
of  survey,  thus  also  the  Saturnian  order  elevates  them  to  the  subcelestial ' 

•  for  wtftuvqamin  in  this  place,  it  is  ueccssirj  to  toad  vwwpman. 

rroc.  Vol.  I.  2  T 


Digitized  by  Google 


330 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


arch.  For  having  made  many  and  blessed  discursive  energies  in  the- 
kingdom  of  Saturn,  they  are  again  extended  from  hence  to  the  per- 
fective, and  from  thence  to  the  celestial  triad,  from  which  contemplating 
the  supercelestial  place,  they  arc  now  ineffably  conjoined  with  the 
supreme  goods  of  intelligibles.  And  after  this  manner  the  sectfnd  orders 
always  connect  souls  with  the  orders  prior  to  them.  Hence  also,  the 
theurgic  art  imitating  the  unapparent  periods  of  souls,  arranges  initiations 
in  the  mysteries  of  the  second  Gods,  prior  to  the  more  sublime  mysteries. 
And  through  these,  it  causes  us  to  pass  to  the  intelligible  place  of  survey. 
These  things,  therefore,  Plato  indicates  concerning  the  Saturn ian  life,  and 
the  polity  of  souls  under  Saturn,  not  in  the  Polkicus  only,  but  also  in 
the  discourses  of  the  Athenian  guest.  For  in  the  fourth  book  of  the 
Laws  he  celebrates  the  life  under  Saturn,  obscurely  signifying  the 
undented  nature,  the  facility,  plenitude,  and  self-sufficiency  of  that 
energy,  through  fabulous  fictions. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


If,  however,  it  be  requisite  from  these  things,  and  from  all  the  mystic 
discipline  concerning  this  God,  to  consider  and  discuss  the  orders  which 
he  constitutes  in  wholes,  in  the  first  place,  we  must  direct  our  attention 
to  the  three  kings  mentioned  in  the  Goigias,  who  distributing  the 
kingdom  of  Saturn  were  produced  by  him,  as  being  allotted  in  a  divided 
manner  a  uniform  and  impartible*  dominion,  and  over  whom  he  places 
.the  divine  law,  which  is  the  cause  of  distribution  according  to  intellect, 
both  to  the  Gods  themselves,  and  to  all  the  natures  posterior  to  the 
Gods.    In  the  second  place,  we  must  consider  th«  rulers  and  kings 


Digitized  by  Google 


chap.  ix. 


OF  PLATO. 


331 


mentioned  in  the  Laws,  who  are  said  to  preside  over  the  different 
allotments  of  souls,  and  who  are  not  men,  but  daemons  of  a  more  divine 
and  excellent  genus,  who  distribute  to  souls  the  measures  of  good,  cut 
off  their  generation-producing  lives,  restrain  their  disorderly  lation,  retain 
them  in  the  intelligible,  and  comprehend  them  in  the  kingdom  of  Saturn. 
In  the  third  place,  therefore,  we  must  direct  our  attention  to  the  daemon 
Gods,  who  preside  over  the  parts  of  the  world,  and  the  herds  [of  souls] 
that  are  in  it,  as  the  Elean  guest  says  in  the  Pnjiticus,  and  who  at  oue 
time  come  into  contact  with  the  objects  of  their  government,  and 
distribute  to  them  intellectual,  and  all  unapparent  goods,  but  at  another 
time  withdraw  themselves  from  the  physical  life  of  the  world,  recur  to 
their  own  place  of  survey,  and  imitate  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the 
demiurgus  and  father  of  the  universe. 

But  after  these  things,  wc  must  survey  the  twofold  circulations  of  the 
mundane  Gods,  viz.  the  Saturnian  and  the  Jovian ;  for  these  Gods 
always  have  each  of  these,  as  the  fable  says  in  the  Politicus.  For  it  is 
evident  that  the  mutation  of  the  stars  and  the  sun  takes  place  in  each  of 
the  revolutions.  This  period,  therefore,  being  twofold,  it  is  obvious  to 
every  one  that  the  periods  are  full  of  Saturnian  goods,  and  participate  of 
the  Saturnian  series.  And  not  only  the  mundane  Gods,  but  likewise  ail 
the  more  excellent  genera  that  follow  the  Gods,  energize  according  to 
both  these  energies,  and  revolve  according  to  the  twofold  circulations, 
through  which  souls  also  sometimes  participate  of  an  intellectual  life, 
and  proceed  in  this  path,  exchanging  for  sense  intellect  as  the  leader  of 
their  motion  and  circulation.  Saturn,  therefore,  extends  his  kingdom 
superually  from  the  first  Gods,  as  far  as  to  partial  souls,  perfects  all 
things,  and  fills  them  with  intellectual  goods,  distributing  to  different 
natures  different  measures  of  good.  For  on  account  of  this,  law  also 
subsists  with  him,  as  Socrates  says  in  the  Gorgias :  "  This  law  therefore 
was  in  the  time  of  Saturn,  and  always  was,  and  now  is,  among  the 
Gods."  For  law  is  the  distribution  of  intellect ;  but  this  God  is  the* 
first,  most  pure,  and  incorruptible  intellect. 

If,  however,  this  God  is  the  primary  leader  of  all  division,  and  is  the 
origin  of  intellectual  separation,  it  is  necessary  on  this  account,  that  law 


S3* 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


should  be  with  him,  which  distinguishes  the  orders  of  beings,  divides 
the  intellectual  genera,  and  separates  all  forms  according  to  a  well- 
ordered  progression ;  but  imparts  to  all  things  by  illumination  the 
measure  of  hyparxis,  connecting  the  order  which  is  in  them,  preserving 
the  boundaries  of  divine  distribution  immutable,  and  possessing  the  same 
dignity  in  the  kingdom  of  Saturn,  and  in  intellectuals,  as  Adrastia  in  the- 
supercelestial  place,  and  in  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time,, 
intellectual  orders.  For  from  each  of  them  an  immutable  guard,  and  the 
progression  of  order  to  all  things  are  generated.  But  they  differ  from 
each  other,  because  law  indeed  divides  the  one  into  multitude,  defines 
the  measures  of  intellectual  subsistence,  and  distributes  to  every  thing  an 
appropriate  good,  producing  the  different  measures  of  beings  from  the 
one  [Saturnian]  intellect.  But  Adrastia  abiding  in  the  intelligible,, 
guards  all  things  uniformly,  and  preserves  total  order  in  a  firm  unde> 
viating  manner,  exempt  from  all  division.  Law,  therefore,  is  a  certain' 
G  od  which  divides  divine  forms,  and  definitely  imparts  to  every  thing 
that  which  is  adapted  to  it  according  to  the  plenitude  proceeding  from 
one  uniform  cause ;  and  it  is  also  co-existent  with  the  Saturnian  order, 
in  which  the  separations  of  beings,  tmd  the  all-perfect  progression  of 
forms  first  subsist.  Hence  the  deinurrgus  likewise  looking  to  this 
conducts  all  things  according  to  law,  and  constitutes  mundane  provi- 
dence an  image  of  the  union  of  the  father ;  but  fate  and  the  fatal  laws, 
an  image  of  the  division  according  to  law.  Souls,  therefore,  live 
according  to  law ;  in  the  Jovian  period  indeed  being  governed  con- 
formably to  the  laws  of  Fate;  but  in  the  Saturnian  period  living 
according  to  divine  law  they  are  subservient  to  the  multitude  [of  divine 
forms]  and  are  extended  to  the  one  cause  of  all ;  and  ascending  to  the 
intelligible  place  of  survey,  they  are  subjected  to  the  sacred  law  of 
Adrastia.  For  this  law  extends  from  on  high  as  far  as  to  the  last  of 
things,  and  defines  to  souls  the  measures  of  whole  periods,  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Pbsedrus.  Who  therefore  this  greatest  God  is,  and  what  the 
goods  are  of  which  he  is  the  cause  to  souls,  and  prior  to  these,  to  Gods 
and  daemons,  the  loaders  of  souls,  let  it,  from  these  things  be  manifest. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  X.  OP  PLATO.  333 


CHAPTER  X. 


Since  Itowever,  theologists  assert  that  an  exemption  from  old  age 
pertains  to  this  order,  as  the  Barbarians  say,  and  Orpheus  the  theologist 
of  the  Greeks,  (for  he  mystically  says  that  the  hairs  of  the  face  of  Saturn 
are  always  black,  and  never  become  hoary)  I  admire  the  divinely-inspired 
intellect  of  Plato  which  unfolds  the  same  things  concerning  this  God  to 
Uiose  who  proceed  in  his  steps.  For  be  says  that  souls  in  the  Saturn- 
ian  period  abandon  old  age,  but  return  to  youth,  and  remove  from  them- 
selves  hoarincss,  but  have  black  hair.  For  he  says  that  the  white  hairs 
of  the  more  elderly  become  black ;  but  the  cheeks  of  those  that  have 
beards  being  rendered  smooth,  they  are  restored  to  the  past  season  [of 
youth.]  These  things  indeed  are  averted  by  the  Elean  guest;  similar  to. 
which  are  the  assertions  of  Orpheus  concerning  this  God. 

—  under  Saturniao  Jove 

Men  liv'd  immortal ;  moist  and  fragrant  hair 
From  the  pure  chin  then  sprouted,  nor  wasmiVd 
With  the  white  flower  that  marks  hiurni  old  age ; 
But  iu  ita  stead,  a  florid  down  appear'd. 

In  these  verses  he  delivers  the  similitude  of  Saturnian  souls  to  this 
God.  For  he  says  that  they  remove  from  the  view  the  old  age  which 
they  had  acquired  from  generation  and  abandon  material  imbecility;  and 
that  they  exert  the  juvenile  and  vigorous  life  of  intellect.  For  it  is  no 
otherwise  lawful  for  them  to  be  assimilated  to  the  God  who  is  exempt 
from  old  age,  than  through  intellectual  puberty,  and  undefiled  power. 
But  the  cause  of  this  is,  that  king  Saturn  himself  is  the  source  of  the 
unallured  Gods,  and  the  inflexible  triad.  Hence  be  is,  as  Socrates 
says,  a  pure  intellect.    For  be  is  at  the  same  time  the  intellect  of  the  un^ 


334  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

defiled  order,  ranking  as  a  summit,  and  riding  as  in  a  vehicle  in  the  flou- 
rishing and  vigorous  '  Gods  that  govern  wholes.  The  souk  also  which  are 
sent  to  him,  wonderfully  advance,  in  conjunction  with  intellectual  energy, 
in  vigour,  and  in  a  power  undeviating,  and  free  from  any  tendency  to 
matter.  Partial  souls  therefore,  when  they  change  their  periods,  at  one 
-  time  proceed  to  a  more  juvenile,  and  at  another,  to  a  more  aged  condi- 
tion. But  whole  souls  always  live  according  to  both  these  periods,  and 
are  conversant  with  Saturn  according  to  the  unapparent  period,  but  go- 
vern the  universe  in  conjunction  with  Jupiter,  according  to  visible  pro- 
vidence, at  once  receiving  an  increase  according  to  both  these  periods, 
and  becoming  at  one  and  the  same  time  both  older  and  younger.  And 
this  is  what  Parmenides  indicates  when  he  says,  that  the  one  proceeding 
according  to  time  becomes  at  once  younger  and  older.  These  things 
Jtrowever,  will  hereafter  be  more  manifest. 


CHAPTER  XL 


Having  therefore  brought  to  an  end  the  information  concerning  the 
king  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  it  evidently  follows  that  we  should  in  the 
next  place  celebrate  the  queen  Rhea.  For  both  Plato  and  Orpheus  assert 
that  she  is  the  mother  of  the  demiurgus  of  wholes,  but  a  divinity  posterior 
to  Saturn.  Thus  therefore,  we  must  speak  concerning  her.  The  stable 
and  united  cause  of  all  intellectuals,  and  the  principal  and  original 
monad,  abiding  in  herself,  unfolding  into  light  all  intellectual  multitude, 
and  again  convolving  it  into  herself,  and  embosoming  her  progeny,  and 
the  causes  of  wholes  that  emerge  from  her,  analysing  as  it  were  after 

1  For  axueuoi,  it  is  neccsiary  to  read  «xp«i»t{. 


.  Digitized  by  Google 


CJIAP.  XI.  • 


OF  PLATO. 


335 


division  the  natures  that  are  divided,  and  being  paternally  allotted  the 
highest  kingdom  in  intellectuals, — this  being  the  case,  the  vivific  Rhea 
proceeds  as  the  second  from  her  proper  principle,  being  allotted  a  ma- 
ternal order  in  the  whole  paternal  orders,  and  producing  the  demiurgus 
of  wholes,  prior  to  other  Cods,  and  the  immutable  guard  of  the  Gods.  For 
this  Goddess  is  the  middle  centre  of  the  paternal  intellectual  triad,  and  the 
receiving  bosom  of  the  generative  power  which  is  in  Saturn,  calling  forth 
indeed,  to  the  generation  of  wholes,  the  causes  which  abide  in  him,  but 
unfolding  definitely  all  the  genera  of  the  Gods.  And  being  filled  indeed 
from  the  father  prior  to  her  with  intelligible  and  prolific  power,  but  filling 
the  demiurgus  and  father  subsisting  from  her,  with  vivific  abundance. 
Whence  also  the  demiurgus  is  the  cause  of  life  to  all  things,  as  containing 
in  himself  the  plenitude  of  intellectual  life,  and  extending  to  all  things 
the  prolific  cause  of  his  mother.  For  as  the  middle  Goddess  multiplies 
the  uniform  powers  of  Saturn,  and  produces  and  causes  them  to  preside 
over  secondary  natures,  so  the  third  father,  at  one  and  the  same  time 
unfolds,  divides,  and  produces  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  the  all* 
perfect  abundance  ot  the  Saturnian  monad,  and  the  dyadic  generation 
of  the  mother  Rhea,  so  as  not  to  leave  the  most  material  and  disorderly 
part  of  the  universe  destitute  of  the  power  of  Saturn. 

This  Goddess  therefore,,  being  the  middle  of  the  two  fathers,  one  of 
which  collects,  but  the  other  divides  intellectual  multitude,  and  the  one 
through  transcendency  desiring  to  abide  and  to  be  established  in  himself, 
but  the  other  hastening  to  produce,  generate  and  fabricate  all  things,  she 
educes  indeed  into  herself,  the  demiurgic  causes  of  wholes,  but  imparts 
her  own  proper  power  to  secondary  natures,  in  unen vying  abundance. 
Hence  also  Plato  assimilates  her  prolific  exuberance  to  streams,  as  So- 
crates says  in  the  Cratylus,  evinces  that  this  Goddess  is  a  certain  flux, 
and  in  what  he  asserts  of  her  obscurely  shows  nothing  else  than  her  fontal 
nature,  and  a  power  unically  comprehensive  of  the  divisible  rivers  of 
life.  For  the  first-effi-ctive  flux  is  fontal  ;  which  also  Socrates  indicating 
in  this  Goddess,  shortly  after  clearly  says  that  the  name  of  Tethys  is  the 
name  of  a  fountain.  Why  therefore,  is  it  any  longer  necessary  to  doubt 
about  these  things,  and  to  say  where  does  Plato  make  mention  of  fontal 


336  °N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

Gods?  For  he  himself  denominates  the  causes  of  the  subsistence  of  all 
the  Gods,  fontal  fluxions.  And  besides  this,  if  he  admits  that  the  mun- 
dane soul  is  the  fountain  and  principle  of  life,  because  it  proceeds  both 
from  an  impartible  and  partible  vivification,  how  is  it  possible  that  he 
should  not  in  a  much  greater  degree  and  more  truly  call  the  Goddess 
who  comprehends  in  herself  all  life,  fontal? 

Concerning  names  however,  it  is  not,  1  think,  at  all  proper  to  contend, 
but  we  should  survey  the  orders  themselves  of  the  first  effective  Gods, 
and  see  how  Plato  following  theologists  copiously  unfolds  them  to  us, 
celebrating  after  the  Saturnian  monad  the  kingdom  of  Rhea,  constituting 
from  these  the  demiurgus  of  wholes,  and  all  the  multitude  of  Gods  which 
is  woven  together  with  him.  For  this  Goddess  binding  together  the  breadth 
of  intellectuals,  and  embosoming  total  life,  emits  all  the  intellectual 
powers  in  herself  of  the  rivers  of  life ;  and  by  the  summit  of  herself 
indeed,  is  conjoined  to  the  first  father,  and  together  with  him  generates 
wholes,  and  the  genera  of  Gods  that  abide  in  him  ;  but  by  her  extremity 
is  connascent  with  fabrication,  and  according  to  a  kindred  conjunction 
with  fabrication,  constitutes  all  the  orders  of  Gods  that  are  prior  to  the 
world,  and  that  are  in  the  world.  Hence  there  also  the  causes  of  the 
demiurgi  of  wholes  primarily  subsist,  and  the  more  partial  genera  of 
lite :  aud  the  union  and  total  deity  of  all  these,  is  at  once  exempt  from 
the  plenitudes  of  herself,  and  is  at  once  co-arranged  with  them. 

Thus  therefore,  she  is  both  uniform  and  multiform,  one  and  simple, 
though  being  self-perfect,  she  is  a  vivific  world,  proceeding  from  on  high 
as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  and  as  far  as  to  the  extremities  of  the 
universe,  giving  subsistence  to  the  vivific  powers  of  the  breadth  of  life. 
Hence  also  Plato  refers  the  vivific  cause  of  wholes  to  this  Goddess,  and 
through  the  last  gifts  of  this  divinity,  indicates  her  total  energy ;  which 
primarily  indeed  fills  the  whole  demiurgus  with  intellectual  and  pro- 
lific power,  but  secondarily  perfects  all  the  genera  of  the  Gods  with  the 
intellectual  fruits  of  herself.  According  to  a  third  order  also,  her  total 
energy  nourishes  the  souls  that  are  the  attendants  of  the  Gods,  with  the 
rivers  of  divine  perfection.  And  in  the  last  orders,  it  imparts  to  mortal 
animals  the  gift  of  nature.    This  therefore  is,  I  think,  more  known  than 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XL  OF  PLATO.  337 

every  thing  to  those  who  admit  that  things  divine  are  beyond  the  works 
of  nature. 

That  however,  which  it  is  more  fit  the  lovers  of  the  contemplation  of 
truth  should  consider,  I  say,  is  this,  that  Plato  divides  Ceres  from  '  the 
whole  vivific  deity,  and  coarranges  her,  at  one  time  with  Proserpine,  at 
another  with  Juno,  and  at  another  with  the  progeny  of  Jupiter,  as  we 
may  learn  in  the  Cratylus.  In  which  dialogue  indeed,  he  co-arranges 
Hhea  with  Saturn,  but  connects  a  certain  common  investigation  and 
theory  about  Ceres,  Jupiter,  and  Juno.  In  the  Laws  likewise  cele- 
brating the  legislative  Goddesses,  he  refers  the  whole  of  a  legitimate  life 
to  the  union  of  Ceres  arid  Proserpine;  since  according  to  Orpheus  this 
middle  Goddess  being  conjoined  with  Saturn  by  her  summit,  is  called 
Rhea ;  but  producing  Jupiter,  and  together  with  Jupiter  unfolding  the 
whole  and  partial  orders  of  the  Gods,  she  is  called  Ceres.  And  all  the 
order  of  middle  life  is  comprehensive  of  the  other  Titanidse,  and  likewise 
of  Ceres.  For  it  preestablished  this  monad  as  a  middle  collective  of  all 
the  orders  in  it,  both  those  that  are  occult,  and  those  that  are  divided 
about  the  generative  powers  of  the  Goddess.  Each  of  these  powers, 
however,  are  triple.  And  this  monad  indeed  conjoins  the  superior  triad 
to  Saturn,  but  weaves  the  inferior,  together  with  the  demiurgic  order. 
It  also  evinces  that  the  Cerealian  monad  being  the  middle,  is  coarranged 
with,  and  is  at  the  same  time  exempt  from  the  demiurgus  of  wholes.  For 
in  conjunction  with  the  whole  order  it  constitutes,  and  together  with 
Jupiter  generates  Proserpine.  And  thus  we  have  celebrated  the  primo- 
genial  Goddess  who  is  the  middle  of  the  fathers. 

'  «ic  ii  omitted  in  the  original 


Froc. 


Vol.  I. 


2  U 


Digitized  by  Google 


338 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V 


CHAFFER  XII. 


Now  however,  after  this  Goddess,  the  detniurgus  of  wholes  is  in  the 
third  place  to  be  celebrated,  according  to  the  order  which  he  is  allotted 
in  the  intellectual  Gods,  peculiarly  unfolding  for  this  purpose  all  the  truth 
concerning  him.   And  in  the  first  place,  we  must  remember  that  it  is 
necessary  the  peculiarity  of  this  third  father  should  be  demiurgic;  and  thus 
in  the  next  place,  following  Plato,  we  must  direct  our  attention  to  other 
particulars  [respecting  this  God].    The  first  of  the  intellectual  Gods 
therefore,  who  is  parturient  with  multitude,  who  is  the  leader  aud  source 
of  all  separation,  and  who  separates  himself  from  the  uniform  and  first 
Gods,  but  generates  the  divided  principles  of  wholes, — this  God  again 
converts  his  progeny  to  himself,  and  weaves  together  these  parts  with  his 
own  sameness,  and  exhibits  himself  as  one  intelligible  world  in  intellectu- 
als, bringing  forth  in  himself,  and  retaining  with  himself  his  own  offspring. 
But  the  second  of  the  intellectual  deities,  is  the  vivific  Goddess,  who 
brings  forth  indeed  in  conjunction  with  the  first  intellectual  God,  occult 
multitude,  (for  she  is  conjoined  to  him  according  to  supreme  transcen- 
dency) but  cannot  endure  to  remain  in  this  mode  of  generating,  and  in 
collecting  the  separation  of  wholes  into  unseparated  union.    Hence  she 
separates  the  third  intellect  from  the  [first]  father;  but  produces  the 
multitude  of  the  Gods,  and  of  intellectual  reasons,  and  fills  thedemiurgus 
with  generative  power.    If,  therefore,  the  first  intellectual  God  is  partu- 
rient with  the  generation  of  wholes ;  but  the  prolific  vivification  of  the 
intellectual  orders  causes  this  generation  to  shine  forth ; — it  is  evident 
tliat  the  intellect  of  the  intellectual  fathers,  according  to  his  own  order, 
produces  and  adorns  all  things,  and  calls  forth  indeed,  the  occult  nature 
of  his  father,  into  separation  and  progression,  but  prepares  total  vivifica- 
tion to  send  forth  the  rivers  of  itself,  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things.  For  it  is 
every  where  the  peculiarity  of  intellect  to  divide  and  unfold  multitude, 
the  plenitudes  of  life,  and  the  unions  of  intelligibles.  Intelligible 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XII. 


OP  PLATO. 


S3[) 


intellect  however  contains  multitude  uniformly,  or  according  to  the  form 
of  one ;  for  multitude  preexists  in  the  intelligible  according  to  cause. 
But  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time,  intellectual  intellect,  has 
indeed  secondary  measures  of  union,  but  is  exempt  from  all  perfect 
separation,  abiding  in  the  first  principles  of  wholes.    And  intellectual 
intellect  is  the  source  of  all  division,  and  of  the  subsistence  of  partial 
natures ;  since  it  preestablishes  in  itself  all  the  multitude  of  forms,  and 
this  not  tetradically  only,  as  intelligible  intellect,  but  it  possesses  one 
all-perfect  intellectual  cause  of  all  forms.    It  is  necessary  therefore  that 
the  whole  demiurgic  principles  should  pertain  to  this  intellect,  that  all 
the  demiurgic  Gods  should  proceed  from  this  one  third  father,  and  that 
this  should  be  the  demiurgus  of  wholes.    For  as  the  first  of  paradigms 
co-subsists  in  intelligible  intellect,  and  in  the  third  triad  and  the  first 
father,  so  likewise  we  must  place  the  first  demiurgic  monad  in  intel- 
lectual intellect,  and  the  third  father  of  the  intellectual  Gods.    For  on 
this  account  also  the  demiurgic  is  conjoined  with  the  paradigmatic  cause, 
according  to  the  analogy  which  each  is  allotted  among  ths  fathers;  one 
indeed  in  intelligibles,  but  the  other  in  intellectuals.    For  one  is  the 
boundary  of  the  intelligible,  but  the  other  of  the  intellectual  order.  But 
this  is  evident  from  what  has  been  before  said. 

Farther  still,  fabrication  being  fourfold,  and  one  indeed  adorning 
wholes  totally,  another  adorning  wholes  but  partially,  another  adorning 
parts,  but  totally,  and  another  weaving  parts  together  with  wholes, 
partially, — this  being  the  case,  it  is  evident  that  the  cause  of  wholes 
which  is  the  cause  of  them  uniformly  and  indivisibly,  is  the  most  ancient 
of  all  the  causes.  It  is  necessary  however,  that  this  cause  should  either 
be  prior  to,  or  in,  or  posterior  to  the  intellectual  Gods.  Where  therefore 
shell  we  place  it  ?  For  all  the  parts  which  are  constituted  by  intellectuals 
are  more  partial  than  the  one  and  total  fabrication.  For  the  division  of 
wholes  into  three,  and  the  leaders  of  divisible  production,  present  them- 
selves to  the  view  in  these  orders.  The  natures  therefore,  that  are  prior 
to  intellectuals,  are  defined  according  to  other  peculiarities  of  the  Gods, 
as  was  before  shown,  and  in  short,  they  subsist  according  to  union,  and 
are  expanded  above  the  separation  of  intellectual  forms. 


Digitized  by  Google 


340 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

It  remains  therefore  that  the  one  demiurgus  of  wholes  must  be  arranged 
in  intellectuals.    But  if  indeed,  he  is  the  first  father,  he  will  be  intelligible, 
will  contain  his  progeny  in  himself,  and  will  be  the  collector  of  separation. 
How  therefore,  does  he  divide  the  worlds?  How  does  he  generate  the 
multitudes  of  mundane  natures?  How  does  he  speak  to  all  the  junior 
demiurgi  at  once  ?  For  the  first  father  is  uncoordinated  with  the  whole 
number  of  mundane  natures,  and  also  converts  his  first  progeny  to 
himself,  flying  as  it  were  from  multitude  to  union,  and  hastily  with- 
drawing himself  from  all-various  separation  into  intelligible  transcen- 
dency.   But  if  the  one  demiurgus  of  wholes  is  the  vivific  order,  all  things 
indeed,  will  be  full  of  life,  on  account  of  the  whole  demiurgus.    And  the 
cause  of  souls,  according  to  a  probable  reason  will  here  become  apparent 
subsisting  prior  to  multitude.    But  how  will  he  convert  all  things  to 
himself?  How  is  he  called  demiurgus  and  father?  For  the  vivific  deity, 
herself  by  herself,  has  a  maternal  dignity  among  the  Gods,  and  is  the 
supplier  of  progression  to  all  things.    But  to  produce  forms,  and  to 
convert,  are  the  illustrious  and  peculiar  good  of  intellect.  Neither 
therefore,  is  the  demiurgus  of  wholes  in  the  supermundane  order.  For 
all  the  natures  there  arc  partial,  and  either  partially  preside  over  wholes, 
or  comprehend  the  productions  of  parts  totally.    Nor  is  he  in  intellU 
gibles.    For  all  the  Gods  there  are  fathers ;  and  no  one  there  is  called  * 
demiurgus  and  father.    But  the  divine  orders  antecedently  comprehend 
all  things  in  a  manner  perfectly  occult  and  uuical.    Not  is  he  in  the 
intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  order.     For  to  collect, 
connect,  and  perfect  multitudes,  is  uot  the  province  of  the  demiurgic 
peculiarity.    For  this  is  the  source  of  separation,  and  the  production  of 
forms,  glittering  with  intellectual  sections.    But  the  iutclligible  and  at 
the  same  time  intellectual  Gods,  extend  intellectual  multitudes  to  the 

1  For  itiynrai,  H  appears  to  me  that  we  should  read  i*u  $if^rai. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIV. 


OF  PLATO. 


.'HI 


union  of  intelligibles.  Nor  again,  is  it  possible  to  admit  that  the  demi- 
urgic cause  is  in  the  first  or  second  order  of  intellectuals.  For  the 
summit  of  intellectuals  is  imparticipable  by  mundane  natures,  and  is 
rather  proposed  to  them  in  tbe  order  of  the  desirable;  but  is  not 
productive  of  them.  Hence,  all  the  Gods  in  the  world  are  elevated  to 
the  Saturnian  place  of  survey ;  but  proceed  from  another  secondary 
principle,  and  through  it  are  converted  and  conjoined  to  the  exempt 
kingdom.  And  the  middle  centre  being  vivific,  is  not  defined  according 
to  the  paternal  characteristic.  For  the  generative  very  much  differs  from 
the  paternal,  arid  the  vivific  from  the  demiurgic  genus ;  so  far,  I  think, 
as  the  principles  of  the  whole  orders,  I  mean  bound  and  infinity,  differ 
from  each  other.  For  the  demiurgic  and  paternal  order  is  referred  to 
bound ;  but  all  vivific  and  generative  power,  to  infinity. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

I  wonder  therefore,  at  those  interpreters  of  Plato,  who  do  not  make 
one  fabrication  but  many,  who  assert  that  there  are  three  demiurgi  of 
wholes,  and  pass  at  one  time  to  the  second,  and  at  another  to  the  third 
dcraiurgus ;  and  who  divide  what  is  said  in  the  Timaeus,  and  think  fit  to 
refer  some  of  the  assertions  to  one,  but  others  to  another  cause.  For  that 
there  is  a  demiurgic  triad,  and  another  multitude  of  Gods  characterized 
according  to  the  producing  cause,  I  also  admit,  and  think  it  will  be 
granted  by  Plato.  It  is  necessary  however  in  each  order  prior  to  the 
triad,  and  prior  to  every  multitude,  that  there  should  be  a  preexistent 
monad.  For  all  the  orders  of  the  Gods  originate  from  a  monad; 
because  each  of  the  whole  orders  is  assimilated  to  the  whole  progression 
of  the  Gods.  As  therefore  the  subsistence  of  the  Gods  has  the  cause  of 
its  generation  from  the  imparticipable  one,  thus  also  it  is  necessary  that 
the  perfect  orders  in  the  Gods,  should  have  a  preexistent  monad,  and  a 
first-eflective  principle.    According  to  the  same  reasoning,  all  the  vivific 


342 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


progressions  are  suspended  from  one  vivification,  and  the  demiurgic 
orders  are  extended  to  one  fabrication.  And  it  is  not  proper  that  there 
should  be  multitude  without  the  monad.  For  there  will  neither  be 
co*arrangement,  nor  a  division  of  multitude  according  to  intellect,  unless 
the  one  and  whole  preexist.  For  on  this  account  prior  to  all  the  divine 
progressions,  the  order  of  wholeness  subsists,  in  order  that  it  may  compre- 
hend parts,  and  may  define  them  in,  and  about  itself. 

How  therefore  neglecting  whole  in  fabrication,  can  we  survey  demiurgi 
divided  according  to  parts?  Though  Plato  himself  thinks  with  respect  to 
the  paradigm  of  the  universe,  that  the  world  should  not  be  assimilated  to 
any  thing  which  naturally  subsists  in  the  form  of  a  part,  but  to  all  perfect 
animal ;  and  on  this  account  he  demonstrates  that  the  world  is  only- 
begotten,  because  its  paradigm  is  one.  For  if  it  were  not  one,  but  many 
paradigms,  again  it  would  be  necessary  that  there  should  be  another 
animal  about  it,  of  which  it  would  be  a  part,  and  it  would  be  more  right 
to  assert  that  the  world  is  no  longer  similar  to  the  many  paradigms,  but 
to  that  which  comprehends  them.  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  one 
paradigm  should  precede  the  many,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  one  good 
subsists  prior  to  participated  goods,  and  that  the  whole  world  should  be 
the  image  of  one  paradigm  prior  to  many.  For  whether  it  is  alone  the 
image  of  many  paradigms,  whence  will  the  world  be  one  and  a  whole  ? 
And  how  is  it  possible  it  should  not  be  more  dishonourable  than  its  parts? 
For  these  indeed,  are  assimilated  to  intelligibles,  but  the  whole  world  is 
similar  to  no  one  of  real  beings.  Or  whether  all  the  world  subsists  from 
a  certain  intelligible  paradigm,  if  indeed  there  are  many  paradigms  of  one 
world,  these  also  will  be  similar  to  each  other,  if  they  are  the  causes  of 
the  same  image.  It  is  necessary  therefore,  that  sameness  should  be 
communicated  to  these  from  one  form ;  or  again,  the  world  will  be  more 
venerable  than  its  paradigms  according  to  union.  But  if  the  paradigm  is 
one,  after  the  same  manner  also  the  demiurgic  cause  is  one.  For  as 
there  is  one  image  from  one  paradigm,  thus  also  the  progeny  being  one, 
derives  its  subsistence  from  one  demiurgus  and  father.  For  it  is 
necessary  that  the  paradigmatic  cause  should  either  be  the  same  with  the 
demiurgus,  and  should  be  established  in  him,  or  that  it  should  be  prior  to 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIV. 


or  PLATO. 


the  demiurgus,  as  we  say  it  is,  or  that  it  should  be  posterior  to  the 
demiurgus,  as  some  think  proper  to  assert. 

If  however,  the  paradigm  and  the  demiurgus  are  the  same,  the  demiur- 
gus will  be  one  according  to  Plato.  For  the  paradigm  is  only-begotten,  as 
he  demonstrates.  But  if  the  demiurgus  exists  prior  to  the  paradigm, 
which  it  is  not  lawful  to  assert,  but  the  paradigm  is  one,  much  more  will 
the  demiurgus  be  one.  For  the  causes  which  are  more  elevated  are 
allotted  a  more  uniform  hypostasis ;  since  also  the  first  cause  of  wholes  is 
one.  And  if  the  paradigmatic  cause  has  indeed  the  first  order  in  beings, 
but  the  demiurgic  cause  the  second  order,  and  this  universe  the  last 
order,  being  the  resemblance  of  the  former,  and  the  progeny  of  the  latter, 
how  is  it  possible  since  the  extremes  are  monadic,  the  middle  multitude 
should  be  without  the  monad  ?  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  paradigm 
being  intelligible,  should  impart  by  illumination  a  greater  degree  of 
union  to  the  universe  than  the  demiurgic  cause.  And  as  the  paradigm 
being  only-begotten,  comprehends  in  itself  the  first  paradigms,  after  the 
same  manner  it  is  necessary  that  the  demiurgic  monad  should  be  compre- 
hensive of  many  demiurgi.  For  if  the  world  derives  its  only-begotten 
subsistence  from  the  paradigm,  but  through  the  demiurgus,  the  demi- 
urgus also  is  indeed  entirely  one. 

Farther  still,  I  think  that  those  who  are  the  patrons  of  this  opinion 
should  direct  their  attention  to  that  assertion  of  Socrates,  that  it  is  every 
where  fit  the  many  should  be  comprehended  in  the  one.  For  on  account 
of  tliis  we  admit  the  hypothesis  of  forms  [or  ideas],  and  prior  to  other 
things  we  preestablish  intellectual  monads.  How  therefore  are  intellec- 
tual forms  extended  to  one  principle,  and  how  do  each  of  them  proceed 
from  one  demiurgic  cause,  but  the  whole  demiurgic  form  is  multiplied, 
and  divided  prior  to  the  indivisible  monad  ?  For  it  is  necessary  that  as 
all  equals,  whether  they  are  intellectual,  or  psychical,  or  sensible,  should 
be  suspended  from  one  first  equality,  all  beautiful  things,  from  beauty 
itself,  and  the  many  every  where,  from  primary  beings,  thus  also  it  is 
necessary  that  the  multitude  of  demiurgi  should  be  suspended  from  one 
fabrication,  and  should  subsist  about  one  demiurgic  monad.  For  how 
can  it  be  lawful  to  leave  the  one  in  forms  rather  than  in  the  Gods  ?  For 


344  OX  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

forms  indeed,  liavc  their  hypostasis  mingled  with  multitude ;  but  the 
Gods  are  defined  according  to  union  itself.  If  therefore  all  the  multi- 
tudes of  forms  arc  the  progeny  of  monads,  much  more  are  the  orders  of 
the  Gods  allotted  peculiarities  which  originate  from  monads,  and  which 
through  monads  are  inherent  in  multitudes.  But  if  this  be  the  case,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  whole  demiurgus  should  subsist  prior  to  the  multitude 
of  demiurgi,  and  that  the  three  demiurgi  should  distribute  the  one  cause 
of  the  generation  of  the  universe. 

Again  therefore  we  assert  from  the  beginning  that  it  is  necessary  the 
demiurgic  principle  should  either  be  one,  or  many,  or  one,  and  many. 
But  if  indeed,  it  is  one  alone,  and  the  multitude  in  the  world,  and  the 
different  order  which  it  contains  subsist  similarly  from  one  demiurgic 
principle,  how  are  mortal  and  immortal  natures  the  progeny  of  the  same 
cause  without  a  medium  ?  For  all  the  natures  that  proceed  from  the  one 
fabrication  are  immortal.  But  if  the  demiurgic  principle  is  many  only, 
whence  is  the  common  form  of  hyparxis  communicated  to  the  multitude, 
if  it  does  not  originate  from  one?  For  as  the  final  cause  is  one,  viz.  the 
good,  as  the  paradigmatic  cause  is  one,  viz.  animal  itself,  and  as  the  world 
is  a  generated  one,  thus  also  after  the  same  manner,  the  demiurgic  cause 
is  one.  But  if  there  are  one  and  many  demiurgic  principles,  whether 
does  the  one  principle  belong  to  partial  or  to  total  genera?  If  however,  it 
belongs  indeed  to  partial  genera,  how  is  it  extended  to  the  first  and 
intelligible  paradigm?  For  the  supermundane  genera  subsist  about  the 
intellectual  Gods,  and  according  to  intellectual  paradigms.  For  being 
partial,  they  entirely  assimilate  the  natures  posterior  to  themselves  to 
intellectuals,  co-ordinately  to  themselves.  Or  how  will  it  any  longer 
preserve  the  union  of  total  fabrication  which  produces  wholes  totally  ? 
For  a  thing  of  this  kind  pertains  to  no  partial  nature  ;  but  it  belongs  to  a 
partial  principle,  to  produce  parts  either  totally '  or  partially,  as  we  before 
observed.  But  if  the  demiurgic  principle  belongs  to  the  total  orders,  it 
is  necessary  that  it  should  either  be  intelligible  or  intellectual,  or  intelli- 
gible and  intellectual.    If  however,  it  is  of  an  intelligible  nature,  how  is 

'  c\ix»f  b  emitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  PLATO.  345 

it  divisive  of  wholes?  How  is  it  co-arranged  with  mundane  natures? 
How  is  it  said  to  fashion  the  universe?  How  from  the  genera  of  being 
does  it  produce  soul,  and  the  natures  posterior  to  soul  ?  For  [on  this 
hypothesis]  we  must  admit  that  all  these  are  in  intelligiblcs,  viz.  figure, 
the  genera  of  being,  and  these  divided,  the  similar  and  the  dissimilar, 
and  other  things  through  which  the  demiurgic  principle  constitutes  the 
whole  world.  But  if  the  demiurgic  principle  is  of  an  intelligible  and  at 
the  same  time  intellectual  nature,  how  does  he  produce  participated 
intellect?  How  does  he  separate  the  multiform  orders  of  souls?  How 
docs  he  divide  the  pai ts,  or  the  circles  that  are  in  them  ?  For  that  which 
is  generative  of  participated  intellect,  is  imparticipable  intellect.  And 
that  which  has  the  power  of  dividing  multitude  .will  not  [on  this 
hypothesis]  differ  from  that  which  connects  the  total  genera  of  the 
Gods.  And  in  short,  the  demiurgus  of  wholes,  is  called  byTiimeus 
intellect,  and  is  frequently  said  to  see,  to  discover,  and  to  reason,  but  he 
is  no  where  denominated  by  him  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time 
intellectual.  For  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  Gods, 
divide  all  things  triad ically.  But  the  demiurgus,  at  one  time  indeed, 
divides  the  world  into  five  parts,  and  at  another  divides  the  circles  of  the 
soul  into  hebdomads,  that  he  may  generate  either  the  celestial  spheres, 
or  the  seven  parts  of  the  soul.  We  must  say  therefore,  that  he  is  entirely 
secondary  to  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  Gods,  and 
he  is  the  cause  of  secondary  goods  to  the  world.  But  we  must  refer  to 
those  Gods  the  cause  of  united  forms  and  reasons.  That  the  demiurgic 
intellect  however,  is  an  intellectual  God,  is  I  think  through  these  things 
sufficiently  apparent  at  present. 


Proc. 


Vol.  I. 


2X 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Bett  Plato  appears  to  me  to  have  indicated  the  peculiarity  of  this- 
God  in  a  remarkable  manner,  by  calling  him  intellect,  and  asserting  that 
he  sees  intelligible*,  but  admitting  that  they  are  visible  to  him  according 
to  nature,  for  that  which  is  truly  intellect,  and  which  establishes  itself 
according  to  this  hypantis,  is  intellectual  intellect.  For  intelligible  intel- 
lect also,  is  indeed  simply  intelligible,  and  is  of  that  allotment ;  but  is 
said  to  be  intellect,  as  being  the  cause  of  every  intellectual  nature. 
And  the  intellect  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
Gods,  has  out  its  own  nature  un mingled  with  the  intelligible.  But  intel- 
lectual intellect  alone,  is  peculiarly  intellect,  being  allotted  the  intellec- 
tual itself  in  intellectuals;  just  as  the  most  principal  of  inlelligibles,  is* 
primarily,  the  first,  and  the  highest  intelligible,  which  wc  denominate  the 
one  being,  and  that  which  is  occultly  being.  This  therefore  is  that  which 
is  simply  intelligible.  But  that  which  is  simply  intellect  is  intellec- 
tual intellect.  For  the  intelligible  indeed  possesses  the  summit,  but 
intellect  the  end  of  wholes.  And  the  intermediate  natures  partly  pertain 
to  the  intelligible,  and  partly  to  intellect,  and  the  intellectual  nature. 
And  the  intelligibles  indeed,  that  are  primarily  so,  possess  intellect  ac- 
cording to  cause;  but  the  first  of  intellectuals  have  the  intelligible 
according  to  participation ;  and  the  natures  that  are  collective  of  these, 
conjoin  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  peculiarity  together.  Since, 
therefore,  Timaeus  also  calls  the  demiurgus  intellect  indefinitely,  and 
neither  denominates  him  life,  nor  intelligible,  in  consequence  of  his  pecu- 
liarity being  alone  intellectual,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  he  should 
be  established  at  the  end  of  the  intellectual  Gods. 

For  there  intellect  is  intellect  itself,  and  is  not  such  an  intellect  as 
the  Saturnian  is.    For  Saturn  also  is  intellect,  but  he  is  a  pure  and  incor- 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XV. 


OF  PLATO. 


S47 


ruptible  intellect,  which  manifests  his  supreme  empire  in  intellectuals, 
transcending  the  whole  intellectual  Gods.  But  the  dcmiurgus  is  simply 
intellect.  As  therefore,  the  simply  intelligible  is  the  first  of  intelligibles, 
so  that  which  is  simply  intellect,  is  the  last  of  intellectuals.  For  all 
things  are  in  each  of  the  orders.  For  in  intelligibles  life  and  intellect 
preexist ;  and  in  the  breadth  of  life,  there  are  similarly  life  and  intellect 
And  in  intellectuals  there  is  each  of  the  rest.  But  in  intelligibles  indeed, 
being  is  according  to  essence,  but  life  and  intellect  are  according  to 
cause.  In  intellectuals,  intellect  indeed  is  according  to  essence,  but  being 
and  life  are  according  to  participation.  And  in  the  intermediate  natures, 
intellect  is  according  to  cause,  but  being  is  according  to  participation, 
and  life  according  to  essence.  As  therefore,  that  whjch  is  most  vital 
in  life  is  the  middle,  and  as  that  which  is  especially  intelligible  is  the 
summit  in  being,  so  in  intellectuals,  the  extremity  is  that  which  is  most 
intellectual.  Hence  if  there  is  a  certain  intellect  which  is  simply  intel- 
lect, and  a  perceiving  intellect,  this  is  intellectual  intellect,  which  Plato 
denominating  the  demiurgus  unfolds  to  us  the  most  manifest  order,  which 
it  is  allotted  in  intellectuals.  On  this  account  also,  prior  to  all  other 
things,  the  demiurgus  constitutes  participated  intellect,  as  Timsus  says. 
For  placing  intellect  in  soul,  and  soul  in  body,  he  fashioned  the  universe. 
Energizing  therefore,  according  to  his  own  essence,  and  producing  by  his 
very  being,  he  constituted  the  intellect  of  the  universe  prior  to  all  other 
things.  For  every  participated  proceeds  from  imparticipable  intellect. 
Hence,  as  if  Plato  had  said,  that  the  generative  cause  which  gives  sub- 
sistence to  participated  intelligible,  is  that  winch  is  primarily  being,  so 
since  the  demiurgus  first  produces  intellect  from  himself,  he  will  be  im- 
participable and  intellectual  intellect.  From  these  things  therefore,  it  is 
evident  what  the  hyparxis  of  the  demiurgus  and  father  is,  and  what  order 
it  is  allotted  in  intellectuals  according  to  Timasus. 


S4S 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  XVL 


Let  us  however  after  another  manner  syllogistically  collect  the  pecu- 
liarity of  the  dciniurgus,  receiving  from  the  Timaeus  the  principles  of  the- 
arguments  on  this  subject.  This  therefore  is  known  to  every  one,  that 
Timaeus  calls  the  whole  demiurgus  fabricator  and  father,  in  the  beginning 
of  what  he  says  concerning  him.  For  lie  says,  "  It  is  difficult  to  discover 
the  fabricator  and  father  of  this  universe,  and  when  found,  it  is  impossible 
to  speak  of  him  to  all  men."  Hence,  he  does  not  think  fit  to  call  him 
either  father  alone,  or  fabricator  alone,  nor  again  connecting  the  two, 
father  and  fabricator,  but  on  the  contrary,  he  places  the  fabricative  prior 
to  the  paternal.  Now  therefore,  we  must  show  in  the  first  place,  in  what 
respect  fabricator  and  father  differ  from  each  other ;  and  in  the  next  place, 
in  addition  to  this,  who  the  fabricator  alone  is,  and  who  father  and  fa- 
bricator is,  and  how  the  fabricative  and  at  the  same  time  paternal  pecu- 
liarity, is  considered  by  Plato  as  adapted  to  the  demiurgus. 

If  therefore,  Ave  divide  all  things  into  the  Gods,  and  the  progeny  of  the 
Gods,  and  tliis  is  the  same  thing  as  to  divide  them  into  superessential 
monads,  and  the  progressions  of  beings,  father  indeed  will  be  generative 
of  the  Gods  and  superesseutial  unities ;  but  fabricator  will  give  subsist- 
ence to  essences  and  beings.  For  again,  according  to  this  reason  Timaeus 
says,  that  the  natures  which  are  generated  by  the  demiurgus  are  equal  to 
the  Gods ;  for  the  demiurgus  is  not  only  fabricator,  but  also  father;  but 
that  those  which  are  produced  by  the  junior  Gods,  are  allotted  a  mortal 
nature.  For  these  Gods  are  alone  producers  and  fabricators  of  things 
which  participate  of  existence  alone,  and  not  of  the  superessential  pecu- 
liarity. Hence  through  that  by  which  they  suffer  a  diminution  with  re- 
spect to  the  demiurgic  monad,  through  this  they  are  not  allotted  a  power 
generative  of  things  equal  to  the  Gods.   And  through  that  by  which  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XVI. 


OF  PLATO. 


349 


intellectual  deraiurgus  is  expanded  above  the  junior  Gods,  through  this 
he  binds  to  himself  the  generations  of  all  mundane  natures. 

But  if  again,  we  divide  beings  into  the  total  and  partial,  father  indeed, 
•will  appear  to  us  to  be  the  hypostatic  cause  of  wholes,  but  fabricator  of 
partial  natures.    For  the  former  is  the  cause  exemptly  of  things  that  are 
generated ;  J  but  the  latter  proximately.     And  the  former,  produces 
indeed  by  his  very  being,  energy  giving  perfection  to  his  hyparxis ;  but 
the  latter  produces  by  energizing,  his  hypostasis  being  fixed  according 
to  energy.    If  also  we  again  separately  divide  the  generations  of  perpe- 
tual and  mortal  natures,  we  must  refer  the  generation  of  perpetual  na- 
tures to  the  paternal  cause,  but  the  generation  of  mortal  natures  to  the 
fabricative  cause.    For  the  fabricator  indeed  produces  that  which  is  ge- 
nerated from  non-being  to  being.    For  the  Elean  guest  defines  the 
effective  art  to  be  this.    But  the  father  constitutes  things  posterior  to 
himself  consubsistent  with  himself.    For  he  is  father  by  his  very  being, 
and  has  the  power  of  generating  united  with  himself.    Each  therefore,  I 
mean  the  paternal  and  the  effective  or  fabricative,  is  assimilated  to  the 
principle  of  bound.    And  the  former  indeed  is  the  cause  of  union,  but 
the  latter  of  the  production  of  forms.    And  the  former  is  the  cause  of 
wholes,  but  the  latter  of  an  extension  as  far  as  to  parts.    And  the  one 
indeed,  is  the  primary  leader  of  simple,  but  the  other  of  composite  na- 
tures.   Again  however,  in  these  the  generative  cause,  and  the  cause 
which  is  productive  of  life,  are  opposed  to  each  other ;  because  the 
paternal  cause  indeed  is  connascent  with  generative  powers,  but  the 
effective  with  vivific  powers.    Ami  as  the  paternal  and  the  effective 
causes  pertain  to  the  coordination  of  bound,  so  every  thing  prolific  and 
vivific,  pertains  to  vivification,  and  the  first  infinity. 

These  things,  however,  being  thus  divided  by  us,  it  is  evident  that  the 
paternal  indeed,  is  itself  by  itself  primarily  in  the  intelligible  Gods.  For 
they  are  the  fathers  of  wholes,  being  fixed  according  to  supreme  intelligi- 
ble union.  And  on  this- account,  Plato  also  calls  the  first  God  father, 
from  the  natures  which  are  proximately  established  after  him,  transfer- 
ring to  him  the  appellation  of  father.  For  every  where  indeed,  it  is  usual 
with  Plato  to  introduce  names  to  the  ineffable  from  secondary  causes, 


350 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


and  the  causes  which  are  posterior  to  it.  But  at  one  time  indeed,  he 
introduces  the  names  from  all  beings,  and  at  another  from  the  first  beings. 
For  it  neither  was  nor  is  lawful  to  refer  names  to  him  who  is  exempt  from 
all  beings,  from  subordinate  natures,  and  which  are  placed  in  an  order 
very  remote  from  him.  If  therefore,  all  beings  participate  of  the  paternal 
peculiarity,  wc  must  say  that  Plato  gives  this  name  to  the  one  from  all 
beings ;  for  there  is  not  among  all  beings  such  a  cause  as  this.  Hence  it 
is  evident  that  Plato  introduces  to  the  one  an  appellation  of  this  kind, 
from  that  which  is  the  first  and  highest  in  the  Gods.  The  intelligible 
Gods,  liowever,  are  more  ancient  than  all  the  divine  orders,  and  subsist 
immediately  aller  the  one.  The  paternal  cause  therefore  of  beings  is  in 
the  intelligible  Gods,  and  the  intelligible  Gods  are  the  fathers  of  all  the 
divine  genera,  being  established  in  the  highest  essences,  and  occultly  pro- 
ducing wholes.  And  the  first  God  indeed,  is  beyond  the  appellation  of 
father,  as  he  is  likewise  beyond  all  other  names ;  and  he  is  neither  properly 
called  the  good,  or  the  one,  through  his  ineffable  and  unknown  transcen- 
dency. But  the  intelligible  Gods  are  primarily  superessential  unities 
and  goodnesses,  and  are  the  exempt  fathers  of  beings. 

The  paternal  peculiarity,  therefore,  originates  supernally  from  the  first 
intelligible  triad ;  but  the  fabricative  first  presents  itself  to  the  view  in 
the  third  triad.  For  that  which  generates  all  forms,  and  adorns  all  things 
with  forms  is  the  third  triad  of  intelligibles.  For  there,  as  we  have  said, 
all-perfect  animal  subsists,  which  is  comprehensive  of  the  first  and  intel- 
ligible paradigms.  Here  therefore,  the  effective  also  or  fabricative  at  the 
same  time  subsists.  For  animal  itself  constitutes  the  Gods,  and  produces 
the  forms  of  all  beings.  Hence  it  is  allotted  the  paternal  peculiarity, 
according  to  the  divine  cause,  but  according  to  the  formal  cause,  it  un- 
folds into  light  the  effective  principle  of  wholes.  But  again,  on  the  con- 
trary, the  effective  and  at  the  same  time  paternal  peculiarity,  is  allotted 
its  hypostasis  in  the  demiurgic  monad.  Hence  also  the  demiurgus  of 
wholes  is  the  hypostatic  cause  of  Gods.  In  a  particular  manner  however, 
he  fabricates  the  world,  energizing  with  forms  and  demiurgic  reasons. 
For  he  constitutes  intellect,  aouls  and  bodies,  adorning  all  things  with 
forms,  some  indeed  with  first,  others  with  middle, aud  others  with  last  forms. 


Digitized  by  Googl 


CHAP.  XVI. 


OF  PLATO. 


351 


Do  you  not  see,  therefore,  how  the  end  of  intelligibles  indeed,  was 
paternal  and  at  the  same  time  effective ;  but  the  end  of  intellectuals  is 
effective  and  at  the  same  time  paternal.  There  however,  the  paternal 
peculiarity  is  more  predominant ;  but  here  the  effective.  For  in  both 
indeed,  both  causes  preexist;  nevertheless  in  the  paradigm  [i.  e.  in  ani- 
mal itself]  the  paternal  is  more  prevalent,  but  in  the  demiurgus  the 
effective.  For  the  former  produces  by  his  very  being ;  but  the  latter  by 
energizing.  And  in  the  former  indeed,  fabrication  [or  effective  energy] 
is  essential ;  but  in  the  latter  essence  is  effective.  Forms  also  are  with 
both;  but  in  the  former  intelligibly,  and  in  the  latter  intellectually.  From 
these  things  therefore,  it  is  evident,  that  the  demiurgic  cause  subsists 
analogous  to  the  paradigmatic  cause;  and  that  it  has  the  same  order  with 
respect  to  intellectuals,  as  that  has  with  respect  to  intelligibles.  And  on 
this  account  Timeeus  also  says  that  the  demiurgus  of  wholes  was  extended 
to  that  paradigm.  For  lie  says,  "  Whatever  ideas  intellect  perceived  by 
the  dianoetic  energy  in  animal  itself,  such  and  so  many  he  conceived  it 
necessary  for  the  universe  to  contain."  And  together  with  this  analogy, 
there  is  a  diminution  of  the  intellectual  with  reference  to  the  intelligible. 
For  the  latter  is  more  united  ;  but  the  former  is  more  separated.  And 
the  one  indeed  is  preestablished  in  the  order  of  the  desirable ;  but  the 
other  is  moved  about  the  desirable.  And  the  one  fills  with  paternal 
power ;  but  the  other  absorbs  as  it  were  and  embosoms  the  whole  prolific 
abundance  of  the  desirable.  And  after  this  manner,  the  demiurgus  of  the 
universe  is  all-perfect,  receiving  whole  intelligible  powers,  from  all-perfect 
•  animal.  For  the  universe  is  threefold  ;  one  indeed  beiug  intelligibly  [all] ; 
another  intellectually ;- and  another  sensibly.  For  the  world  is  perfect, 
from  perfect  natures,  as  Timreus  says.  And  animal  itself  is  perfect  ac- 
cording to  all  things,  as  the  same  Timaeus  asserts.  The  demiurgus  like- 
wise, being  the  best  of  causes,  is  all-perfect. 

Again  therefore,  resuming  what  we  have  said,  we  repeat,  that  the 
paternal  cause  commences  from  the  supreme  union  of  intelligibles;  but 
the  paternal  and  at  the  same  time  effective  cause  is  consubsistent  in  the 
intelligible  paradigm ;  and  the  effective  and  at  the  same  time  paternal 
cause  is  defined  according  to  the  whole  demiurgus.    But  the  cause  whicu 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


is  alone  effective  and  fabricative,  pertains  to  the  junior  Gods  who  give 
subsistence  to  partial  and  mortal  things.  The  peculiarity  therefore  of 
the  demiurgic  cause  is  effective  and  paternal.  And  this  Timseus  asserts, 
not  only  in  the  beginning  of  the  discourse  about  it.  in  which  he  says, "  [To 
discover]  therefore,  the  artificer  and  father  of  this  universe,  &c.;"  but 
also  in  the  speech  to  the  junior  Gods,  he  does  the  same  thing ;  for  the 
demiurgus  in  a  simitar  manner  says  to  them :  "  Gods  of  Gods  of  whom  I 
am  the  demiurgus  and  father,  [Whatever  is  generated  by  me  is  indissolu- 
ble, I  being  willing  that  it  should  be  so.]"  For  he  does  not  call  himself 
father  and  demiurgus,  but  demiurgus  and  father,  just  as  there  fTimaeus 
calls  him]  fabricator  and  father.  And  not  in  the  Timaeus  only  is  this 
mode  of  the  arrangement  of  the  names  defined,  but  in  the  Politicus  also, 
the  FJean  guest  speaking  about  the  world  says  that  it  imitates  the  instruc- 
tion of  its  demiurgus  and  father ;  and  in  the  beginning  indeed,  he  uses 
these  names  more  accurately,  but  in  the  end  more  negligently.  Since 
Plato  therefore,  every  wliere  preserves  this  order  of  names  unchanged,  it 
is  evident  to  those  who  are  not  entirely  unskilled  in  things  of  this  kind, 
that  he  defines  the  demiurgic  monad  according  to  this  peculiarity,  and 
that  he  considers  it  to  be  effective  and  at  the  same  time  paternal.  For 
because  indeed,  it  is  the  end  of  the  intellectual  triad,  it  is  allotted  a  pa- 
ternal transcendency  with  respect  to  all  the  second  genera  of  Gods ;  but 
because  it  produces  from  itself  all  the  partial  genera  and  species  of  beings, 
it  possesses  an  effective  cause  of  the  natures  to  which  it  gives  subsistence. 
And  because  indeed,  it  is  father,  power  is  in  it,  and  at  the  same  time  in- 
tellect. For  the  demiurgus  himself  says,  "  Imitating  the  power  which  I 
employed  iu  your  generation."  And  again,  Timaeus  says  concerning  the 
demiurgus ;  "  Whatever  ideas  intellect  perceived  in  animal  itself,  such 
and  so  many  he  conceived  by  the  dianoetic  energy  it  necessary  for  this 
universe  to  contain."  Hence  he  is  father,  and  the  power  of  the  father  is 
in  him,  aod  intellect.  All  these  however,  are  in  him  intellectually,  and 
not  intelligibly.  Hence,  I  think  he  is  called  father  indeed,  not  simply, 
but  together  with  effector  and  demiurgus;  and  power,  not  by  itself,  but 
the  power  of  the  demiurgus  and  father.  For  he  who  calls  himself  demi- 
urgus and  father,  says  that  it  is  the  power  of  himself.  But  he  is  immedi- 


Digitized  by  Google 


■ 


CHAP.  XVI.  OF  PLATO.  553 

ately  called  intellect,  without  the  addition  of  power,  and  the  other 
appellations.  *'  Whatever  ideas  therefore  intellect  perceived,"  &c.  For 
all  things  are  in  him  intellectually,  and  both  power  and  father,  by  which 
he  imitates  the  intelligible  paradigm.  Tor  in  him  all  things  were  intelli- 
gibly, '  viz.  bound,  infinity,  and  that  which  is  mixed  from  both  these. 
These,  however,  arc  father,  power,  and  intellect.  But  the  intellectual  of 
the  paradigm  indeed  was  intelligible  in  the  intelligible  Gods,  sub- 
sisting prior  to  an  intellectual  cause.  The  intellectual  however  of  the 
demiurgus,  is  of  itself  intellectual,  being  intellectual  in  intellectuals,  as 
was  before  observed.  Because  indeed,  as  we  have  said,  he  is  father, 
power  is  in  him,  and  also  intellect.  But  because  these  are  defined  ac- 
cording to  the  effective  and  demiurgic,  he  is  coarranged  with  the  vivific 
order,  and  together  with  it  constitutes  the  genera  of  life,  and  vivifies  the 
whole  world.  What  this  order  is  however,  and  where  it  is  arranged,  we 
shall  shortly  survey.  But  thus  much  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said, 
that  so  far  as  he  is  the  demiurgus,  he  requires  contact  with  the  vivific 
order,  together  with  it  generates  total  lives,  and  conjoins  it  to  himself. 
Disseminating,  however,  all  the  measures  of  life  in  it,  and  together  with 
it  adorning  and  producing  them,  he  again  converts  them  to  himself.  For 
it  belongs  to  him  to  generate  all  things,  and  to  recall  all  things  to  him- 
self, no  less  than  to  generate  them,  because  he  is  established  at  the  end 
of  the  intellectual  order,  and  is  the  demiurgic  intellect.  As  he  is  there- 
fore demiurgic,  he  gives  subsistence  to  all  thirigs;  but  as  intellect,  he 
convolves  multitude  to  union,  and  converts  it  to  himself.  He  also 
accomplishes  both  these,  by  the  words  which  he  delivers  to  the  junior 
Gods.  For  he  fills  them  with  demiurgic  and  prolific  power,  collects  them 
to  himself,  constitutes  himself  the  object  of  desire  as  it  were  to  the  mul- 
titude of  Gods,  and  extends  about  himself  all  the  demiurgi  in  the  world, 

'  For  rsrpas,-,  it  u  necessary  to  read  rmrrcef. 


Proc.  Vol.  I.  9  Y 


Digitized  by  Google 


354  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


In  the  third  place  therefore,  let  us  purify  our  conceptions  about  the  de- 
miurgic cause  according  to  other  projecting  energies  of  intellect,  following 
for  this  purpose  Timams.  In  the  first  place  then,  Timseus  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  theory  concerning  the  demiurgus,  sufficiently  exhibits  his  good- 
ness, and  his  unenvying  and  abundant  communication  of  demiurgic 
reasons,  being  impelled  to  this  from  the  seat  of  goodness  which  is  in- 
herent in  him,  and  from  his  exuberant  deity.  For  his  goodness  and  his 
unenvying  abundance,  are  not  as  it  were  a  certain  habit  of  good,  and  a 
power,  or  a  form  itself  by  itself  existing  prior  to  many  goods,  but  it  is  one 
ineffable  participation  of  good,  and  the  one  of  the  demiurgic  order;  ac- 
cording to  which  the  demiurgus  also  is  a  God,  and  fills  all  things  with 
their  proper  good.  For  because  there  is  deity  in  him  which  desires  to 
adorn  and  arrange  all  things,  and  an  hyparxis  which  is  extended  to  the 
providence  of  the  whole  of  things,  on  this  account  he  establishes  the  prin- 
ciple of  fabrication.  His  goodness  therefore  is  nothing  else  than  demi- 
urgic deity.  But  his  will  is  the  progeny  of  the  energy  of  his  goodness, 
bounding  the  end  of  his  power.  For  since  in  the  demiurgus  of  wholes 
there  are,  as  we  have  said,  father,  power,  and  intellect,  and  these  subsist 
in  him  intellectually,  according  to  each  of  these  he  is  filled  with  the  par- 
ticipation of  the  one.  And  through  goodness  indeed,  that  which  is 
paternal  in  biro,  and  which  is  as  it  were  the  intelligible  of  intellect,  is 
illuminated.  But  through  will,  his  power  is  governed,  and  is  extended 
to  one  intelligible  good.  And  through  providence,  his  intellect  is  perfect, 
and  gives  subsistence  to  all  things.  All  these  likewise  are  the  progeny 
of  the  one  deity  in  the  demiurgus. 

In  the  first  place,  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  Timaeus  unfolds  through 
these  things  the  divine  peculiarity  of  the  demiurgus.   But  in  the  second 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XVII. 


OF  PLATO. 


355 


place,  he  presents  to  our  view  the  intelligible  cause  which  is  in  him,  and 
also  the  united  paradigmatic  cause  of  wholes  which  he  contains.  For 
to  make  all  things  similar  to  himself,  evinces  that  he  is  the  intelligible 
paradigm  of  every  thiug  beautiful  and  good  in  the  world.  For  because 
he  gives  subsistence  to  all  things  by  his  very  being,  that  to  which  he 
gives  subsistence  is  the  image  of  himself.  And  according  to  this 
reasoning  the  demiurgus  is  not  only  a  God,  but  he  contains  in  himself 
the  intelligible,  and  true  being,  and  antecedently  comprehends  not  only 
the  final  cause  of  mundaoe  natures,  but  also  the  paradigmatic  cause. 
But  again,  in  the  third  place,  Timseus  celebrates  the  demiurgic  power, 
and  the  principle  which  abolishes  every  thing  disorderly  and  indefinite, 
and  prepares  the  beautiful  alone  and  the  good  to  have  dominion  in 
wholes.  For  the  assertion  that  the  demiurgus  to  the  utmost  of  bis  power 
suffered  nothing  evil  and  vile  to  exist,  indicates  his  unconquerable 
power,  which  adorns  things  material  in  an  unpolluted  manner,  and 
imparts  by  illumination  bound  to  indefinite,  and  order  to  disorderly 

In  which  part  of  the  Tiro  feus,  likewise,  this  dogma  of  Plato  will  appear 
to  you  to  be  admirable,  that  matter  is  generated  from  some  one  of  the 
Gods  situated  above  the  demiurgus.  For  the  demiurgus  receiving 
matter  occupied  by  the  vestiges  of  forms,  thus  himself  introduces  into  it 
all  the  perfection  of  ornament  and  arrangement.  Matter,  therefore,  and 
the  whole  of  that  which  is  the  subject  of  bodies,  proceed  supernally  from 
the  first  principles,  which  on  account  of  their  exuberance  of  power,  are 
able  to  generate  even  the  last  of  beings.  But  the  demiurgus  of  the 
universe,  imparts  by  illumination,  order,  bound,  and  ornament,  and  the 
whole  world  is  fabricated  an  image  of  intelligible*,  through  the  commu- 
nication of  forms. 

Ia  the  fourth  place,,  therefore,  let  us  survey  how  Timacus  unfolds  to 
us  the  demiurgic  intellect.  "  By  a  reasoning  process,"  says  he,  "  the 
demiurgus  discovered  from  the  things  which  are  visible  according  to 
nature,  that  no  work  which  is  destitute  of  intelligence  can  ever  become 
more  beautiful  than  that  which  possesses  intellect."  What  therefore  is 
this  reasoning  ?  What  is  the  discovery,  and  whence  does  it  originate  ? 


356  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

Reasoning,  therefore,  is  indeed  distributed  intellection,  looking  to  itself, 
and  in  itself  investigating  good.  For  every  one  who  reasons,  passes  from 
one  thing  to  another,  and  being  converted  to  himself,  searches  after 
good.  The  demiurgic  intellect,  therefore,  in  adorning  and  arranging  the 
universe  subsists  analogously  to  him  who  reasons ;  for  he  emits  the 
divided  causes  of  mundane  natures,  which  preexist  unitedly  in  intel- 
ligibles. For  those  things  which  intelligible  intellect  constitutes 
uniformly  and  excmptly,  these  intellectual  intellect  separating,  distri- 
buting into  parts,  and  as  it  were  fabricating  by  itself,  generates. 
Reasoning  therefore  is  the  being  filled  with  the  intelligible,  and  an  all- 
perfect  union  with  it.  By  which  also  it  is  evident  that  it  is  not  fit  to 
think  this  reasoning  [of  the  demiurgus]  is  either  investigation  or  doubt, 
or  a  wandering  of  divine  intellect,  but  tliat  it  is  stable  intelligence 
intellectually  perceiving  the  multiform  causes  of  beings.  For  intellect  is 
always  united  to  the  intelligible,  and  is  filled  with  its  own  intelligibles. 
And  in  a  similar  manner  it  is  intellect  in  energy,  and  intelligible.  For 
at  one  and  the  same  time,  it  intellectually  perceives  and  is  perceived, 
discovers  itself,  entering  into  itself,  and  the  reasoning  also  finds  what 
this  intelligence  is,  but  not  according  to  transition.  For  the  intelligence 
of  the  Gods  is  eternal.  And  invention  with  them  is  not  the  discovery  of 
that  which  h  absent;  for  all  things  are  always  present  to  the  intellect 
of  the  Gods.  The  intelligible  likewise  there  is  not  separated  from 
intellect.  The  conversion,  therefore,  of  intellect  to  itself  may  be  called 
reasoning;  but  the  being  filled  from  intelligibles  invention.  And 
intelligibles  themselves  may  be  denominated  things  visible  according  to 
nature.  For  because  Tim  sens  had  denominated  the  unadorned  subject 
of  bodies  when  it  was  vanquished  by  the  obscure  vestiges  of  forms, 
visible,  hence,  I  think,  ho  calls  intelligibles  visible  according  to  nature. 
For  it  is  according  to  nature,  to  intellect  to  look  to  these,  and  not  to 
things  subordinate  to  these.  As,  therefore,  he  says,  that  intellect  itself 
sees  intelligibles,  after  the  same  manner  also  he  calls  intelligibles  things 
naturally  visible,  and  converts  intellect  to  the  intelligible,  as  that  which 
sees  to  that  which  is  seen.  If,  therefore,  intellect  sees  animal  itself,  and 
assimilates  to  it  the  whole  world,  it  may  be  said  that  animal  itself  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XVIH.  OF  PLATO.  357 

visible  to  the  demiurgus  of  the  universe.  For  there  the  most  splendid  of 
intelligibles  subsists ;  and  this  is  that  which  we  before  demonstrated, 
when  we  said  that  there  the  fountain  of  beauty  shines  forth,  wbieh 
Socrates,  in  the  Phsednts,  denominates  splendid  and  fulgid. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


Such  therefore  are  the  conceptions  which  are  to  be  assumed  of  the 
demiurgic  cause,  and  from  these  things  they  are  to  be  derived.  We 
shall  however  obtain  one  perfection  of  the  summit  of  the  dogmas 
concerning  it,  if  we  are  able  to  survey  the  words  which  this  cause 
extends  to  the  junior  demiurgi,  and  to  unfold  the  concealed  meaning  of 
them.  This,  therefore,  we  shall  also  do,  establishing  the  following  principle 
of  the  explanation  of  them  :  The  energies  and  powers  of  the  Gods  are 
twofold.  And  some  indeed  abide  in,  and  energize  about  them,  and 
have  for  their  end  one  hypostasis,  and  which  is  united  to  essence.  But 
others  proceed  from  them,  exhibit  an  efficacious  power  about  secondary 
natures,  and  coexist  with  the  multitude  of  their  recipients,  and  with  the 
peculiarity  of  essence.  These,  however,  being  twofold,  the  secondary 
are  suspended  from  those  that  are  prior  to  them,  are  defined  about  them, 
and  receive  their  proper  hyparxis  according  to  them.  For  it  is  every 
where  necessary  that  externally  proceeding  should  be  the  images  of 
internal  energies,  evolving  the  at-once-collected  nature  of  their  indi- 
visibility ;  multiplying  that  in  them  which  is  united,  and  dividing  their 
impartibility. 

According  to  this  reasoning,  therefore,  the  energy  of  nature  is  also 
twofold,  one  being  that  which  abides  in  it,  according  to  which  it  connects 
itself,  and  the  reasons  it  contains,  but  the  other  proceeding  from  it, 


Digitized  by  Google 


358  0N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

through  which  also  bodies  are  filled  with  these  physical  powers,  which 
being  moved  by  nature,  act  on  each  other,  and  physically  suffer  by  each 
other.  Again,  the  motion  of  the  soul  likewise  is  twofold.  And  the  one 
indeed  is  self-motive,  is  converted  to  itself,  is  of  itself,  concurs  with  the 
life  of  the  soul,  and  is  without  any  difference  with  respect  to  it.  But 
the  other  is  incumbent  on  alter-motive  natures,  moves  these,  and  about 
these  extends  the  power  of  itself.  The  energy  of  intellect,  therefore,  is 
likewise  twofold.  And  one  indeed  is  intellectual,  is  united  to  true 
beings,  and  is  impartible,  being  co-existent  with  the  intelligible  itself  of 
intellect,  or  rather  being  the  intelligible  itself,  and  intellect.  For  intellect 
is  not  of  itself  in  capacity,  and  afterwards  receiving  energy,  intellec- 
tually perceives  the  intelligible ;  but  it  is  one  simple  energy.  For  the 
multitude  of  it  is  unical,  and  its  energy  is  directed  to  itself.  But  the 
other  energy  of  intellect  is  directed  to  externals,  and  to  things  which  are 
able  to  participate  of  intellect.  For  these  intellect  causes  to  be  intel- 
lectual through  itself,  splendidly  as  it  were  emitting  the  light  of  its  own 
intelligence,  and  imparting  it  to  others.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that 
the  divine  and  demiurgic  intellect  itself,  should  always  indeed  be  united 
to  the  intelligible,  and  that  it  should  have  the  plenitude  and  self- 
sufficiency  of  demiurgic  intelligence  eternally  established  according  to  a 
union  exempt  from  wholes ;  to  which,  as  it  appears  to  me,  Timaeus  also 
looking  says,  that  the  father  of  the  universe  abides  in  his  accustomed 
manner,  and  withdraws  himself  to  his  own  place  of  survey,  delivering 
the  fabrication  of  mortal  natures  to  the  mundane  Gods.  For  so  far  as 
he  is  exempt  from  the  beings  posterior  to  himself  aud  is  uncoordinated 
with  the  more  partial  multitude  of  Gods,  so  far  he  is  converted  to 
himself,  and  surveys  and  intellectually  perceives  the  natures  prior  to 
himself,  according  to  one  uniform  union.  But  in  consequence  of  the 
more  ruling  and  leading  Gods  being  extended  towards  him,  he  emits 
from  himself  secondary  energies,  to  all  the  partial  orders. 

Timaeus,  therefore,  fashions  through  words,  these  powers  and  effica- 
cious energies  which  proceed  from  the  whole  and  one  fabrication  to  the 
demiurgic  multitude  of  Gods.  For  words  are  the  images  of  intellections ; 
because  indeed  they  evolve  that  which  is  contracted  in  intelligibles,  but 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XVTII. 


OF  PLATO. 


359 


lead  forth  that  which  is  impartible  into  a  partible  hypostasis.  They 
likewise  transfer  that  which  abides  in  itself  into  habitude  to  another 
thing.    And  it  is  evident  that  the  reasons  which  are  impelled  from 
nature,  are  certain  natural  [powers],  and  render  that  which  receives  them 
physical.    But  the  reasons  which  arc  generated  from  soul,  are  indeed 
vivific,  but  render  the  inanimate  nature  which  participates  of  them 
([animated]  and  moved  from  itself,  through  the  power  of  soul,  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Phaedrus,  and  communicate  to  it  the  resemblance  of  self- 
motion.    And  the  reasons  which  are  generated  from  intellect,  illumi- 
nating the  natures  posterior  to  it,  distribute  all  intellectual  goods  to  their 
recipients,  being  the  suppliers  of  true  knowledge,  of  purity  and  a  more 
simple  life.    After  the  same  manner  also  the  demiurgic  words  produce 
in  the  junior  Gods,  whole,  impartible,  and  united  measures  of  exempt 
fabrication,  and  fill  their  essences  with  demiurgic  providence.  They 
likewise  render  them  second  demiurgi,  and  emulous  of  their  father. 
For  he  indeed  gives  subsistence  to  the  whole  plenitudes  of  the  world. 
But  they,  imitating  him,  fabricate  all  partial  natures  in  conjunction  with 
wholes.    And  he  produces  the  essence  of  perpetual  natures.    But  they 
fashioning  mortal  natures  according  to  one  generation-producing  circle, 
likewise  transmute  these.    And  as  the  one  demiurgus  governs  the  whole 
periods  of  the  universe,  thus  also  the  many  demiurgi  convolve  the 
divisible  circles  of  the  natures  that  are  borne  along 1  in  generation.  If, 
therefore,  we  assert  these  things  rightly  concerning  the  words  proceeding 
from  the  demiurgus  to  the  multitude  of  mundane  Gods,  and  they  are 
efficacious,  fabricative,  and  convertive  of  their  recipients  to  a  union  with 
him,  and  are  also  perfective  of  the  beneficent  reasons  which  they 
contain,  we  shall  no  longer  seem  to  speak  paradoxically,  if  we  say  that 
these  words  extend  to  the  Gods  in  the  world  the  participation  of  all  the 
powers  that  are  firmly  established  in  the  father,  and  of  the  causes  prior 
to,  and  subsisting  after  him.    And  as  he  convolving  the  end  of  the 
intellectual  Gods,  is  the  plenitude  of  all  things,  so  likewise  the  demiurgic 
words  proceeding  from  him,  produce  in  the  junior  Gcds  the  peculiarities, 

'  For  tupyif/ar  read  ?  tf»p«n»>. 


Digitized  by  Google 


360  °N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

as  I  may  say,  of  all  the  divine  genera  that  are  above  the  world,  through 
which  they  are  suspended  from  all  the  orders  prior  to  them  ;  just  I  think 
as  the  whole  of  this  world  [is  suspended  from  the  mundane  Gods  who  '] 
fabricate  all  mortal  natures,  and  impart  to  different  things  a  different 
power,  and  an  efflux  of  divine  powers. 

What,  therefore,  in  short,  is  it  whieh  Plato  indicates  the  Gods  derive 
through  these  words  from  the  first  demiurgus,  and  the  all-perfect  fabri- 
cation ?  In  the  first  place,  indeed,  they  derive  this,  that  they  are  Gods  of 
Gods.    For  the  vocal  address  proceeding  to  thent  from  the  father,  is  the 
supplier  of  divine  power,  and  is  allotted  an  efficacious  preseuce  in  its 
participant,  as  we  before  observed.    But  in  the  next  place,  these  xvords 
impart  to  them  an  indissoluble  power.    The  demiurgus  of  wholes, 
however,  comprehends  in  himself  the  cause  of  dissolution,  in  order  that 
they  may  indeed  be  essentially  indissoluble,  but  according  to  the  cause 
of  binding,  not  indissoluble.  In  the  third  place,  therefore,  the  demiurgus 
produces  in  them  from  on  high,  through  these  words,  a  renovated 
immortality.    For  the  assertion  that  they  are  neither  immortal,  nor  shall 
be  subject  to  the  fatality  of  death,  establishes  them  in  this  form  of 
immortality,  which  the  fable  in  the  Politicus  denominates  renovated. 
In  addition  to  this  also,  the  words  testify  that  they  derive  from  the  father 
a  power  perfective  of  wholes.    For  if  the  world  is  imperfect  without  the 
subsistence  of  mortal  animals,  it  is  doubtless  necessary  that  those  who 
preside  over  the  generation  of  them  should  be  the  causes  of  |>erfcction 
to  the  universe.    And  in  the  last  place,  these  words  impart  to  the  junior 
Gods  a  paternal  and  generative  empire  derived  from  the  exempt  and 
intellectual  cause  of  wholes;  and  insert  in  them  the  proximate  powers 
of  regeneration.    For  through  these  words,  the  junior  Gods  again  receive 
in  themselves  the  natures  that  are  corrupted,  fabricate  parts  from  wholes, 
and  again  effect  the  dissolution  of  parts  into  their  wholes.  And 
universally  tlic  words  of  the  demiurgus  subject  the  perpetually-generated 
course  of  uature,  to  the  fabrication  of  the  junior  Gods.    In  short, 

■  There  is  evidently  something  wanting  in  the  original  in  this  part ;  and  as  it  appears  to  me 
after  xaJsnrij  (otp-eti)  mm  o  <rufiir«f  wroti  xo<r/*.j^  it  is  requisite  to  supply  the  words  «•{  tvif  ry*M?iiovf 
tt90(  ermt£nrr«u,  w. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XVIII.  OF  PLATO.  gflx 

therefore,  the  demiurgus  fills  the  junior  Gods  with  divine  union,  fills 
them  with  a  firm  establishment,  and  fills  them  with  a  perpetuity  adapted 
to  their  nature.  But  he  pours  into  them  the  all- various  causes  of 
perfective  powers,  of  vivific  rivers,  and  demiurgic  measures.  Hence 
also,  the  many  demiurgi  refer  the  fabrication  of  particulars  to  the  one 
and  whole  providence  of  the  father,  and  the  principles  of  demiurgic 
works  which  they  received  from  him,  to  his  efficacious  production.  And 
all  of  them  indeed  are  filled  with  all  powers,  because  all  of  them 
participate  of  the  demiurgic  words  which  proceed  into  them  from  the 
father.  But  some  of  them  are  more  characterized  by  one  peculiarity 
than  another. 

And  some  of  them  indeed  are  the  suppliers  of  union  to  their  progeny ; 
others,of  indissoluble  permanency;  others,  of  perfection ;  and  others,  of  life. 
But  others  preside  over  regeneration,  and  being  allotted  in  a  distributed 
manner  in  the  universe,  the  powers  which  subsist  unitedly  in  the  one  demi- 
urgus, they  are  subservient  to  the  providence  of  the  father.  And  every  thing 
which  is  generated  by  the  many  demiurgi,  is  in  a  much  greater  degree 
produced  by  the  one  fabrication  ;  which  governs  mortal  natures  indeed, 
eternally,  things  that  are  moved,  immoveably,  and  partible  natures 
impartibly.  It  is  not  however  necessary  that  the  progeny  of  that  one 
demiurgus  should  be  suspended  from  the  motion  of  the  junior  Gods. 
For  every  where  the  one  fabrication  is  more  comprehensive  than  that 
which  is  multiplied.  And  the  more  causal  of  divine  natures  energize 
prior  to  their  own  offspring,  and  together  with  them  constitute  the 
progeny  that  proceed  from  them.  The  first  [demiurgic]  God,  therefore, 
produces  from  and  through  himself  the  divine  genera  *  of  the  universe, 
according  to  his  beneficent  will.  But  he  governs  mortal  natures  through 
the  junior  Gods,  generating  indeed  these  also  from  himself,'  but  other 
Gods  producing  them  as  it  were  with  their  own  hands.  For  he  says, 
"  these  being  generated  through  me  will  become  equal  to  the  Gods." 
The  cause,  therefore,  through  which,  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  junior 
Gods;  but  the  cause  d/row  which,  even  in  the  production  of  mortal 

'  It  appears  from  the  version  of  Portus  that  the  words  ».»»  yfri  are  omitted  in  the  original. 

Proo.  Vol.  I.  2  Z 


Digitized  by  Google 


362  ON  THC  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

natures  is  to  be  referred  to  the  whole  demiurgus.  For  always  the  first 
of  those  things  that  are  constituted,  produce  in  conjunction  with  their 
monad  the  generation  of  secondary  natures.  And  all  things  indeed 
proceed  from  that  monad,  but  some  things  immediately ;  and  through 
it,  but  some  things  through  other  media  receive  the  providence  that 
emanates  from  it.  For  these  middle  genera  of  causes  are  allotted  the 
providential  inspection  of  secondary  natures  from  the  first  effective 
monad. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


Concerning  the  words,  therefore,  in  the  Tiraaeus,  which  the  demi- 
urgus delivers  to  the  Gods  in  the  world,  thus  much  may  suffice  at 
present.  But  after  these,  it  is  fit  to  survey  the  second  measures  of  total 
demiurgic  providence,  which  the  demiurgus  extends  from  himself  to  the 
many  and  divisible  souls.  For  having  constituted  these,  divided  them 
equal  in  number  to  divine  animals,  and  disseminated  them  about  the 
world,  he  inserts  in  them  fabricative  boundaries,  defines  the  whole 
periods  of  them,  inscribes  in  them  the  laws  of  Fate,  proposes  the 
apparent  measures  of  their  generation-producing  life,  legally  institutes, 
and  adorns  in  a  becoming  manner  all  the  rewards  of  virtue,  and  the 
works  of  vice,  intellectually  comprehends  in  one  the  end  of  every  period, 
and  coarranges  with  a  view  to  this  the  whole  polity  of  partial  souls. 
All'  souls,  therefore,  of  an  immortal  condition,  being  allotted  a  pro- 
gression from  the  demiurgus,  are  filled  from  him  with  an  united  and 


'  For       it  U  necewary  to  read 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XIX. 


OF  PLATO. 


363 


intellectual  providence.  Because,  however,  progeny  which  are  suspended 
from  their  causes  participate  of  the  perfective  efficacy  which  proceeds 
from  them,  divine  souls,  indeed,  primarily  subsisting  from  thence, 
become  auditors  of  the  words  of  their  father  immediately ;  but  partial 
souls  participate  of  the  uniform  providence  of  the  demiurgus  secondarily, 
and  with  greater  partibility.  Hence  also  the  demiurgus,  as  a  legislator, 
denning  to  these  all  the  measures  of  their  life,  he  thus  extends  demiurgic 
words,  unitedly  comprehending  the  divided  nature  of  the  whole  of  their 
life,  convolving  in  sameness  without  time  their  temporal  mutability,  and 
collecting  uniformly,  according  to  one  simplicity,  the  multiform  and 
diversified  nature  of  the  energy  which  exists  about  them.  But  to  divine 
souls  he  immediately  unfolds  the  providence  of  himself,  and  exhorts 
them  to  join  with  him  in  a  providential  inspection  of  the  whole  world,  to 
fabricate,  adorn  and  dispose  in  conjunction  with  him,  mortal  natures,  to 
govern  generated  beings  according  to  the  measures  of  justice,  and  to 
.  lead  and  convolve  all  things,  following  demiurgic  providence.  Very  far 
therefore,  are  those  interpreters  of  Plato  from  according  with  the  fabri- 
cation of  the  universe,  who  admit  that  partial  are  the  same  with  whole 
souls,  and  who  attribute  the  same  essence  to  all  souls ;  because  all  of 
them  are  allotted  their  generation  from  one  demiurgus. 

For  in  the  first  place,  the  father  in  the  course  of  his  fabrication 
adorning,  and  disposing  in  an  orderly  manner  partial  souls,  poured 
mingling,  the  remainder  of  the  former  mixture,  says  Timseus,  and 
produced  the  second  and  third  genera.  But  in  a  progression  of  this 
kind,  the  words  effective  of  conversion  which  he  extends  to  divine  souls, 
arc  intellectual,  and  demiurgic,  and  impart  to  them  generative  powers, 
and  perfective  goods ;  but  those  which  he  extends  to  partial  souls,  are 
the  definite  sources  of  generation,  of  the  laws  of  Fate,  of  justice,  and 
all-various  periods.  If,  therefore,  every  thing  which  proceeds  from  the 
demiurgus  is  essentially  imparted  to  souls,  it  is  indeed  necessary  that 
different  measures  of  words  should  be  the  causes  of  different  powers ; 
and  that  to  some  among  the  number  of  divisible  souls,  the  demiurgus 
should  distribute  a  polity  exempt  from  mundane  affairs,  but  to  others 


■ 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THIS  THEOLOGY 


HOOK  V. 


a  polity  arranged  under  these  souls,  and  supernally  governed  by  them. 
These  things,  however,  may  elsewhere  be  more  copiously  demonstrated. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

» 

After  the  demiurgic  words  therefore,  again  returning  to  the  demiurgic 
intellect,  let  us  survey  following  Plato,  who  the  demiurgus  is,  who 
convolves  the  end  itself  of  the  intellectual  triad  to  the  beginning,  and 
after  what  manner  it  is  fit  to  denominate  him  according  to  the  Grecian 
theology.  Or  rather,  prior  to  this  let  us  summarily  show  what  we  may 
assume  concerning  him  according  to  the  narration  of  Timaeus.  For  we 
shall  more  easily  learn  those  particulars,  if  we  assent  to  these.  For  di- 
rectly, in  the  beginning  of  the  theology  concerning  him,  he  is  celebrated 
as  the  fabricator  and  father  of  the  world.  And  he  is  neither  called  fabri- 
cator alone,  nor  father  and  fabricator,  but  at  one  and  the  same  time 
manifestly  possessing  both  peculiarities,  he  is  rather  characterized  by  the 
fabricative,  than  by  the  paternal  cause.  But  he  is  denominated  the 
demiurgus  of  wholes,  according  to  his  goodness,  unenvying  and  exuberant 
will,  and  his  power  which  is  able  to  adorn  and  arrange  all  things,  and 
even  such  as  are  of  a  disorderly  nature.  He  is  however  particularly 
unfolded  to  us  as  the  supplier  of  beauty,  symmetry  aud  order,  and  as  the 
best  of  causes;  and  this  because  he  is  allotted  the  uniform,  and  first 
effective  power  of  the  whole  demiurgic  series.  But  he  gives  subsistence 
to  intellect  and  soul,  and  at  the  same  time  to  all  the  life  in  the  world  ; 
since  he  fabricated  the  whole  world  an  animal  animated,  and  endued  with 
intellect.  Beiug  likewise  full  of  every  intelligible,  and  extending  himself 
to  intelligible  and  all-perfect  animal  and  conjoining  this  to  himself  through 


■ 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XX. 


OF  PLATO. 


365 


similitude,  he  fabricates  the  sensible  universe  only-begotten,  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  separate  paradigm  [animal  itself]  transcending  wholes, 
unitedly  constitutes  the  intelligible  universe. 

Moreover,  he  is  likewise  the  fabricator  of  bodies,  and  the  perfector  of 
works,  binding  all  things  by  the  most  excellent  analogies,  and  co-adapt- 
ing  their  powers,  bulks,  and  numbers  by  the  most  beautiful  bonds. 
Farther  still,  he  constituted  the  universe  a  whole  from  wholes,  and  perfect 
from  perfect  parts,  that  it  might  be  free  from  old  age  and  disease,  and 
might  contain  in  itself  all  the  genera  of  the  elements.  He  likewise 
adorned  it  with  the  first  figure,  and  with  the  most  simple  and  most  com- 
prehensive of  all  figures.  Besides  these  things,  he  is  also  the  cause  of 
self-sufficiency  to  the  universe,  and  of  a  circulation  into  itself,  in  order 
that  suffering  all  things  from,  and  effecting  all  things  in  itself,  it  might 
not  be  in  want  of  any  thing  externally  situated.  And  he  is  indeed  the 
supplier  of  intellectual  motion,  and  of  a  life  which  is  evolved  according 
to  time,  and  which  effects  *  a  mutation  always  according  to  the  same,  and 
similarly,  and  about  the  same  things.  Farther  still,  he  is  the  father  of 
soul,  and  of  all  the  genera  in  soul,  of  the  division  in  it,  and  all  the 
harmonic  reasons  it  contains,  constituting  it  in  the  world,  as  a  self-moved 
and  immortal  lyre ;  and  he  is  also  the  divider  of  the  one,  and  the  seven 
circles  in  it,  and  in  short,  is  the  maker  and  fabricator  of  figure  and 
morphe.* 

In  addition  to  these  things  likewise,  he  generates  from  himself  the 
whole  of  time,  according  to  the  imitation  of  eternity,  together  with  all  the 
measures  of  time,  and  the  Gods  that  unfold  these  measures  into  light. 
But  he  especially  constitutes  the  whole  sun,  enkindling  its  light  from  his 
own  intellectual  essence,  in  order  that  possessing  a  transcendency  exempt 
from  the  other  Gods  it  might  be  the  king  of  the  universe.  Moreover,  he 
fabricates '  all  the  multitudes  of  mundane  Gods  and  daemons,  and  all 
celestial  and  sublunary  natures,  in  order  that  he  may  evince  this  only- 

■  For  vtMVfuwv,  it  is  necessary  to  read  wwfumif. 
*  Morphe  pertain*  to  the  colour,  figure,  and  magnitude  of  superficies. 
1  For  intutvpyn,  h  it  necessary  to  read  h^opr*'- 


Digitized  by  Google 


366  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

begotten  and  self-sufficient  God  [the  world]  to  be  the  image  of  the  intel- 
ligible and  all-perfect  God ;  fixing  the  earth  indeed,  as  a  firm  seat 
or  Vesta,  in  it,  but  distributing  by  lot  the  other  elements  to  divine  souls 
and  daemons.  Besides  all  this  likewise,  he  converts  to  himself  the  genera 
of  Gods  that  have  proceeded  from  him,  and  fills  all  things  with  undented 
generation,  with  perpetual  life,  demiurgic  perfection,  and  generative 
abundance.  He  also  constitutes  divisible  souls  together  with  their  vehi- 
cles, divides  them  about  their  leading  Gods,  arranges  different  souls  under 
different  Gods,  unfolds  to  them  the  laws  of  Fate,  measures  their  descents 
into  generation,  establishes  rewards  to  their  contests  in  their  periodic 
revolutions,  and  institutes,  as  I  may  say,  the  whole  of  their  polity  in  the 
world. 

But  after  all  these  things,  he  introduces  a  boundary  to  the  providence 
of  wholes,  and  returning  to  his  own  place  of  survey,  delivering  to  the 
junior  Gods  the  superintendence  of  mortal  natures,  and  abiding  in  his  own 
accustomed  manner,  is  the  paradigm  to  the  demiurgi  in  the  world  of 
providential  attention  to  beings  of  a  second  order.  And  as  in  the  fabri- 
cation of  wholes  the  paradigm  is  intelligible  animal,  so  in  the  arrange- 
ment of  partial  natures,  the  paradigm  is  intellectual  animal,  in  which  all 
forms  shine  forth  in  a  divided  manner,  according  to  their  own  nature. 
For  Timaeus  says,  "  the  children  understanding  the  order  of  their  father, 
were  obedient  to  it,"  and  he  abiding,  and  paternally,  and  eternally  pro- 
ducing all  things,  they  adorn  and  arrange  the  mortal  genera  demiurgi- 
cally, and  according  to  time.  Hence  the  providence  of  the  demiurgus 
presents  itself  to  the  view,  extending  from  on  high  as  far  as  to  the  produc- 
tion of  these,  and  what  is  here  said  by  Plato,  is  as  it  were  a  hymn  to  the 
demiurgus  and  father  of  this  universe,  celebrating  his  productions,  and 
the  benefits  which  he  confers  ou  the  world. 

And  it  is  requisite  that  being  persuaded  by  what  is  here  clearly  written, 
we  should  investigate  all  the  other  enquiries  about  the  demiurgus.  My 
meaning  is,  that  we  should  investigate  what  we  mentioned  a  little  before, 
who  the  demiurgus  is,  and  how  we  ou$ht  to  denominate  him  according 
to  the  sentiments  of  the  Greeks;  and  on  what  account,  Timteus  neither 
delivers  the  name  of  him,  nor  unfolds  to  us  who  he  is,  but  says,  "  that  it 


CH  AP.  XXI. 


OF  PLATO. 


367 


is  difficult  to  discover  him,  and  that  when  discovered,  it  is  impossible  to 
speak  of  him  to  all  men."  Now  therefore,  I  think,  from  what  has  been 
already  said,  it  is  evident  even  to  those  who  are  but  in  a  small  degree 
intelligent,  that  according  to  the  decision  of  Plato,  it  is  the  great  Jupiter, 
who  is  now  celebrated  by  us  as  the  demiurgus.  For  if,  as  we  have  ob- 
served, the  kingdom  of  Saturn  is  the  summit  of  the  whole  intellectual 
triad,  and  the  intelligible  transcendency  of  intellectuals,  but  the  maternal 
and  vivific  fountain  of  Rhea,  is  the  middle  centre,  and  the  receiving  bosom  • 
of  the  generative  power  in  Saturn,  it  is  manifest  to  every  one,  that  the 
mighty  Jupiter  is  allotted  the  end  of  this  triad.  For  from  the  before- 
mentioned  causes,  one  of  which  indeed  is  paternal,  but  the  other  gene- 
rative, he  is  the  God  having  a  paternal  subsistence,  who  is  said  to  reign, 
receiving  the  intellectual  dominion  of  his  father.  If,  therefore,  it  is  ne- 
cessary that  the  demiurgus  should  convolve  the  end  of  this  intellectual 
triad,  as  was  before  demonstrated,  and  to  effect  this,  is  the  province  of 
the  royal  power  of  Jupiter,  we  must  evidently  acknowledge  that  the 
Jovian  empire  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  demiurgus,  and  that  Jupiter  is 
the  demiurgus  celebrated  in  the  Timaeus. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


If,  however,  it  be  necessary  to  consider  this  as  worthy  of  further  discus- 
sion, and  to  demonstrate  that  the  theology  in  the  Timaeus  about  the 
demiurgus,  accords  with  what  is  elsewhere  written  by  Plato  concerning 
this  God,  let  us  in  the  first  place  assume  what  is  delivered  in  the  Critias, 
because  this  dialogue  proximately  follows  the  Timseus,  and  is  composed 
according  to  an  analogy  to  it,  delivering  the  hypostasis  of  the  same  things 
in  images,  the  primary  paradigms  of  which  Timaeus  celebrates  through 


Digitized  by  Google 


368  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

the  fabrication  of  the  world.  Here,  therefore,  Plato,  (that  I  may  derive 
what  I  say  from  the  beginning)  relating  the  warlike  preparations  of  the 
Athenians,  in  former  times,  and  the  insolence  and  usurpation  of  the 
Atlantics,  who  were  the  progeny  of  Neptune,  but  destroyed  the  divine 
seed,  through  the  mixture  of  human  and  mortal  pursuits,  and  conducted 
themselves  insolently  to  all  men,  collects  indeed  the  Gods  to  a  consultation 
concerning  them,  in  the  same  manner  as  poets  inspired  by  Phoebus,  and 
forms  a  common  assembly  of  the  Gods.  But  Jupiter  is  the  author  of  the 
whole  polity  of  them,  and  converts  the  multitude  of  them  to  himself.  And 
as  in  the  Timaeus  the  demiurgus  convolves  all  the  mundane  Gods  to  him- 
self, so  Jupiter  in  the  Critias  providentially  attending  to  the  whole  of 
things,  collects  the  Gods  to  himself. 

In  the  next  place,  therefore,  let  us  consider  what  Plato  says  concerning 
this  God,  and  how  it  accords  with  what  was  before  said  by  Tinueus. 
**  But  Jupiter  the  God  of  Gods  who  reigns  legitimately,  and  who  is  able 
to  perceive  every  thing  of  this  kind,  when  he  saw  that  an  equitable  race 
was  in  a  miserable  condition,  and  was  desirous  of  punishing  them,  in  order 
that  by  being  chastized  they  might  possess  more  elegant  manners,  col- 
lected all  the  Gods  into  their  most  honourable  habitation,  whence  being 
seated  as  in  the  middle  of  the  whole  world,  he  beholds  all  such  things  as 
participate  of  generation."  Here,  directly  in  the  beginning,  king  Jupiter 
being  celebrated  as  the  God  of  Gods,  does  it  not  accord  with  what  is 
written  in  the  Timaeus,  where  he  is  said  to  be  the  father  and  cause  of  all 
the  mundane  Gods?  For  what  other  God  is  it  who  reigns  over  all  the 
Gods,  except  the  cause  of  their  subsistence  and  essence?  Who  is  it  also 
that  calls  the  mundane  deities,  Gods  of  Gods  ?  Is  it  not  him  who  binds 
to  himself  the  principle  of  all  fabrication  ?  If,  therefore,  he  imparts  to 
his  progeny  to  be  Gods  of  Gods,  in  a  much  greater  degree  it  pertains  to 
him  to  be  celebrated  as  the  God  of  all  [the  mundane]]  Gods.  To  which, 
therefore,  of  the  Gods  prior  to  the  world,  does  it  particularly  belong  to 
punish  offenders  except  to  him  who  defines  to  souls  all  their  measures, 
unfolds  to  them  the  laws  of  the  universe,  and  legally  institutes  such  things 
as  arc  fit  concerning  justice  and  injustice,  in  order  that  afterwards  he  may 
not  be  accused  of  the  vices  of  each  of  them  ?    Moreover,  to  congregate. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXII. 


OF  PLATO. 


369 


all  the  Gods  into  their  most  honourable  habitation,  from  which  the  whole 
of  generation  may  be  seen,  and  which  possesses  the  middle  of  the  universe, 
is  to  attribute  to  him  a  providence  exempt  from  multitude,  but  extending 
equally  to  the  whole  world ;  which  things  indeed  are  the  illustrious  goods 
of  the  demiurgic  monad.  For  to  convert  all  the  Gods  to  himself,  and  to 
survey  the  whole  world  pertains  exemptly  to  the  demiurgus  of  the 
universe.  For  what  else  is  multitude  able  to  participate  proximately, 
except  the  monad  from  which  it  derives  its  subsistence?  And  who  can 
convert  all  the  Gods  in  the  world  to  himself,  but  the  fabricator  of  their 
essence,  and  of  their  allotment  in  the  universe? 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


We  must  establish  this,  therefore,  as  one  and  the  first  argument  in 
proof  of  the  thing  investigated.  But  if  you  are  willing,  we  will  derive  a 
second  argument  from  what  is  said  by  Socrates  in  the  Cratylus,  in  which 
he  discusses  the  meaning  of  the  names,  from  which  he  may  represent  to 
us  the  essence  of  Jupiter.  For  he  is  not  led  to  the  nature  of  this  God 
from  one  name,  as  he  is  in  the  names  of  other  Gods,  such  as  Saturn, 
Rhea,  Neptune,  and  Pluto,  but  from  two  names  which  tend  to  one  thing, 
and  which  divisibly  indicate  the  one  and  united  essence  of  Jupiter,  he 
unfolds  the  power  of  this  God,  and  the  peculiarity  of  his  hyparxis.  For 
the  common  rumour  concerning  him,  denominates  him  in  a  two-fold 
respect.  And  at  one  time  calling  him  (&<a)  dia,  we  worship  him  in  our 
prayers  and  hymns ;  but  at  another  time  we  celebrate  him  as  (fijwO  zenat 
a  word  derived  from  life.  Being  therefore  at  the  same  time  called 
zcits,  and  delighting  in  the  appellation  of  dia,  he  is  similarly  denominated 

Proc.  Vot.  I.  3  A 


Digitized  by  Google 


370 


OJT THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  y. 


from  both  names  by  the  Greeks.  And  these  names  manifest  the  essence 
and  order  which  he  is  al totted  among  divine  natures.  And  neither  of 
these  names  indeed,  is  by  itself  sufficiently  able  to  make  known  the  pecu- 
liarity of  the  God ;  but  when  conjoined  with  each  other  and  forming  a 
sentence,  they  have  the  power  of  unfolding  the  truth  concerning  him. * 
How,  therefore,  from  both  the  names  the  poweT  of  this  king  is  signified, 
and  the  precedaneous  order  of  his  hypostasis  in  the  Gods,  we  may  hear 
Socrates  himself  saying,  "  That  the  name  of  his  father"  who  is  called 
Jupiter  is  beautifully  posited  ;  but  that  it  is  not  easy  to  apprehend  the 
meaning  of  it,  because  in  reality  the  name  of  Jupiter  is  as  it  were  a 
sentence.  Dividing  it  however  into  two  parts,  some  of  us  use  one  part, 
and  some  another.  For  some  indeed  call  him  zena,  but  others  dia. 
.  And  these  parts  collected  into  one  evince  the  nature  of  the  God,  which 
we  say  a  name  ought  to  effect.  For  there  is  not  any  other  who  is  more 
the  author  of  life  to  us,  and  to  all  other  things  than  he  who  is  the  ruler 
and  king  of  all  things.  It  happens,  therefore,  that  this  God  is  rightly 
denominated,  on  account  of  whom  life  is  present  to  all  living  beings. 
But  it  is  divided  into  two  parts,  as  if  I  should  say  that  there  is  one 
name  from  dia  and  zena."  The  mode,  therefore,  of  collecting  the  names 
into  one,  and  of  rendering  the  hyparxis  of  this  God  apparent  through 
both,  is  manifest  to  every  one. 

If,  however,  he  is  the  supplier  of  life  to  all  things,  as  he  is  said  to  be, 
and  is  the  ruler  and  king  of  all  such  tilings  as  arc  said  to  live,  to  whom  can 
we  assert  this  peculiarity  pertains,  if  we  omit  the  demiurgus?  And  is  it 
not  necessary,  that  according  with  what  is  said  in  the  Timacus,  we  should 
refer  to  him  the  principle  of  vivification.  For  the  demiurgus  renders  the 
whole  world  animated,  endued  with  intellect,  and  an  animal,  and  consti- 
tutes the  triple  life  which  is  in  it,  one  indeed  being  impartible  and 
intellectual,  another  partible  aud  corporeal,  and  another  between  these, 
impartible  and  at  the  same  time  partible.  It  is  he  likewise  who  conjoins 
each  of  the  celestial  spheres  to  the  circulations  of  the  soul,  inserts  in  each 
of  the  stars  a  psychical  and  intellectual  life,  and  produces  in  the 

1  For  aura*  it  teems  necessary  to  read  avrw. 
1  i.  e.  Of  the  father  of  Tantalus. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXII.  OF  PLATO.  37I 

-sublunary  elements  leading  Gods  and  souls,  and  in  addition  to  all  these 
things,  constitutes  the  divisible  genera  of  life,  and  imparts  to  the  junior 
Gods  the  principle  of  mortal  animals.  All  tilings  therefore  in  the  world 
are'full  of  life,  through  the  power  of  the  demiurgus  and  father.  And  this 
world  is  one  animal,  denying  its  completion  from  containing  all  animals, 
through  the  never-failing  cause  of  the  power  by  which  it  was  generated. 
And  there  is  no  other  who  is  the  supplier  of  life  to  all  things,  and  through 
whom  all  things  live,  some  indeed  more  clearly,  but  others  more 
obscurely,  than  the  demiurgus  of  wholes.  For  he  also  is  intellectual 
animal,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  all-perfect  paradigm  is  intelligible 
animal.  Hence  likewise,  these  are  conjoined  to  ea«h  other.  And  the 
one  indeed  is  paternally  the  cause  of  wholes ;  but  the  other  demiurgi- 
cally. And  as  animal  itself  constitutes  intelligibly,  all  intelligible  and 
sensible  animals,  according  to  one  cause,  thus  also  the  demiurgus 
fabricates  intellectually  according  to  a  second  order,  the  animals  in  the 
world. 

As  animal  itself  likewise  proximately  subsists  from  intelligible  life,  so 
the  demiurgus  is  generated  from  intellectual  life,  and  is  the  first  that  is 
.filled  with  the  rivers  of  vivification.  Hence  he  illuminates  all  things 
with  life,  unfolding  the  depths  of  the  animal-producing  deity,  and  calling 
forth  the  prolific  power  of  the  intellectual  Gods.  If  therefore,  all  things 
live  through  the  demiurgic  cause,  they  also  participate  of  soul  and  intel- 
lect, and,  as  I  may  say,  of  all  vivification,  through  the  providence  of  this 
God.  But  he  who  pours  the  rivers  of  life  on  all  things  in  the  world  from 
himself,  and  is  the  ruler  and  king  of  wholes,  is  the  mighty  Jupiter,  as 
Socrates  says  in  the  Cratylus,  and  evidently  appears  to  be  the  same  with 
the  demiurgus.  And  the  divinely-inspired  intellectual  conception  of 
Timaeus  concerning  the  demiurgus,  accords  with  the  theology  of  Socrates 
about  Jupiter.  If  likewise  each  of  them  denominates  the  knowledge  of 
this  God  difficult  to  be  apprehended,  and  one  of  them  says  that  it  is 
difficult  to  discover  him,  and  when  discovered,  that  it  is  impossible  to 
speak  of  him  to  all  men,  but  the  other  asserts  that  it  is  not  easy  'to 
understand  the  name  of  Jupiter,  do  they  not  in  this  respect  accord  with 
each  other  in  what  they  say  concerning  this  God?  Besides  this  also,  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


37^ 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


composition  of  the  names,  and  the  coalition  of  the  two  names  into  one 
hyparxis,  appear  in  a  remarkable  degree  to  be  adapted  to  the  demiurgus. 
For  a  biformed'  essence,  and  generative  power,  are  attributed  to  him 
according  to  other  theologists.  For  the  duad  sits  with  him,  according  to 
which  he  generates  all  things ;  concerning  which  Timaeus  also  introduces 
him  speaking  to  the  demiurgi  in  the  world,  and  saying,  **  Imitating  my 
power."  And  through  this  he  produces  and  vivifies  all  things.  Hence 
it  is  necessary  through  names  also  to  consecrate  the  duad  to  him 
according  to  ancient  rumour.  For  he  glitters  with  intellectual  sections, 
divides  and  collects  wholes,  and  constitutes  one  indissoluble  order  from 
many  things.  And  this  the  power  of  the  names  indicates,  extending  us 
from  divided  intellection,  to  one  self-perfect  and  uniform  theory. 

All  these  particulars  therefore,  clearly  demonstrate  to  us  that  Plato  con- 
siders the  demiurgus  of  wholes  to  be  the  same  with  Jupiter.  For  he  who 
alone  is  the  cause  of  life  to  all  things,  and  who  is  the  king  of  all  things,  is  the 
demiurgus  of  the  universe.  And  he  who  in  a  remarkable  manner  rejoices  in 
a  duad  of  names,  is  he  who  arranges  and  adorns  the  whole  world.  And  it 
appears  to  me,  as  I  have  frequently  said,  that  in  consequence  of  being 
allotted  the  end  of  the  intellectual  triad,  converting  this  to  the  beginning, 
and  being  full  of  the  middle  fountains  of  life-,  but  uniting  himself  to  the 
watch-tower  of  his  father,  and  producing  into  himself  the  simplicity  of 
an  intelligible  subsistence,  according  to  the  peculiarity  of  first-effective 
causes,  he  is  also  allotted  a  duad  of  names.  And  as  he  received  his 
essence  from  both  [i.  e.  from  Saturn  and  Rhea]  and  possesses  indeed 
bound  from  his  father,  but  infinite  power  from  the  generative  deity  of  his 
mother,  thus  also  he  possesses  one  of  the  names  from  his  father,  and  from 
the  uniform  perfection  which  is  in  him  ;  but  the  other  from  total  vivifica- 
tion.  And  through  both,  as  he  is  allotted  an  essence,  so  likewise  an 
appellation.  For  it  is  obvious  to  every  one,  that  the  term  (ha)dial  on 
account  of  which,  is  a  sigu  of  a  total  essence.  -  Let  us  declare,  says 
Timaeus,  on  account  of  what  cause  [the  composing  artificer  constituted 
generation  and  the  universe].    He  was  good."    But  the  name  of  life 

'  For  Wnt*;,  h  it  necessary  to  read  evouk;. 

*  In  the  original  lit,  but  it  U  evidently  necessary  to  read  lieu 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XX1I1.  OF  PLATO.  373 

pertains  of  itself  to  the  middle  order  of  beings.  The  demiurgus  there- 
fore obtains  one  of  these  names,  viz.  dia,  from  the  intellectual  summit, 
and  the  paternal  union.  For  according  to  the  participation  of  it,  he  is 
one,'  bound,  and  intelligible.  Bat  he  obtains  the  other  name  from  the 
middle  order  of  intellectuals.  For  there  life,  and  the  vivific  bosoms  are 
allotted  their  hypostasis.  The  demiurgic  intellect  however,  shining  forth 
from  both,  participates  also  of  the  names  through  composition.  For  we 
call  him  dia  and  zena,  because  life  proceeds  to  all  things  on  account  of 
him,  and  to  live  is  inherent  in  all  [vital  natures]  on  account  of  him. 
And  thus  after  a  manner  the  position  of  the  names  indicates  the  progres- 
sion of  the  demiurgus  from  both  the  precedaneous  causes. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 


Again  therefore,  let  us  direct  our  attention  to  what  is  written  in  the 
Philebus,  and  survey  how,  in  what  is  there  said,  Socrates  refers  the  fabri- 
cation of  the  universe  to  Jupiter.  For  admitting  that  intellect  adorns  and 
arranges  all  things,  in  the  same  manner  as  the-  wise  men  prior  to  him, 
and  that  it  governs  the  sun  and  moon,  and  all  the  circulation  [of  the 
heavens]  he  demonstrates  that  the  whole  world  participates  of  soul,  and 
intellectual  inspection,  and  that  we  also  derive  the  participation  of  these 
from  wholes ;  but  that  the  universe  is  not  and  was  not  from  chance,  and 
likewise  the  most  divine  of  visible  natures,  as  many  physiologists  assert, 
white  the  natures  which  the  universe  contains  participate  of  soul  and 
intellect.    Having  therefore,  as  we  have  said,  demonstrated  these  things, 

•  For  m<rri,  it  it  mcmsxtj  to  read  n  t<m. 


Digitized  by  Google 


374  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

and  shown  that  what  the  whole  world  contains  is  greater  and  more  perfect 
than  what  we  contain,  and  that  wholes  have  a  greater  authority,  and  a 
more  ruling  essence  than  partial  natures,  and  having  placed  intellect  over 
wholes,  as  that  which  adorns  and  arranges  the  universe,  and  likewise 
assigned  this  province  to  soul,  through  the  inspection  of  intellect,  (for 
intellect  is  not  present  to  the  world  without  soul)  he  afterwards  recurs  to 
i  in  participate  intellect,  to  the  author  of  participated  intellect  and  soul, 
and  the  fabricator  of  the  whole  world,  and  he  denominates  and  celebrates 
this  fabricator,  who  contains  the  causes  of  the  plenitudes  in  the  world,  as 
no  other  thau  Jupiter  the  great  king  and  ruler  of  wholes,  conformably  to 
the  rumour  of  the  Greeks.  He  likewise  extends  about  him  all  the 
providence  of  the  world,  and  places  in  him  the  whole  cause  of  the 
arrangement  and  ornament  of  the  universe. 

It  is  better  however,  in  the  next  place,  to  hear  the  words  themselves  of 
Plato.  He  gives  therefore  to  the  world  an  intellectual  superintendance, 
and  adds  this  to  the  before  mentioned  demonstrations,  that  there  is,  as  we 
have  frequently  observed,  an  abundance  of  infinity  in  the  world,  and  a 
sufficiency  of  bound,  and  that  there  is  a  certain  cause  in  them  by  no 
means  vile  and  contemptible,  which  adorns  and  co-arranges  the  years, 
the  seasons,  and  the  months,  and  which  may  most  justly  be  called 
wisdom  and  intellect.  But  .again,  because  it  is  necessary  that  partici- 
pated intellect  should  govern  the  world  through  soul  as  a  medium,  (for  it 
is  impossible  that  intellect  should  be  present  to  any  tiling  without  soul, 
as  Timasus  also  asserts)  hence  it  is  requisite  that  soul  also  should  preside 
over  the  universe,  and  that  proximately  having  dominion  over  the  natures 
it  contains,  it  should  govern  the  world  according  to  intellect.  This 
therefore  Socrates  having  in  the  next  place  added,  he  subjoins  as  follows: 
"Moreover,  wisdom  and  intellect  could  never  be  without  soul."  For 
how  could  the  impartible  and  eternal  essence  of  intellect  be  immediately 
conjoined  with  a  corporeal  nature  ?  It  is  necessary  therefore  that  intellect 
should  preside  over  wholes,  that  it  may  connect  the  order  in  the  world, 
well-being,  and  all  tilings.  For  order  and  well-being  are  the  progeny  of 
an  intellectual  essence.  But  it  is  necessary  that  soul  primarily  participa- 
ting of  intellect,  should  illuminate  body  with  the  light  proceeding  from 


♦ 

Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXIIL 


OF  PLATO. 


875 


thence,  and  fill  all  thiogs  with  intellectual  arrangement.  It  must  be 
admitted  therefore,  that  the  world  is  animated  and  endued  with  intellect. 
Hence  from  this  Socrates  ascends  to  the  cause  itself  of  the  whole  world, 
which  produced  intellect  and  soul,  and  generated  the  total  order  [of  the 
universe.^ 

"  Hence,  (Socrates  adds)  you  may  say  that  in  the  nature  of  Jupiter 
there  are  a  royal  soul  and  a  royal  intellect  through  the  power  of  cause ; 
and  that  in  the  other  Gods  there  are  other  beautiful  things,  whatever 
they  are,  by  which  their  deities  love  to  be  distinguished,  and  from  which 
they  delight  in  taking  their  respective  denominations."    One  of  these 
two  things  therefore  is  necessary,  either  that  what  is  here  said  is  said 
concerning  the  world,  or  concerning  the  demiurgus  of  wholes.    For  if 
the  world  is  Jupiter,  the  participated  intellect  in  the  world  is  royal, 
and  the  soul  also  is  royal  which  governs  the  universe,  and  arranges  and 
adorns  it  according  to  intellect    And  these  things  are  evidently  present 
to  the  world  through  the  power  of  the  cause  by  which  it  was  constituted, 
and  which  rendered  it  a  partaker  of  intellect  and  animated.    And  thus 
Jupiter  will  be  that  which  is  adorned  and  fabricated,  and  not  tlie 
adorner  and  fabricator  of  all  things.    If,  however,  it  is  necessary  that  the 
power  of  cause  should  be  comprehensive  in  an  exempt  manner  of  a  royal 
intellect  and  a  royal  soul,  we  must  admit  that  the  nature  of  Jupiter  is  in 
the  demiurgic  order  and  power;  and  intellect  and  soul  will  be  in  him 
according  to  cause,  since  he  imparts  both  these  to  his  progeny.    Of  these 
two  opinions  therefore,  every  one  may  adopt  that  which  he  pleases,  but 
to  me,  when  I  consider  what  is  here  said,  and  every  other  assertion  of 
Plato  concerning  this  God,  it  by  no.  means  appears  to  be  necessary  to 
refer  the  nature  of  Jupiter  to  the  whole  world.    For  neither  does  the 
only-begotten  subsistence  of  the  world  accord  with  the  kingdom  of 
Jupiter,  since  the  Saturnian  triad,  and  which  distributes  the  dominion  of 
the  father,  is  manifestly  celebrated  by  Plato  himself;  nor  can  that  which 
is  cause  to  all  things,  as  it  is  said  in  the  Cratylus,  refer '  to  the  world. 
For  the  world  is  among  the  number  of  things  which  participate  of  life 


■  For  lt*t$f*i,  it  U  necessary  to  read  . 


376  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

from  another.  As  I  have  said  therefore,  we  roust  leave  this  opinion,  as 
by  no  means  adapted  to  Plato,  though  it  is  adopted  by  some  of  his 
interpreters.  But  considering  cause  to  be  the  same  as  Jupiter,  we  must 
say  that  soul  and  intellect  are  established  in  him  exemptly ;  and  that 
Jupiter  participates  of  both  these,  from  the  Gods  that  are  prior  to  him  ; 
of  intellect  indeed,  from  his  father,  but  of  soul  from  the  queen  [[Rhea] 
who  is  the  deity  of  vivification.  For  there  the  fountain  of  soul  subsists, 
just  as  in  Saturn,  there  is  intellect  according  to  essence.  For  every 
where  the  intelligible  unically  comprehends  the  intellect  which  is  coordi- 
nate with  it.    And  thus  much  concerning  these  particulars. 


■  '■  - 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


In  the  next  place,  we  may  conjoin  with  this  the  mythological  concep- 
tions in  the  Protagoras,  and  arrive  at  the  same  conclusion,  considering  in 
common  with  the  Timaeus,  how  the  opinions  delivered  to  us  concerning 
the  mighty  Jupiter,  through  the  Protagorean  fable,  accord  with  the  asser- 
tions about  the  demiurgus.  The  fable  says,  therefore,  that  Prometheus 
adorning  the  human  race,  and  providentially  attending  to  our  rational 
life,  that  it  may  not  perish  by  being  merged  in  the  furies  of  earth,  and 
the  necessities  of  nature,  ns  some  one  of  the  Gods  says,  bound  nature  to 
the  arts,  extended  these  which  are  imitations  of  intellect,  as  it  were  to 
sportive  souls,  and  through  these  excited  our  gnostic  and  dianoetic  power 
to  the  contemplation  of  forms.  For  every  artificial  production  is  effec- 
tive of  form,  and  adorns  the  matter  which  is  the  subject  of  it.  The  fable 
also  adds,  that  Prometheus  providentially  attending  to  the  arts  gave  them 
to  souls,  and  that  he  received  them  from  Vulcan  and  Minerva.    For  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXIV.  OF  PLATO.  377 

these  Gods  the  cause  of  all  arts  is  primarily  comprehended ;  Vulcau. 
primarily  imparting  the  fabricative  power  of  them  ;  but  Minerva  super- 
nally  illumiuating  their  guostic  and  intellectual   power.     Not  only 
however,  is  the  invention  of  arts  necessary  to  souls  in  generation,  but 
also  a  certain  other  science,  the  political,  which  is  more  perfect  than  the 
arts,  and  which  is  able  to  arrange  and  adorn  tliem,  aod  to  lead  souls 
through  virtue  to  a  life  according  to  intellect.    But  as  Prometheus  was 
unable  to  impart  this  life  to  us,  because  the  political  science  is  primarily 
with  the  mighty  Jupiter,  but  it  was  not  possible  (says  the  fable)  for 
Prometheus  to  enter  latently  into  the  tower  of  Jupiter,  (for  the  guards  of 
Jupiter  are  terrible,  defending  him  exempt  from  aJl  partial  causes,) — 
hence  Jupiter  sent  the  messenger  Hermes  to  men,  who  brought  with  him 
prudence  and  shame,  and  in  short  the  political  science.   Jupiter  also 
ordered  Hermes  to  imparl  similarly  to  all  men  these  virtues,  and  to  dis- 
tribute to  all  souls  the  knowledge  of  things  just,  beautiful,  and  good,  but 
not  in  a  divided  manner,  as  different  arts  are  distributed  to  different 
persons.   Aod  some  men  indeed  are  judges  of  these  things;  but  others 
are  ignorant  either  of  all,  or  of  some  of  the  arts. 

In  what  is  here  said,  therefore,  Plato  primarily  refers  to  Jupiter  the 
paradigm  of  the  political  science,  as  is  evident  from  the  words  themselves. 
But  he  produces  the  progression  of  this  science,  and  the  communication 
and  participation  of  the  Hermaical  series,  aud  extends  its  essential 
presence,  which  we  participate  in  common,  to  all  souls.  For  to  distribute 
to  all  of  them,  is  to  insert  in  souls  essentially  a  science  of  this  kind. 
Tltese  things,  therefore,  being  laid  down,  let  us  consider  to  whom  we 
must  say  ihe  political  science  especially  pertains,  and  who  it  is  that 
primarily  established  a  polity  in  the  universe,  that  formed  divine  to 
govern  mortal  natures,  divided  wholes  from  parts,  and  produced  self- 
motive  and  intellectual  natures  more  aocient  than  those  thut  are  deprived 
of  the  presence  of  intellect.  Is  it  not  the  demiurgns,  who  is  the  cause  to 
us  of  all  these  goods,  who  governs  the  whole  world  according  60  recti- 
tude, binds  it  by  the  best  analogies,  ebtablishea  every  polity  in  it,  pos- 
sesses and  comprehends  the  laws  of  Fate,  and  extends  the  sacred  law6  of 
Adrastia,  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  tilings,  and  arranges  and  adorns  by  justice 
Froc.  Vol.  I.  3  B 


Digitized  by  Google 


378 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


all  celestial  and  sublunary  natures  ?  For  he  who  introduces  partial  souls 
into  the  universe  as  into  their  habitation,  and  imparts  to  them  a  total 
polity  which  is  the  best  of  all  polities,  and  is  governed  by  the  most  excel- 
lent laws,  is  he  who  denominates  these  laws  the  laws  of  Fate,  who  defines 
the  measures  of  Justice,  and  legally  institutes  all  things,  as  Timseus  says. 
Is  it  not  therefore  superfluous  to  endeavour  to  prove  that  he  who  possesses 
the  first  paradigm  of  the  political  science*  is  according  to  Plato  the  demi- 
urgus? 

If,  however,  these  things  are  true,  and  according  to  the  fable  in  the 
Protagoras  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  political  science  first  subsists  in 
Jupiter,  it  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said,  that  the  demiurgus  of  the 
universe  is  Jupiter.  For  to  what  other  cauee  can  we  grant  the  primary 
form  of  the  political  science  to  belong,  than  to  that  which  arranges  and 
adorns  the  universe  ?  If  the  polity  ia  the  heavens  is  the  first  and  most 
perfect  of  all  polities,  as  Socrates  in  the  Republic  says  k  is.  Who  like- 
wise is  he  that  produces  all  things,  and  co-arranges  them  when  produced 
to  each  other,  in  order  to  the  elegant  disposition  of  the  universe  ?  If, 
therefore,  the  first  and  most  perfect  demiurgus  of  the  universe  is  political,, 
but  the  political  science  first  subsists  with  Jupiter,  being  established  with 
him  on  a  sacred  foundation,  proceeds  from  thence  to  all  secondary 
natures,  and  adorns  and  arranges  both  wholes  and  parts  according  ft> 
intellect,  it  is  evidently  necessary  that  the  demkirgus  of  wholes  should  be 
the  same  with  Jupiter,  and  that  there  should  be  one  byparxis  of  both, 
which  administers  every  thing  in  the  world  according  to  rectitude,  and 
'  circularly  leads  every  thing  confused  and  disorderly  into  order.  For, 
says  Timaeus,  it  is  not  lawful  for  that  which  is  best  to  effect  any  thing 
else  than  that  which  is  most  beautiful.  How  therefore  is  it  possible  that  he 
who  adorns  and  arranges  wholes  through  Themis,  and  together  with  ber 
produces  all  things,  should  not  essentially  possess  in  himself  the  whole  of 
the  political  science  ? 

How  is  it  possible  likewise  that  he  should  not  be  the  first  Jupiter,  who 
definitely  imparts  to  ail  things  that  which  is  divine,  and  weaves  one  polity 
from  all  things,  but  is  exempt  from  all  partial  causes  and  the  Titannic 
genera,  and  is  guarded  by  his  own  undefiled  powers,  beyond  the  whole 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXV. 


OP  PLATO. 


379 


world  ?  For  the  guards  which  surround  him,  obscurely  signify  his  immu- 
table order,  and  the  undeviating  defence  of  fabrication,  through  which 
being  firmly  established  in  himself,  he  pervades  through  all  things  without 
impediment,  and  being  present  to  all  his  progeny,  is  according  to  supreme 
transcendency  expanded  above  wholes.  Moreover,  the  citadel  of  Jupiter, 
according  to  the  rumours  of  theologists,  is  a  symbol  of  intellectual  circula- 
tion, and  of  the  highest  summit  of  Olympus,  which  all  the  wise  suspend 
from  the  intellectual  watch  tower  of  Jupiter,  to  which  he  extends  all  the 
mundane  Gods,  imparting  to  them  from  thence  intellectual  powers, 
divine  light,  and  vivific  illuminations,  and  compressing  all  the  profundi- 
ties of  the  worlds  by  one  most  simple  circulation,  through  which  the 
summit  also  of  the  apparent  worlds  is  denominated  the  period  of  same- 
ness, and  the  most  prudent  and  uniform  circulation,  as  Timeeus  says, 
expressing  the  unical  intellectual  power  of  demiurgic  conversion,  and 
being  allotted  the  same  transcendency  with  respect  to  all  the  sensible 
world  that  the  supreme  summit  of  Jupiter  possesses  with  respect  to  all 
the  arrangement  of  the  firmaments.  These  things  may  also  be  assumed 
by  us  as  subservient  to  the  proposed  investigation,  from  the  fabulous 
fictions  in  the  Protagoras. 


RAPIER  XXV. 


Wb  may,  however,  approach  still  nearer  to  the  truth,  and  assume  in 
the  present  discussion,  the  fable  in  the  Politicus.  For  in  this  it  will  ap- 
pear that  Plato  in  a  remarkable  manner  considers  the  demiurgus  of  the 
universe  to  be  the  same  with  Jupiter,  and  even  as  far  as  to  the  very 
names  asserts  the  same  things  a6  Timaeus.  The  Elean  guest,  therefore, 
as  we  have  before  observed,  assigns  £in  this  dialogue]  twofold  circulations 


380  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

to  the  whole  of  this  world,  the  one  intellectual,  and  which  elevates  souls 
but  the  other  proceeding  into  nature,  and  imparting  things  contrary  to 
the  former.  And  the  one  indeed,  being  unapparent,  and  governed  by 
divine  providence,  but  the  other  apparent,  and  convolved  according  to 
the  order  of  Fate.  He  also  places  twofold  motive  causes  over  these 
circulations.  For  every  mutation  and  period  require  a  certain  moving 
cause.  And  prior  to  the  causes  that  move  the  circulations,  he  asserts 
that  there  are  as  it  were  twofold  ends  of  the  periods,  and  assigns  first- 
effective  canscs  of  the  motions,  coordinate  to  the  moving  causes,  and  to 
the  circulations  themselves  which  differ  from  each  other.  Jupiter  there- 
fore moves,  and  circularly  leads  one  of  the  periods,  whether  you  are  wil- 
ling to  call  it  intellectual,  or  providential,  or  in  whatever  other  way  you 
may  denominate  it,  and  he  also  supplies  the  world  with  life,  and  imparts 
to  it  a  renovated  immortality.  But  he  prcestablishes  his  father  Saturn 
as  the  object  of  desire  to,  and  the  end  of  the  whole  of  this  circulation.  For 
he  leads  back  wholes,  and  converts  them  to  himself. 

Moreover,  he  extends  happy  souls  to  the  watch-tower  of  his  father,  viz. 
those  souls  whose  corporeal  nature  is  obliterated,  and  whose  circulation 
is  to  the  incorporeal  and  the  impartible.  All  the  generation-producing* 
symbols  likewise  of  these  souls  are  amputated,  and  the  form  of  their  life 
is  transferred  to  the  intellectual  summit.  For  these  souls  are  also  said  to 
t>e  the  nurselings  of  Saturn,  but  to  commit  the  government  of  themselves 
to  Jupiter,  and  through  him  to  be  extended  to  the  intelligible,  and  the 
Saturnian  dominion.  For  the  intelligible  is  nutriment,  as  it  is  said  by  the 
Gods  themselves.  And  as  Socrates  in  the  Phaedrus  elevates  souls 
through  the  circulation  of  the  heaven  to  the  supercelestial  place,  where 
souls  are  nourished,  survey  true  beings,  and  the  unknown  order  of  the 
Cods,  with  the  highest  powers  of  themselves,  and  as  he  there  says,  intel- 
lectually perceive  with  the  lieads  of  the  charioteers,— thus  also  the  Elean 
guest  circularly  leads  souls  under  Jupiter,  to  the  Saturnian  watch-tower, 
and  asserts  that  such  as  have  ascended  are  nourished  by  Saturn,  and  calls 
them  the  nurselings  of  the  God.  For  every  where  indeed,  the  intelligible 
is  perfective  of,  and  has  the  power  of  filling  an  intellectual  life,  and  the 

•  For  Tttovtwpy*,  it  is  necessary  to  read  yntvMp/x. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXV. 


©F  PLATO. 


pate  of  the  natures  that  are  beyond,  establish  themselves  in  more  elevated 
intellectuals,  and  ascend  as  far  as  to  the  unknown  order,  but  remote  from 
the  good,  and  the  one  principle  of  all  things.  But  the  souls  [that  ascend 
through  the  circulation  of  the  heaven]  are  extended  to  the  first  intellect, 
which  is  imparticipable,  and  the  intelligible  itself,  and  when  they  are 
there,  and  have  established  their  life  in  the  occult  order  as  in  a  port,  they 
ineffably  participate  of  the  union  proceeding  from  the  good,  and  of  the 
light  of  truth. 

With  respect  however  to  what  remains  respecting  the  twofold  periods, 
as  we  have  said,  the  world  itself  indeed  moves  itself,  being  moved 
according  to  its  own  nature,  and  giving  completion  to  the  order  of  Fate. 
But  the  nrst-eflective  cause  of  this  motion  of  the  world,  and  of  its  life,  i» 
the  God  who  illuminates  it  with  the  power  of  being  moved  and  of  living, 
and  is  the  mighty  Jupiter.  Hence  also  this  period  is  said  to  be  Jovian, 
so  far  as  Jupiter  is  the  cause  of  this  apparent  arrangement,  just  as  Saturn 
is  the  cause  of  the  intellectual  and  unapparent  arrangement.  It  is  better, 
however,  to  hear  Plato  himself  discussing  these  things.  That  there  are, 
therefore,  twofold  circulations  of  the  universe,  and  that  the  God  who 
moves  it  is  the  leader  of  the  one,  but  of  the  other  the  world  itself  convolv- 
ing itself,  Plato  here  teaches  us.  But  as  was  just  now  said,  and  which  is 
the  only  thiug  that  remains,  the  universe  is  at  one  time  co-governed  by 
another  divine  cause,  again  acquiring  life,  and  receiving  a  renovated 
immortality  from  the  deouurgus;  but  at  another  time,  when  he  lays  aside 
as  it  were  the  handle  of  his  rudder,  the  world  being  left  by  itself,  moves 
for  a  time  by  itself,  so  as  frequently  to  proceed  in  an  inverted  order. 

Again,  however,  that  one  of  the  periods,  viz.  the  apparent,  in  Jovian, 
but  that  the  other  is  referred  to  the  kingdom  of  Saturn,  Plato  himself 
determines  in  what  follows,  subjoining  these  words,  after  the  celebration 
of  that  life,  and  of  the  undented  polity  of  the  souls  that  are  there,  which 
is  liberated  from  all  corporeal  pains,  and  the  servitude  about  matter : 
"  You  have  beard,  Socrates,  what  was  the  life  of  men  under  Saturn ;  but 
youyourself  have  seen  what  the  condition  of  the  present  life  is,  which  is  said 
to  be  under  Jupiter."   And  moreover,  that  of  these  two  circulations, 


OW  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


(since  the  apparent  is  under'" Jupiter)  Jupiter  is  the  cause  and  maker  of 
it,  is  obvious  to  every  one,  and  that  again  Jupiter  is  the  power  that  moves 
the  unapparent  circulation,  which  is  Saturnian,  may  be  demonstrated 
from  what  in  written.  For  it  is  necessary  that  these  two  Gods  should 
cither  rule  over  each  of  these  circulations,  or  that  one  of  them  should  rule 
over  the  unapparent,  but  the  other  over  the  present  circulation.  If, 
however,  Jupiter  moves  the  universe  according  to  this  period,  the  world 
can  no  longer  be  said  to  convolve  itself,  and  to  govern  every  thing  it 
contains.  Nor  will  it  be  true  neither  that  the  whole  is  convolved  by 
divinity  with  twofold  and  contrary  circulations,  nor  again,  that  two 
certain  Gods  convolve  it  whose  decisions  are  contrary  to  each  other. 
For  if  Saturn  indeed  moves  it  according  to  one  circulation,  but  Jupiter 
moves  it  according  to  a  period  contrary  to  that  of  Saturn,  two  Gods 
will  move  it  according  to  contrary  circumvolutions.  If,  however,  these 
things  are  impossible,  it  is  indeed  manifest  to  every  one  that  both  the 
divine  causes  preside  over  the  circulation  according  to  the  Saturnian 
convolution;  Saturn  indeed  as  the  supplier  of  an  intellectual  life;  but 
Jupiter,  as  elevating  all  things  to  the  Saturnian  empire,  and  establishing 
them  in  his  own  intelligible.  And  thus  that  period  may  be  called  Sa- 
turnian, in  consequence  of  Saturn  imparting  the  first  effective  cause  of 
the  whole  [of  an  intellectual]  life.  But  according  to  this  more  physical 
circulation,  and  which  is  known  to  every  one,  Fate  and  connate  desire 
move  the  universe. 

Jupiter,  however,  is  the  cause  of  this  motion  esemptly,  who  gives 
Fate  and  an  adscititious  life  to  the  world.  These  things,  therefore,  being 
demonstrated  by  us,  let  us  consider  what  the  particulars  are  which  are 
asserted  of  the  God  who  moves  the  world  according  to  the  other  period. 
And  they  are  these;  "  that  the  world  indeed  at  another  time  is 
conjointly  governed  by  another  divine  cause,  again  acquiring  life,  and 
receiving  a  renovated  immortality  from  the  demiurgus."  It  is  obvious, 
therefore,  to  every  one,  that  the  Elean  guest  says,  that  the  God  who 
moves  the  universe  according  to  the  Saturnian  period,  supplies  it  with 
life,  and  imparts  to  it  a  renovated  immortality,  and  that  he  clearly  calls 
him  the  demiurgus.   Hence,  if  it  is  Jupiter  who  conjointly  governs  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXV. 


OF  PLATO. 


period,  as  has  been  demonstrated,  he  will  be  the  demiurgus  of  the  world, 
and  the  supplier  of  immortality.  And  what  occasion  is  there  to  say 
much  on  the  subject  ?  For  if  the  same  God  is  the  cause  of  life,  and  is 
denominated  the  demiurgus,  again  the  Cratylus  will  present  itself  to 
us,  and  Jupiter  according  to  this  will  be  the  same  with  the  demiurgus. 
For  life  accedes  to  all  things  from  Jupiter,  as  it  is  asserted  in  that 
dialogue.  Moreover,  in  what  follows,  as  Timteus  calls  the  cause  of  the 
.  circulation  of  Fate,  demiurgus  and  father,  after  the  same  manner  the 
Elean  guest  denominates  this  cause,  and  also  calls  it  the  maker.  "  For 
the  world," says  he,  "  revolves,  remembering  the  doctrine  of  the  demi- 
urgus and  father."  Properly,  therefore,  do  we  denominate  the  whole 
of  this  period  Jovian,  because  the  world  moves  and  convolves  itself, 
according  to  the  doctrine  of  Jupiter,  and  the  order  imparted  to  it  from 
him.  Again,  therefore,  Jupiter  is  demiurgus  and  father.  And  here  also 
the  Elean  guest  preserves  the  same  order  of  the  divine  names  as  Timaeus. 
For  he  does  not'  call  him  father  and  demiurgus,  but  on  the  contrary,  in 
the  same  manner  as  Timseus,  demiurgus  and  father  ;  because  the  demi- 
urgic peculiarity  in  him  is  more  manifest  than  the  paternal  deity.  These 
things,  however,  have  been  copiously  investigated  before ;  and  it  has 
been  shown  in  what  respect  the  demiurgic  is  different  from  the  paternal 
genus,  how  they  are  complicated  with  each  other,*  where  the  paternal 
subsists  essentially,  but  the  demiurgic  according  to  cause,  and  where 
again,  the  demiurgic  subsists  essentially,  but  the  paternal,  according  to 
participation. 

■  For  uu  ymf  it  if  oecemry  to  read  ov  yaj. 
*  For  i*  **)*>s,  it  it  requisite  to  read  n> 


384  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


It  will  remain,  therefore,  that  we  should  make  mention  of  what  is 
written  in  the  Laws  concerning  Jupiter.  For  perhaps  in  them  alto  it 
will  appear  that  Plato  assigns  the  same  order  to  the  demiurgus  and  to 
Jupiter.  As  the  equalities  therefore,  according  to  which  polities  are 
adorned,  are  twofold,  and  the  one  polity  indeed  proposes  the  equal 
according  to  number,  and  proceeds  through  things  which  differ  from 
each  other  according  to  an  equal  law ;  but  the  other  embraces  in  all 
things,  the  equality  winch  is  according  to  desert;  and  also,  since 
equality  subsists  according  to  ratio, — this  being  the  case,  each  of  these 
equalities  exists  in  the  providence  of  the  world.  For  the  essence  of  the 
soul,  indeed,  is  primarily  divided  by  its  fabricator  by  the  equality 
according  to  ratio ;  but  it  is  also  consummately  filled  with  the  remaining 
middles,  and  bound  with  them  through  the  whole  of  itself.  The  several 
bodies  [of  the  world]  likewise,  participate  of  a  certain  common  essenoe, 
m  the  fabrication  of  things ;  and  on  this  account  they  are  allotted  the 
equality  which  is  according  to  number.  But  all  things  are  arranged  and 
adorned  through  the  best  of  analogies,  and  the  demiurgus  according  to 
this  inserts  both  in  wholes  and  parts,  an  indissoluble  order  in  the 
universe,  and  an  adaptation  of  tliem  to  each  other. 

This  equality,  therefore,  the  Athenian  guest  exhorts  his  citizens 
particularly  to  honour,  in  consequence  of  assimilating  his  city  to  the 
universe.  He  also  says  that  it  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  but  that  it  is  not 
likewise  easy  for  every  one  to  perceive  the  most  true  and  excellent 
equality ;  for  it  is  the  judgment  of  Jupiter.  What  therefore  is  the  cause 
on  account  of  which  the  Athenian  guest  asserts  this  analogy  to  be  the 
judgment  of  Jupiter?  What  other  cause  can  we  assign  than  its  con- 
tributing to  the  perfection  of  the  world,  and  its  power  and  dominion  in 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXVI. 


OF  PLATO. 


385 


the  fabrication  of  wholes  ?  For  that  which  gives  an  orderly  distinction  to 
the  genera  of  causes,  contrives  the  most  beautiful  bond  of  them,  and 
weaves  together  one  order  from  wholes,  is  according  to  Tim&eus  the 
power  of  this  analogy.  For  it  established  soul  in  the  middle  (of  the 
universe)  analogous  to  intellect  and  a  corporeal  nature.  For  soul  is  the 
middle  of  an  impartible  and  partible  essence.  And  by  how  much  it 
surpasses  a  partible,  by  so  much  it  falls  short  of  an  impartible  hypostasis. 
The  power  of  this  analogy,  however,  binds  the  soul  from  double  and 
triple  ratios,  and  connects  the  whole  of  it  proceeding  from  and  at  the 
same  time  returning  to  (its  principles,)  by  the  primary  and  self-motive 
boundaries  of  equality.  It  likewise  constitutes  the  corporeal  series  from 
the  four  first  genera.  And  it  adapts  indeed  the  extremes  to  each  other 
through  the  middles,  but  mingles  the  middles  according  to  the  pecu- 
liarity of  the  extremes.  It  reduces,  however,  all  things  to  one  world, 
and  one  indissoluble  order  connectedly  comprehended  in  the  universe. 
If,  therefore,  we  acknowledge  that  this  equality  has  dominion  in  the 
whole  fabrication  of  things,  the  best  of  analogies  is  the  judgment  of  the 
demiurgus,  and  according  to  the  decision  of  him  who  generated  wholes 
it  is  allotted  that  great  dominion  in  the  fabrication  of  the  universe, 
which  we  have  before  shown  it  to  possess.  Hence  if  the  same  analogy 
is  the  judgment  of  Jupiter,  as  the  Athenian  guest  says  it  is,  it  is  obvious 
to  every  one  that  the  nature  of  Jupiter  is  demiurgic.  For  it  is  not  any 
thing  else  which  judges  of  the  dignity  of  this  analogy  than  that  which 
employs  it  in  the  arrangement  of  wholes.  And  to  this  the  legislator 
establishing  himself  analogous,  binds  and  in  a  particular  manner  adorns 
the  city  which  is  assimilated  to  the  universe,  by  this  analogy. 


Proc. 


Vol.  I. 


3  C 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 


Fbom  these  things,  therefore,  and  from  all  that  has  been  previously  said, 
we  confidently  assert,  following  Plato  and  paternal  rumours,  that  Jupiter 
is  the  demiurgus  of  the  universe ;  and  we  may  collect  into  one,  the 
scattered  opinions  of  the  ancients  on  this  subject ;  of  whom,  some,  indeed, 
refer  the  paradigm  of  the  world,  and  the  demiurgic  cause  to  the  same 
order ;  but  others  divide  these  from  each  other.  And  some  place  all- 
perfect  animal  prior  to  the  demiurgus ;  but  others  afford  an  hypostasis 
to  it  after  the  demiurgus.  For  if  the  demiurgus  is,  as  has  been  said,  the 
great  Jupiter,  and  the  paradigm  proposed  to  the  demiurgus  in  order  to 
the  generation  of  the  world,  is  all-perfect  animal,  these  are  at  the  same 
time  united  to  each  other,  and  are  allotted  an  essential  separation. 
And  animal  itself,  indeed,  intelligibly  comprehends  in  itself  the  whole 
Jovian  series ;  but  Jupiter  the  demiurgus  of  the  universe  intellectually 
pre-establishes  in  himself  the  nature  of  animal  itself.  For  animal  itself 
is  the  supplier  of  life  to  all  things,  and  all  things  primarily  live  on 
account  of  it,  and  Jupiter  being  the  cause  of  life,  possesses  the  paradigm 
and  the  generative  principle  of  the  essence  of  all  animals.  Justly, 
therefore,  does  Timaeus,  in  Plato,  having  called  the  intelligible  paradigm 
animal,  conjoin  the  demiurgic  intellect  to  the  first  intelligible  animal ; 
and  through  the  all-perfect  union  of  the  demiurgus  and  father  with  it,  he 
also  arranges  and  adorns  this  universe.  For  Jupiter  binding  to  himself 
the  fabrication  of  the  universe,  and  being  an  intellectual  animal,  is 
united  to  intelligible  animal,  and  being  allotted  a  progression  analogous 
to  it,  constitutes  all  things  intellectually,  which  proceed  from  animal 
itself  intelligibly. 

For,  as  we  have  said,  the  intelligible  hypostases  being  triple,  and  one 
indeed,  being  allotted  its  hyparxis  according  to  existence  and  the  one 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXVII.  OF  PLATO.  387 

being;  but  another  according  to  intelligible  life,  and  the  middle  centre 
of  the  intelligible  breadth,  where  eternity,  all  life,  and  intelligible  life 
subsist,  as  Plotinus  somewhere  says;  and  another  according  to  intel- 
ligible multitude,  the  first  plenitude  of  life,  and  the  all-perfect  paradigm 
of  wholes, — this  being  the  case,  the  three  kingdoms  of  the  intellectual 
Gods  are  divided  analogous  to  the  three  intelligible  hypostases.  And 
one  indeed,  the  mighty  Saturn,  being  allotted  an  hyparxis  according  to 
the  summit  of  intellectuals,  and  having  a  paternal  transcendency, 
possesses  a  dominion  analogous  to  the  summit  of  the  intelligible  Gods, 
and  the  occult  order.  And  as  in  that  order,  all  things  are  uniformly, 
and  are  ineffably,  and  without  separation  united,  thus  also  this  God 
again  converts  to  himself,  and  conceals  in  himself  the  natures  that  have 
proceeded  from  him,  imitating  the  occult  of  the  first  summit.  But  again, 
the  order  which  comprehends  the  middle  genera  of  wholes,  and  is  filled 
indeed,  from  the  generative  power  of  Saturn,  but  fills  from  itself  the 
whole  fabrication  wilh  vivific  rivers,  has  the  same  order  in  intellectuals 
which  eternity  has  in  intelligibles,  and  the  uniform  cause  of  the  life 
which  is  there.  And  as  eternity  proximately  generates  intelligible 
animal,  which  is  also  denominated  eternal,  through  the  participation  of 
eternity,  thus  also  the  middle  bosom  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  unfolds 
the  deraiurgus  of  the  universe,  and  the  vivific  fountain  of  wholes.  But 
the  third  king,  viz.  the  fabricator  and  at  the  same  time  father,  is  indeed 
co-ordinate  to  the  remainder  of  the  intelligible  triad,  viz.  to  all-perfect 
animal.  And  as  that  is  an  animal,  so  likewise  is  Jupiter.  And  Jupiter 
indeed  is  intelligibly  in  all-perfect  animal ;  but  all-perfect  animal  is 
intellectually  in  Jupiter.  The  extremities  likewise  of  the  intelligible 
and  intellectual  Gods  are  united  to  each  other ;  and  in  them,  separation 
is  co-existent  with  union.  And  one  of  them,  indeed,  is  exempt  from 
fabrication ;  but  the  other  is  converted  to  the  intelligible,  is  filled  from 
thence  with  total  goods,  and  is  allotted  a  paternal  transcendency  through 
the  participation  of  it.  The  maker,  therefore,  and  father  of  the  universe, 
who  has  firmly  established  in  himself  the  uniform  strength  and  power  of 
all  fabrication,  who  possesses  and  comprehends  the  primary  cause  of 
the  generation  of  wholes,  and  who  stably  fixes  in  himself  all  things,  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


:388 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 


again  produces  them  from  himself  in  an  undefiled  manner,  being  allotted 
such  an  order  as  this  among  the  intellectual  fathers,  is  celebrated,  as  I 
may  say,  through  the  whole  of  the  Timaeus,  in  which  dialogue,  his 
prolific  and  paternal  power  is  unfolded,  and  his  providence  which 
pervades  from  on  high  as  far  as  to  the  extremities  of  the  universe.  He 
is  also  frequently  celebrated  by  Plato  in  other  dialogues,  so  far  as  it  is 
possible  to  celebrate  his  uniform  and  united  power,'  and  which  through 
transcendency  is  exempt  from  wholes. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


If  however  some  one  recollecting  what  is  said  in  the  beginning  of  the 
Timaeus  about  him,  viz.  that  it  is  difficult  to  discover  him,  and  when 
found,  impossible  to  speak  of  him  to  all  men,  should  enquire  in  the  first 
place,  why  since  the  Grecian  theology  ascribes  such  a  name  to  the 
demiurgus,  as  we  have  before  mentioned,  Timaeus  says  that  he  is  ineffable, 
and  established  above  all  the  indication  which  subsists  in  words.  In 
the  next  place,  if  he  should  inquire  why  intelligible  animal  which  is 
arranged  above  the  demiurgus  is  both  denominated,  and  is  made  known 
by  many  signs,  but  the  demiurgus  who  has  established  his  kingdom  in 
an  order  secondary  to  that  of  all-perfect  animal,  and  is  an  intellectual 
God,  (all-perfect  animal  receiving  an  intelligible  transcendency)  is  left  by 
Timaeus  ineffable,  as  we  have  said,  and  unknown,  perhaps  we  also, 
following  Plato,  may  be  able  to  dissolve  all  such  doubts.  For  every 
order  of  the  Gods  originates  from  a  monad,  and  presides  over  its 

1  Svrayu,  is  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXV III.  OF  PLATO.  5gp 

proper  series  according  to  the  6rst-erTective  cause.  And  such  things 
indeed  as  are  nearer  to  this  principle  arc  more  total  than  those 
that  are  more  remote  from  it  But  more  total  natures  are  manifestly 
seen  to  be  less*  distant  from  the  monad,  and  conjoin  things  which 
are  diminished  according  to  essence  to  the  natures  that  are  prior 
to  them.  Every  order  of  the  Gods  likewise  is  a  whole  united  to 
itself  through  the  whole,  is  allotted  one  indissoluble  connexion,  both 
in  wholes  and  parts,  and  through  the  monad  which  collects  every  order 
into  one,  it  is  converted  about  itself,  is  suspended  from  this,  and  is 
wholly  convolved  according  to  it. 

If,  therefore,  we  assert  these  things  truly,  in  each  order  a  monad  is 
allotted  a  transcendency  with  respect  to  multitude,  analogous  to  the 
good.  And  as  the  unical  cause  of  whole  goods,  and  which  is  incom- 
prehensible by  all  things,  is  exempt  from  all  things,  constitutes  all  things 
about  itself,  generates  them  from  itself,  and  hastily  withdraws  the  unions 
of  all  things  to  its  own  ineffable  superunion,  thus  also  the  uniform  and 
generative  principle  of  every  co-ordinate  multitude,  connects,  guards  and 
perfects  the  whole  series  of  itself,  imparts  good  to  it  from  itself,  and 
fills  it  with  order  and  harmony.  It  is  likewise  that  to  its  own  progeny, 
which  the  good  is  to  all  beings,  and  is  the  object  of  desire  to  all  the 
natures  that  originate  from  itself.  Thus,  therefore,  the  union  of  the 
intelligible  father  subsists  prior  to  the  whole  paternal  order;  the  one 
wholeness  of  the  Sy  noches  is  prior  to  the  connective  order ;  and  the  first 
effective  cause  of  life,  to  the  vivi6c  order. 

Hence  also,  of  every  demiurgic  series,  which  is  suspended  from  the 
triad  of  the  sons  of  Saturn,  the  monad  which  proximately  fabricates 
wholes,  and  is  established  above  this  triad,  comprehends  in  itself  all  the 
demiurgic  Gods,  converts  them  to  itself,  and  is  of  a  boniform  nature. 
The  one  fountain  likewise  of  all  the  demiurgic  numbers,  subsists,  as  I 
may  say,  with  respect  to  all  this  order  analogous  to  the  one,  and  to  the 
one  principle  of  all  things.  Timaeus  therefore,  indicating  these  things 
to  us,  asserts  directly  in  the  beginning  of  the  generation  of  the  world, 

'  For  w&fo*  if  is  evidently  necessary  to  read  ijrror. 


Digitized  by  Google 


390  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

that  this  monad  which  proximately  fabricates  wholes,  is  difficult  to  be 
known,  and  is  indescribable,  as  having  the  same  ratio  as  the  ineffable 
and  unknown  cause  of  all  beings.  Whence  likewise,  I  think,  he  calls 
the  demiurgus  the  best  of  causes,  and  the  father  of  this  universe,  as  being 
allotted  the  highest  order  among  the  demiurgi,  and  convolving  to  himself, 
and  producing  from  himself  all  the  effective  principles.  That  one  how- 
ever, Parmenides  demonstrates  to  be  perfectly  unknown  and  ineffable ; 
but  Timaeus  says  that  it  is  difficult  to  discover  the  maker  and  father  of 
the  world,  and  impossible  to  speak  of  him  to  all  men ;  which  assertion 
falls  short  of  the  cause  that  flies  from  all  knowledge,  and  all  language, 
and  appears  to  verge  to  the  nature  of  things  known  and  effable.  For 
when  he  saj'S  that  it  is  impossible  to  speak  of  him  to  all  men,  he  does 
not  leave  him  entirely  ineffable  and  unknown.  And  the  assertion  that  it 
is  difficult  to  discover  him,  is  not  the  sign  of  a  peculiarity  perfectly 
unknown.  For  because  the  demiurgus  has  established  a  kingdom 
analogous  to  the  good,  but  in  secondary  and  manifold  orders  of  it,  he 
participates  indeed  of  the  signs  of  the  good,  but  is  allotted  the  participa- 
tion in  conjunction  with  an  appropriate  peculiarity,  and  a  communion 
with  beings  adapted  to  him.  And  as  he  is  good,  but  not  the  good  itself, 
so  likewise  he  is  difficult  to  be  known  by  the  natures  posterior  to  him, 
but  is  not  unknown.  He  is  also  celebrated  in  mystic  language,  but  is 
not  perfectly  ineffable.  You  may  see  however,  the  order  of  things,  and 
the  remission  in*  them  proceeding  in  a  downward  progression.  For  the 
good  indeed,  is  exempt  from  all  silence,  and  all  language.  But  the  genus 
of  the  intelligible  Gods  rejoices  in  silence,  and  is  delighted  with  ineffable* 
symbols.  Hence  also,  Socrates  in  the  Pbaedrus,  calls  the  vision  of  the 
intelligible  monads  the  most  holy  of  initiations,  as  being  involved  in 
silence,  and  perceived  intellectually  in  an  arcane  manner.  But  the 
vision  of  intellectuals  is  indeed  effable,  yet  is  not  effable  and  known  to  all 
men,  but  is  known  with  difficulty.  For  through  diminution  with  respect 
to  the  intelligible,  it  proceeds  from  silence  and  a  transcendency  which  is 
to  be  apprehended  by  intelligence  alone,  into  the  order  of  things  which 
are  now  effable. 

•  For  a|^T».f,  ic  it  necessary  to  read  « sr)™t . 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXIX. 


OF  PLATO. 


391 


If  however,  this  be  the  case,  all-perfect  animal  is  much  more  ineffable 
and  unknown  than  the  demiurgic  monad.  For  it  is  at  once  the  monad 
of  every  paradigmatic  order,  and  is  intelligible,  but  not  intellectual. 
How  therefore,  do  we  endeavour  to  denominate,  and  as  it  were  unfold  it, 
but  thus  magnificently  celebrate  the  demiurgic  cause  ?  And  how  do  we 
class  this  cause  in  the  same  rank  with  things  ineffable  ?  For  this  will  not 
be  acting  conformably  to  Plato,  who  arranges  animal  itself  beyond  the 
demiurgus ;  but  this  will  be  giving  an  hypostasis  to  it  in  a  secondary 
order  of  Gods,  where  it  will  be  ranked,  and  will  be  effable  and  known 
more  than  the  demiurgic  monad.  To  which  may  be  added,  that  to 
denominate  that  all-perfect  animal  most  beautiful,  but  the  demiurgus  the 
best  of  causes,  gives  indeed  the  same  analogy  to  these  causes  with 
respect  to  each  other,  as  there  is  of  the  good  with  respect  to  the  beautiful* 
And  as  the  good  is  prior  to  the  beautiful,  (for  the  first  beauty,  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Philebus,  is  in  the  vestibules  of  the  good)  so  likewise  the  best ' 
is  prior  to  the  most  beautiful,  and  the  demiurgus  is  prior  to  all-perfect 
animal.  For  the  best  indeed,  remarkably  participates  of  the  good,  but 
the  most  beautiful,  of  beauty. 


In  addition  to  these  things  therefore,  it  must  also  be  asserted  by  us, 
that  the  most  beautiful  and  the  best,  are  simply  indeed  related  to  each 
other  according  to  order,  as  the  good  is  to  the  beautiful.  For  the  series 
of  the  whole  of  goodness  is  expanded  above  all  the  progression  and 
arrangement  of  the  beautiful.    Every  where,  therefore,  the  best  is  prior 


CHAFFER  XXIX. 


■  For  offrrc,,  it  is 


Digitized  by  Google 


392 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


to  the  most  beautiful.  And  the  one,  indeed,  with  reference  to  an  inferior 
order,  will  be  the  best,  but  the  other  with  reference  to  a  more  excellent 
order,  will  be  the  most  beautiful.  I  say  for  instance,  that  the  most 
beautiful,  as  in  intelligibles,  will  have  this  peculiarity ;  but  the  best  as  in 
intellectuals.  And  if  the  most  beautiful,  in  supermundane  natures,  is  a 
thing  of  this  kind,  the  best  will  be  said  to  be  best  as  with  reference  to  the 
Gods  in  the  world.  Hence,  if  the  best  of  causes  is  the  leader  of  the 
demiurgic  series,  and  according  to  it  is  allotted  a  transcendency  of  this  kind, 
but  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligible  animals  preestablishes  the  illustrious 
power  of  beauty  in  a  higher  order,  by  what  contrivance  can  it  on  this 
account  be  shown  that  intelligible  and  all-perfect  animal  is  subordinate 
to  the  intellectual  cause  ?  And  that  the  demiurgus  is  converted  to  that 
which  is  posterior  to  himself?  Or  how  can  it  be  said  that  animal  itself  is 
visible  to  him,  and  all-perfect  animal,  and  that  which  is  comprehensive 
of  all  intelligibles,  if  it  is  made  to  be  comprehended  by  another?  For 
thus  the  demiurgus  will  be  more  comprehensive  than  animal  itself,  if  the 
former  indeed  being  characterized  according  to  the  best,  is  expanded 
above  the  paradigm,  but  the  latter  being  denominated  as  most  beautiful 
is  secondary  to  the  demiurgic  cause. 

Moreover,  as  that  all-perfect  and  intelligible  animal  is  particularly 
considered  by  Timaeus  according  to  a  formal  nature,  and  not  according 
to  the  union  which  is  in  it,  and  an  hypostasis  which  is  above  all  forms,'  he 
very  properly  grants  that  animal  itself  may  be  known  and  manifested  by 
words,  but  considers  the  demiurgus  as  in  a  certain  respect  ineffable,  and 
superior  to  knowledge.  For  both  indeed,  I  mean  the  demiurgus  and 
animal  itself,  participate  of  union,  and  prior  to  a  formal  essence,  are  con- 
tained in  the  one.  And  if  you  assume  the  unities  which  are  in  them,  you 
must  admit  the  unity  of  the  paradigm  to  be  intelligible,  but  the  demiurgic 
unity  to  be  intellectual,  and  that  an  intelligible  hyparxis  is  nearer  to  the 
first  one,  which  is  unknown  and  incomprehensible  by  all  things,  than  an 
intellectual  hyparxis.    But  if  you  are  willing  to  survey  the  forms  of  the 

'  Instead  of  too  warn*,  it  it  doubtless  necessary  to  read  ra  xarra.  For  the  demiurgus  also  has 
an  hypostasis  which  is  above  the  forms  of  the  universe. 


CHAP.  XXIX.  OF  PLATO.  393 

paradigm  by  themselves,  according  to  which  it  is  said  to  be  the  paradigm 
of  every  thing  in  the  world,  and  the  goodness  and  union  of  the  demiurgus, 
the  former  will  appear  to  you  to  be  known  and  effable  ;  but  the  demiur- 
gic cause  will  be  seen  to  participate  of  the  unknown  and  ineffable  pecu- 
liarity of  the  Gods.    For  again,  Timajus  was  in  a  remarkable  degree  in 
want  of  the  demiurgus  and  father,  as  the  producing  cause  of  wholes,  and 
the  generator  of  the  world-    But  to  generate,  to  produce  and  provide  are 
the  peculiarities  of  Gods,  so  far  as  they  are  Gods.    Hence  also  Ti- 
maeus  denominates  the  peculiarity  of  the  demiurgus  according  to  which  he 
is  a  God,  the  cause  of  the  generation  of  the  universe,  and  the  most  proper 
principle  of  the  arrangement  of  wholes.    But  he  denominates  the  pecu- 
liarity of  the  paradigm  to  be  that  which  comprehends  the  first  forms, 
according  to  which  the  world  also  is  invested  with  forms.    For  it  is  the 
image  of  the  paradigm,  but  the  effect  of  the  demiurgus.    It  belongs, 
therefore,  to  the  paradigm  to  be  the  first  of  forms,  but  to  the  demiurgus 
to  be  the  best  of  causes,  according  to  his  goodness,  and  the  hyparxis  of 
essence.    For,  as  we  have  said,  to  generate,  to  give  subsistence  to,  and  to 
provide  for  other  things,  especially  pertain  to  the  Gods,  and  not  to  the 
natures  which  are  primarily  suspended  '  from  them ;  but  the  latter  are 
allotted  through  the  former  an  abundance  prolific  of  secondary  natures. 
It  appears  to  me  that  Socrates  in  the  Republic  indicating  these  things, 
does  not  say  that  the  sun  is  the  cause  of  generation,  till  be  had  declared 
him  to  be  the  progeny  of  the  superessential  principle  of  all  things ;  just  as 
Timoeus  does  not  begin  the  fabrication  of  the  universe,  till  lie  had  cele- 
brated the  goodness  of  the  demiurgus  of  wholes.    For  each  [i.  e.  the 
demiurgus  and  the  sun]  is  a  producing  cause  according  to  tht  good,  the 
former  indeed  of  the  universe,  but  the  latter  of  a  generated  nature;  but 
not  according  to  the  intellect  which  is  in  them,  or  life,  or  any  other  form 
of  essence.    For  these  through  the  participation  of  the  good  constitute 
the  natures  posterior  to  themselves.    And  thus  through  these  things  we 
have  answered  the  before-mentioned  doubts. 

•  For  i^munn,  it  is  necessary  to  read  ttyryunif . 

* 

Prcc.  Vol.  I.  3D 


Digitized  by  Google 


S04 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


Of  the  problems  pertaining  to  total  fabrication,  it  now  remains  for  me 
to  relate  what  my  opinion  is  respecting  the  Crater,  and  the  genera  that 
are  mingled  in  it.    For  these  also  Timae us  co-arranges  with  the  demiurgic 
monad,  in  the  generation  of  the  soul.    The  demiurgus,  therefore,  mingles- 
the  elements  of  the  hypostasis  of  souls ;  but  the  middle  genera  of  being 
are  mingled.    The  much-celebrated  Crater,  however,  receives  this  mix- 
ture, and  generates  souls  in  conjunction  with  the  demiurgus.    Hence,  in 
the  first  place,  the  genera  of  being  must  be  admitted  to  be  twofold.  And 
it  must  be  granted  indeed,  that  some  of  them  give  completion  to  total 
hypostases,  but  others,  to  such  as  are  partial ;  and  that  the  hyparxes  of 
first  effective  and  united  causes,  are  established  in  the  intelligible  Gods- 
For  there  essence  subsists  primarily  in  the  summit  of  intelligibles,  and 
motion  and  permanency  are  in  the  middle  centre.    For  intelligible  eter- 
nity abides  in  one,  and  at  once  both  abides  and  is  the  occult  cause  of  all 
life.    Hence,  Plotinus  also  calls  eternity  life  which  is  one  and  total :  and. 
again,  in  another  part  of  his  works  he  calls  it  intelligible  life.    But  the 
third  from  him,  Theodorus,  denominates  it  permanency.    And  both 
these  opinions  harmonize  with  each  other ;  because  permanency  also  is  ia 
eternity,  (for  according  to  Timaeus,  eternity  abides  in  one)  and  motion. 
For  eternity  is  intelligible  life,  and  that  which  participates  of  it  is  intelli- 
gible animal.    Moreover,  sameness  and  difference,  are  in  the  extremity 
of  intelligibles.    For  whence  does  multitude  originate,  but  from  differ- 
ence?   And  whence  is  the  communion  of  parts  with  wholes,  and  the 
hyparxisof  things  which  are  divided  in  each  other  derived  but  from  same- 
ness?  For  that  one  participates  of  being,  uud  being  of  the  one.    All  the 
parts  likewise  of  the  one  being  pervade  through  each  other  in  an  uncon- 
fused  manner ;  for  at  one  and  the  same  time  sameness  and  difference  are 
there  occultly.   And  the  whole  intelligible  breadth  is  allotted  its  hypo* 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXX. 


OF  PLATO. 


stasis  according  to  the  first  and  most  uniform  genera.  As  essence  likewise 
presents  itself  to  the  view  in  conjunction  with  the  one,  according  to  the 
first  triad,  so  motion  and  permanency  shine  forth  in  the  second,  and 
sameness  and  difference  in  tlie  third  triad.  And  all  things  are  essentially 
in  the  intelligible;  just  ns  life  and  intellect  are  there  intelligibly.  For 
since  all  beings  proceed  from  intelligibles,  all  things  preexist  there 
according  to  cause.  And  motion  and  permanency  arc  there  essentially, 
and  sameness  and  difference  uniformly. 

Again,  in  the  middle  genera  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  hypo- 
stases, the  same  things  subsist  secondarily  and  vitally.  In  the  summit  of 
them  indeed,  essence  subsists.  For  Socrates  in  the  Pluedrus  speaking 
about  this  order,  characterizes  the  whole  of  it  from  essence.  For  the 
truly-existing  essence  which  is  without  colour,  without  figure,  and  without 
contact,  subsists  after  this  manner.  But  in  the  middle  centre  there  are 
motion  and  permanency.  For  there  the  circulation  of  the  heaven  sub- 
sists, as  the  same  Socrates  says;  being  established  indeed  undeviatingly, 
in  one  form  of  intelligence;  but  being  moved  in,  and  about  itself;  or 
rather  being  motion  and  eternal  life.  But  in  the  extremity  of  thiB  order, 
sameness  and  difference  are  vitally  established.  Hence  it  is  converted  to 
the  beginning  according  to  the  nature  of  sameness,  is  divided  uniformly, 
proceeds  into  more  numbers,  and  generates  from  itself  more  partial 
monads. 

Again,  in  the  third  orders,  the  highest  of  the  intellectual  Gods  possesses 
all  things  according  to  essence,  and  is  the  intelligible  itself  and  true  being 
in  intellectuals,  again  recalling  the  separation  which  is  iu  himself  into 
undivided  union.  But  the  middle  order  subsists  according  to  motion  and 
at  the  same  time  permanency.  For  it  is  a  vivific  deity,  abiding  and  at 
the  same  time  proceeding,  being  established  with  purity,  and  vivifying 
all  things  by  prolific  powers.  And  the  third  progression  subsists  accord- 
ing to  sameness,  together  with  difference.  For  this  separates  itself  from 
the  fathers,  and  is  conjoined  to  tltein  through  intellectual  conversion.  And 
it  binds,  indeed,  at  once  the  natures  posterior  to  itself,  to  each  other, 
according  to  the  common  powers  of  forms,  and  at  the  same  time  separates 
them  by  intellectual  sections.    But  in  this  order,  all  genera  and  species 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  T- 


first  shine  forth  to  the  view ;  because  it  is  especially  characterized 
according  to  difference,  being  allotted  the  end  of  all  the  total  hypostases. 
From  this  likewise  it  proceeds  to  all  things,  viz.  to  participated  intellect, 
the  multiform  orders  of  souls,  and  the  whole  of  a  corporeal  nature.  For, 
in  short,  it  constitutes  triple  genera  of  the  natures  posterior  to  itself; 
some  indeed,  being  impartible  and  the  first;  others  being  media 
between  partible  and  impartible  natures;  and  others  being  divided  about 
bodies.  And  through  these  things  it  generates  all  the  more  partial  genera 
of  beings.  That  we  may  therefore  again  return  to  what  has  been  before 
said,,  the  genera  must  be  admitted  to  subsist  every  where,  yet  not  every 
where  after  the  same  manner;  but  in  the  highest  orders  of  divine  natures 
indeed,  they  subsist  uniformly,  without  separation,  and  unitedly,  where 
also  permanency  participates  of  motion,  and  motion  of  permanency,  and 
there  is  one  united  progression  of  both.  In  the  more  partial  orders,  however, 
it  must  be  admitted  that  the  same  things  subsist  in  a  divided  manner,  and 
together  with  an  appropriate  remission.  For  since  the  first  and  most 
total  of  forms  are  m  the  extremity  of  intelligibles,  it  is  indeed  necessary 
that  genera  should  have  the  beginning  of  their  hypostasis  in  intelligibles. 
And  if  the  demiurgic  cause  is  generative  of  all  the  partial  orders,  it  com- 
prehends the  first  genera  of  the  hypostasis  of  them.  As  likewise  the 
fountain  of  all  forms  subsists  in  this  cause,  though  there  arc  intelligible 
forms,  so  the  genera  of  being, preexist  in  it,  though  there  are  other  whole 
genera  prior  to  it.  And  the  divine  Jamblichus  somewhere  rightly 
observes  that  the  genera  of  being  present  themselves  to  the  view  in  the  ex- 
tremity of  the  intelligible  Gods.  The  present  theology  likewise,  following 
things  themselves,  gives  a  progression  to  these  as  well  as  forms  supernallyr 
from  the  intelligible  Gods.  For  such  things  as  subsist  according  to  cause,- 
occultly,  and  without  separation  in  the  first  essences  [i.  e.  in  intelligibles] 
these  subsist  in  a  divided  and  partible  manner,  and  according  to  the  nature 
ofeach,in  intellectuals.  For  from  hence,  all  the  divisibleorders  of  beings  are 
filled  both  with  these  genera,  and  with  formal  hyparxes.  And  on  this  ac- 
count, the  demiurgus  also  is  said  to  comprehend  all  genera,  and  to  have  the 
fountain  of  forms,  because  he  generates  all  the  partial  rivers  [of  life]  and 
imparts  to  them  from  himself  by  illumination  all  the  measures  of  subsistence.' 


CHAP.  XXXI.  OF  PLATO.  397 

Hence  triple  genera  of  all  beings  proceed  from  the  derniurgus,  some 
indeed  being  impartible,  others  partible, '  and  others  subsisting  between 
these,  being  more  united  indeed  than  the  partible,  but  more  separated 
than  the  impartible  genera;  but  subsisting  according  to  the  middle  of 
both,  and  connectedly  containing  the  one  bond  of  beings.  And  the 
derniurgus  indeed  produces  the  intellectual  essence,  through  the  first  and 
impartible  genera;  but  the  corporeal  essence  through  the  third  and 
partible  genera ;  and  the  psychical  hypostasis  which  is  in  the  middle  of 
these,  through  the  middle  genera  in  beings.  Moreover,  he  generates 
every  intellectual  and  impartible  nature  from  himself,  and  fills  thein  with 
total  generative  power.  But  he  constitutes  the  psychical  essence,  in 
conjunction  with  the  Crater;  and  the  corporeal  essence,  in  conjunction 
with  total  Nature. 


CHAPTER  XXXL 

1 

• 

That  in  this  arrangement  likewise  we  follow  Timaeus,  any  one  may 
learn  from  the  following  considerations :  The  derniurgus  producing  the 
intellect  of  the  universe,  himself  produces  it  from  his  own  essence  alone, 
unfolding  it  at  once  according  to  one  union,  in  consequence  of  consti- 
tuting it  eternally,  and  no  mention  whatever  is  here  made  of  the  Crater. 
But  the  derniurgus  in  arranging  and  adorning  soul  prior  to  body,  mingles 
the  genera,  and  energizes  in  conjunction  with  the  Crater.  And  in  fa- 
shioning the  body  of  the  universe,  and  describing  the  heaven,  he  fabri- 
cates it  in  conjunction  with  Necessity.  For  the  nature  of  the  universe, 
says  Tiuia:us,  was  generated  mingled  from  intellect  and  necessity.  And  nei- 
ther does  he  here  assume  the  Crater  in  order  to  the  arrangement  of  bodies. 

*  The  words  rm  h  fufurr*  arc  omitted  in  the  original,  but  evidently  ought  to  be  inserted. 


Digitized  by  Google 


3.Q8 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


But  it  has  been  abundantly  shown  by  us  elsewhere,  that  Plato  calls 
physical  production,  a  production  through  necessity,  and  does  not,  a* 
some  suppose,  consider  necessity  to  be  the  same  with  matier.  It  is 
evident,  therefore,  that  the  demiurgus  produces  the  generation  of  bodies 
together  with  total  Nature,  mingles  the  partible  genera  in  the  first  Nature, 
and  thus  produces  bodies  from  intellect  and  necessity.  For  bodies 
receive'  from  intellect  indeed,  good  and  union;  but  from  necessity  a 
progression  which  terminates  in  interval  and  division.  He  arranges  and 
adorns,  however,  the  6elf-motive  essence  of  souls,  in  conjunction  with  the 
Crater.  And  neither  intellect,  nor  bodies,  require  a  cause  of  this  kind. 
The  demiurgus  indeed  is  the  common  source  of  the  triple  genera.  But 
the  Crater  is  the  peculiar  cause  of  souls,  and  is  co-arranged  with  the  de- 
miurgus and  filled  from  him,  but  fills  souls.  And  receiving  from  thence 
indeed  the  powers  of  prolific  abundance,  it  pours  them  on  souls  according 
to  the  measures  of  their  respective  essences.  To  some  of  them  likewise  it 
orderly  distributes  the  summits  of  the  genera  [of  being],  to  others  the 
middle  progressions  of  the  genera,  and  to  others,  the  terminations  of 
them.  Hence  the  Crater  is  indeed  essentially  vivific,  since  souls  also  are 
certain  lives,  but  it  is  the  first-effective  cause  of  souls,  according  to  the 
peculiarity  of  hyparxis,  and  is  the  uniform  and  all-perfect  monad,  not 
of  every  life,  but  of  that  which  is  psychical.  For  from  this  Crater  the 
soul  of  the  universe  subsists,  and  likewise  the  second  and  third  genera  of 
partible  souls,  and  of  those  souls  that  are  allotted  a  progression  between 
these. 

The  whole  number,  therefore,  of  the  psychical  order  proceeds  from  the 
Crater,  and  is  divided  according  to  the  prolific  powers  which  it  contains. 
Hence  the  Crater  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  souls,  the  receptacle  of  their 
fabrication,  and  the  generative  monad  of  them,  and  the  like.  For  it  is 
said  to  be  so  rightly,  and  conformably  to  the  mind  of  Plato.  If,  how- 
ever, the  Crater  is  co-arranged  with  the  demiurgus,  and  equally  consti- 
tutes with  him  the  genera  of  souls,  it  is  indeed  necessary  that  this  Crater 
should  be  fontal,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  whole  demiurgus.  Hence 


■  For  hxofuia,  it  is  necessary  to  read  g^spou. 


CHAP.  XXXI.  OF  PLATO.  399 

the  Crater  is  the  fountain  of  souls,  but  is  united  to  the  demiurgic  monad. 
And  on  this  account,  Socrates  also  in  the  Philebns  says,  that  in  Jupiter 
there  is  a  royal  soul,  and  a  royal  intellect.  For  that  which  we  at  present 
denominate  fontal,  he  calls  royal;  though  the  name  of  fountain  when 
applied  to  souls  is  well  known  to  Plato.  For  Socrates,  in  the  Phredrus, 
says,  that  the  self- motive  nature  is  the  fountain  and  principle  of  motion 
to  such  other  things  as  are  moved. 

And  you  see  that  as  a  twofold  divine  monad  prior  to  souls  is  delivered 
by  theologists,  the  one  being  indeed  fontal,  but  the  other  of  a  primary 
ruling  nature,  Plato  likewise  gives  to  the  progeny  of  these  twofold 
appellations,  assuming  one  name  from  the  more  total,  but  the  other  from 
the  more  partial  monad.  For  the  self-motive  nature,  is  a  fountain  indeed, 
as  being  the  offspring  of  the  fontal  soul,  but  it  is  a  principle,  as  participa- 
ting of  the  primary  ruling  soul.  If  therefore,  the  name  of  fountain,  and 
also  of  principle  is  assigned  by  Plato  to  souls,  what  occasion  is  there  to 
wonder  if  we  denominate  the  exempt  monads  of  them,  fountains  and 
principles?  Or  rather  from  these  things  that  is  demonstrated.  For 
whence  is  a  ruling  power  imparted  to  all  souls  except  from  the  ruling 
monad  ?  For  that  which  similarly  extends  to  all  souls,  is  necessarily 
imparted  to  them  from  one  and  the  same  cause.  If  therefore,  some  one 
should  say  it  is  imparted  by  the  demiurgus,  so  far  as  he  is  the  demiurgus, 
it  is  necessary  that  in  a  similar  manner  it  should  be  inherent  in  all  other 
things  which  proceed  from  the  demiurgic  monad.  But  if  it  proceeds 
from  the  definite  and  separate  cause  of  souls,  that  cause  must  be 
denominated  the  first  fountain  and  principle  of  them. 

Moreover,  that  of  these  two  names,  the  ruling  is  more  allied  to  souls 
than  the  fontal,  as  being  nearer  to  them  according  to  order,  Plato 
manifests  in  the  same  dialogue.  For  calling  the  self-motive  nature  the 
fountain  and  at  the  same  time  principle  of  the  motion  of  the  whole  of 
things,  he  nevertheless  frames  his  demonstration  of  its  un begotten 
subsistence  from  principle  alone.  For,  says  he,  principle  is  unbegotteu. 
For  it  is  necessary  that  every  thing  which  is  generated  should  be 
generated  from  a  principle.  If  therefore,  demonstrations  are  from  things 
proximate  to  the  things  demonstrated,  it  is  necessary  that  principle 


Digitized  by  Google 


400 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


should  be  more  proximate  to  souls  than  fountain.  Farther  still,  if  every 
thing  which  is  generated  is  generated  from  a  principle,  as  Plato  says,  but 
souls  are  in  a  certain  respect  generated,  as  Timaeus  says,  there  is  also  a 
precedaneous  principle  of  souls.  And  as  they  are  the  principles  of 
things  which  are  generated  according  to  time,  so  after  another  manner 
principle  subsists  prior  to  souls,  which  are  generated.  And  as  they  are 
unbegotten  according  to  the  generation  of  bodies,  thus  also  the  principle 
of  souls  is  exempt  from  all  generation.  Through  these  things  therefore,  it 
is  demonstrated  by  us,  that  tbeCrater  is  the  fountain  of  souls,  that  after  the 
fountain  there  is  a  primary  ruling  monad  of  them,  and  that  this  monad 
is  more  proximate  to  souls  than  the  fountain,  but  is  established  above 
them,  as  being  their  prolific  cause.  And  all  these  particulars  we  hav  e 
demonstrated  from  the  words  of  Plato. 


i 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 


Again  therefore,  let  us  return  to  the  things  proposed,  and  teach  in  a 
greater  degree  the  lovers  of  the  contemplation  of  truth,  concerning  this 
Crater.  For  the  whole  vivific  deity  having  established  in  the  middle  of 
the  intellectual  kings  the  prolific  cause  of  divine  natures,  and  according 
to  her  highest,  most  intellectual  and  all-perfect  powers,  being  occultly 
united  to  the  first  father,  but  according  to  more  partial  and  secondary 
causes  from  them,  being  conjoined  to  the  demiurgus,  and  establishing 
one  conspiration  together  with  him  of  the  generation  of  the  partial  orders, 
Timaeus  mystically  mentions  those  more  ancient  powers  of  the  Goddess, 
and  which  abide  in  the  first  father.  But  with  respect  to  those  powers 
that  are  co-arranged  with  the  demiurgus,  and  adorn  together  with  him 


Digitized  by  LiOOQle 


CHAP.  XXXII.  OF  PLATO.  401 

the  natures  in  the  universe,  some  of  these  he  delivers  more  clearly  but 
the  whole  of  others  through  indication.  For  the  secondary  monads 
themselves  of  the  Goddess  are  triple,  as  the  wise  assert,  one  of  them 
being  the  fountain  of  souls,  the  second,  being  the  fountain  of  the  virtues, 
but  the  third  being  the  fountain  of  Nature  which  is  suspended  from  the 
back  of  the  Goddess.  The  demiurgus  therefore,  also  assumes  these  three 
hypostases  to  his  own  prolific  production.  And  the  Crater  indeed,  as 
we  have  said,  is  the  fountain  of  souls,  unically  containing  the  whole  and 
perfect  number  of  them.'  And  as  the  demiurgus  is  allotted  a  paternal 
cause  with  respect  to  the  psychical  generation,  so  the  Crater  is  prolific, 
and  is  allotted  the  ratio  and  order  of  a  mother.  For  such  things  as 
Jupiter  produces  paternally  in  souls,  the  fountain  of  souls  produces 
maternally  and  generatively. 

Virtue  however,  energizes  by  itself,  and  adorns  and  perfects  wholes. 
And  on  this  account,  the  universe  having  participated  of  soul,  immedi- 
ately also  participates  of  virtue.  "  For  the  demiurgus,  says  Timseus, 
having  placed  soul  in  the  middle,  extended  it  through  the  universe,  and 
besides  this  surrounded  the  body  of  it  externally  with  soul  as  with  a  veil, 
and  causing  circle  to  revolve  in  circle,  constituted  heaven  one,  alone  and 
solitary,  but  through  virtue  able  to  converse  with  itself,  and  being  in  want 
of  no  other  thing,  but  sufficiently  known  and  friendly  itself  to  itself."  At 
one  and  the  same  time  therefore  the  world  is  animated,  lives  through  the 
whole  of  its  life  according  to  virtue,  and  possesses  from  the  virtues  as  its 
highest  end,  friendship  with  itself,  and  an  all-perfect  knowledge  of  itself. 
For  it  is  itself  sufficiently  known  and  friendly  to  itself  through  virtue. 

Moreover,  nature  also  is  consubsistent  with  the  generation  of  body. 
For  the  demiurgus  generates  body  through  necessity,  and  fashions  it 
together  with  its  proper  life.  And  on  this  account,  shortly  after,  having 
constituted  partial  souls,  he  shows  to  them  the  nature  of  the  universe, 
and  the  laws  of  Fate.  For  in  consequence  of  possessing  the  cause  of 
total  Nature  and  Fate,  he  also  exhibits  these  to  souls.  For  the 
demiurgus  is  not  converted  to  things  posterior  to  himself,  but  primarily 

'  For  ivrw,  it  U  necessary  to  read  oantn, 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  3  E 


Digitized  by  Google 


402  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

contains  in  himself  the  things  which  are  exhibited,  and  unfolds  to  souls 
the  powers  of  himself.  Hence,  the  paradigm  of  all  Nature,  and  the  one 
cause  of  the  laws  of  Fate  pre-subsist  in  him.  For  the  fountain  of 
Nature,  is  called  the  first  Fate  by  the  Gods  themselves.  "You  should 
not  look  upon  Nature,  for  the  name  of  it  is  fatal."  Hence  also,  Tinneus 
says,  that  souls  at  one  and  the  same  time  see  the  laws  of  Fate,  and  the 
nature  of  the  universe,  viz.  they  see  as  it  were  mundane  Fate,  and  the 
powers  of  it.  And  the  Elean  guest  in  the  Politicus,  denominates  the 
motive  cause  of  the  more  physical  circulation  of  the  universe,  Fate. 
For  he  says  that  "Fate  and  connate  desire  convolve  the  world."  And 
the  same  person  likewise  clearly  acknowledges  that  the  world  possesses 
this  power  from  the  demiurgus  and  father.  For  he  say*  that  all  the 
apparent  arrangement  and  circulation  are  derived  from  Jupiter.  It  is 
demonstrated  therefore,  that  according  to  these  three  causes  of  the  vivific 
Goddess  which  are  co-arranged  with  the  demiurgus,  the  world  is  perfec- 
ted by  him,  viz.  according  to  the  fontal  Crater,  the  fountain  of  the 
virtues,  and  the  first-effective  cause  of  nature. 

It  is  likewise  manifest  that  again  in  these  things  Plato  does  not  refuse 
to-  employ  the  name  of  fountain.  For  in  the  Laws  he  calls  the  power 
of  prudence  which  is  essentially  inherent  in  souls,  and  which  is  productive 
of  the  virtues  in  us,  the  fountain  of  intelligence.  And  he  also  says,  that 
two  other  fountains  are  imparted  to  us  by  nature,  viz.  pleasure  and  pain. 
As,  therefore,  we  before  demonstrated  that  souls  are  called  the  fountains 
of  motions,  on  account  of  the  one  fountain  of  them,  of  which  they 
participate,  thus  also  when  Plato  calls  the  first  progeny  of  Nature 
fountains,  it  is  obvious  to  every  one,  that  he  will  permit  the  exempt 
cause  itself  of  them  to  be  denominated  a  fountain.  After  the  same 
manner,  likewise,  since  he  magnificently  celebrates  the  essential  power 
of  virtue  in  us,  as  the  fountain  of  intelligence,  he  will  not  be  compelled 
to  hear  a  name  which  does  not  at  all  pertain  to  his  philosophy,  if  some 
one  should  be  willing  to  denominate,  the  first  monad  of  the  virtues,  a 
fountain.  But  where  shall  we  have  the  name  of  fountain  posited  by  him 
in  the  intellectual  Gods?  In  the  Cratylus,  therefore,  he  says  that  Tethys 
is  the  occult  name  of  a  fountain,  and  he  calls  Saturn  himself  and  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


.CHAP.' XXXIII.  OF  PLATO.  403 

queen  Rhea  fluxions.  For  these  divinities  are  rivers  of  the  intelligible 
fountains,  and  proceeding  from  fountains  placed  above  them,  they  fill 
all  the  natures  posterior  to  themselves  with  the  prolific  rivers  of  life. 
And  the  Crater  itself  likewise  is  fontal.  The  Gods,  therefore,  also 
denominate  the  first>eftective  causes  of  partial  natures,  fontal  Craters. 
These  things,  however,  we  shall  more  fully  investigate  elsewhere.  Let 
it  be  considered  also,  that  we  have  here  sufficiently  examined  the 
particulars  concerning  the  demiurgic  monad,  according  to  the  narration 
of  Plato. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 


In  the  next  place,  let  us  survey  those  causes  and  leaders  of  uncon- 
taminated  purity,  and  see  if  Plato  any  where  appears  to  remind  us  of 
this  order  of  Gods,  and  of  the  inflexible  power  proceeding  from  them  to 
all  the  divine  genera.  For  the  first-effective  triad  of  the  immutable 
order,  is  united  to  the  triad  of  the  intellectual  kings  and  the  progressions 
of  the  former  are  co-divided  with  the  monads  of  the  latter.  And  the 
summit  of  the  triad,  and  as  it  were,  the  flower  of  the  inflexible  guard  of 
wholes  is  united  to  the  first  intellectual  king.  But  the  middle  centre  of 
the  triad,  is  in  a  kindred  manner  conjoined  to  the  second  intellectual 
king,  proceeds  together  with  him,  and  subsists  about  him.  And  the 
extremity'  of  the  whole  triad  is  connected  with  the  third  intellectual 
king,  is  converted  with  him  to  the  principle  [of  the  intellectual  order,] 
and  together  with  him  is  convolved  to  the  one  union  of  the  father  of  all 
the  intellectual  Gods.    And  after  this  manner,  indeed,  the  three 

•  to  is  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  Google 


404 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


unpolluted  guardians  of  the  intellectual  fathers,  are  monadically  divided. 
But  together  with  this  division  they  have  also  an  hypostasis  united  to 
each  other.  All  of  them,  likewise,  are  in  a  certain  respect  in  each  of 
the  fathers,  and  all  of  them  energize  about  all.  And  after  a  certain 
manner  indeed  according  to  their  proper  hypostasis,  they  are  divided 
from  the  fathers  ;  but  after  another  manner  they  are  impartibly  assumed 
with  them,  and  at  one  and  the  same  time  they  arc  allotted  an  equally- 
dignified  order  with  the  fathers,  and  appear  to  possess  an  essence 
subordinate  to  them. 

Such,  therefore,  being  their  nature,  they  preserve,  indeed,  the  whole 
progressions  of  the  fathers  undefiled,  but  supply  them  with  inflexibility 
in  their  powers,  and  immutability  in  their  energies.  They  are  suspended, 
however,  from  total  purity.  And  if  some  of  the  ancients  have  in  any 
of  their  writings  surveyed  in  intellect  that  which  always  subsists  with 
invariable  sameness,  which  receives  nothing  into  itself  from  subordinate 
natures,  and  is  not  mingled  with  tilings  inferior,  they  celebrate  all  such 
goods  as  these,  as  pervading  to  intellect,  and  other  natures,  from  these 
Gods.  For  the  oration  in  the  Banquet  of  Plato,  celebrates  in  a  remark- 
able manner  the  immiscibility  of  the  divine  essence  with  secondary 
natures ;  and  that  which  transcends  the  whole  of  things  in  purity  and 
immutable  power,  arrives  to  the  Gods  through  the  guardian  cause.  And 
as  the  intellectual  fathers,  are  the  suppliers  of  prolific  production,  both 
to  all  other  things,  and  to  the  inflexible  Gods,  thus  also,  the  undefiled, 
Gods,  impart  the  power  of  purity,  both  to  the  fathers,  and  to  the  other 
divine  orders.  At  one  and  the  same  time,  therefore,  the  three  unpolluted 
Gods  subsist  with  the  three  intellectual  kings,  are  the  guardians  of  the 
fathers  themselves,  establish  about  them  an  immutable  guard,  and 
firmly  fix  themselves  in  them.  Hence  also,  the  Athenian  guest,  as  he 
arranges  and  adorns  his  polity  through  the  best  analogy,  through  which 
the  demiurgus  binds  and  constitutes  the  whole  number  [of  the  elements,] 
so  likewise  he  appoints  a  guard  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  region,  that 
nothing,  as  much  as  possible,  may  be  without  defence ;  imitating  in  this 
the  intellectual  Gods  themselves  who  guard  all  things  by  the  undefiled 
leaders.    And  it  appears  to  me  that  on  tins  account  he  calls  the  rulers 


Digitized 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  OF  PLATO.  405 

[of  his  polity]  guardians  of  the  laws,  or  [simply]  guardians,  because  the 
inflexible  guardians  are  consubsistent  with  the  intellectual  leaden  of  the 
whole  worlds. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


These  arguments,  however,  will  be  more  remote  from  that  divine 
triad,  and  are  referred  to  it  from  ultimate  images.  But  perhaps 
omitting  these,  we  may  abound  with  greater  conceptions,  and  more 
conducive  to  the  investigation  of  the  thing  proposed,  and  speculating 
together  with  Plato  the  divine  genera,  we  may  discover  how  he  also 
celebrates  this  order  of  Gods,  and  constitutes  them  together  with  the 
three  kings  that  are  now  discussed,  just  as  by  other  theologists  also,  we 
are  mystically  instructed  in  the  truth  concerning  them.  In  the  fable 
therefore  of  Protagoras,  Plato  indicating  to  us  the  exempt  watch-tower 
of  Jupiter,  and  the  transcendency  of  his  essence  which  is  unmingled  with 
all  secondary  natures,  through  which  he  is  inaccessible  and  unrevealed 
to  the  partible  genera  of  Gods,  refers  the  cause  of  this  to  his '  immutable 
guard,  aiid  the  defensive  order  by  which  he  *  is  surrounded.  For  on 
account  of  this,  all  the  demiurgic  powers  indeed  are  firmly  established  in 
themselves.  But  all  the  torms  [that  are  in  him]  are  according  to  supreme 
transcendency  exempt  from  secondary  natures.  And  in  short,  the 
demiurgic  intellect  [through  this  order]  abides  after  its  accustomed 
manner.  For  the  fable  says  that  the  guards  of  Jupiter  are  terrible  to 
all  things.    And  on  this  accoant  such  [partible]  genera  of  Gods  (one  of 

•  For  mnm,  it  i*  necewary  to  read  mnau. 
'  The  tame  emendatioo  it  here  also  necessary,  U  abort. 


Digitized  by  Google 


■106 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


which  also  Prometheus  is)  cannot  be  immediately  conjoined  with  the 
undented  and  Olympian  powers  of  the  demiurgus.  If,  therefore,  Socrates 
himself  in  the  form  of  a  fable  clearly  delivers  to  us  the  guard  about  the 
demiurgus,  is  it  not  through  these  things  evident  that  the  guardian 
genus  is  consubsistent  with  the  intellectual  Gods  ?  For  as  the  Oracles 
say,  that  the  demiurgio  order  is  surrounded  with  a  burning  guard,  thus 
also  Plato  says  that  guards  stand  round  it,  and  defend  inflexibly  the 
summit  of  it  exempt  from  all  secondary  natures. 

But  in  the  Cratylus,  Socrates  unfolding  through  the  truth  which  is 
expressed  in  names,  who  Saturn  is,  demonstrates  indeed  his '  peculiar 
hyparxis,  according  to  which  he  subsists  as  the  leader  of  the  total  intel- 
lectual orders.  He  likewise  unfolds  to  us  the  monad  of  the  unpolluted 
order,  which  is  united  with  Saturn.  For  Saturn,  as  he  says  in  that 
dialogue,  is  a  pure  intellect.  For,  he  adds,  the  koron  (to  xogo*)  of  him, 
does  not  signify  his  being  a  boy,  but  the  purity,  and  incorruptible  nature 
of  intellect.  After  an  admirable  manner  therefore,  the  fabricator  of  these 
divine  names,  has  at  one  and  the  same  time  conjoined  the  Saturnian 
peculiarity,  and  the  first  monad  of  the  unpolluted  triad.  For  the  union 
of  the  first  father  with  the  first  of  the  unpolluted  Gods,  is  transcendent, 
and  hence  this  inflexible  God  is  called  silent  by  the  Gods,  is  said  to  accord 
with  intellect,  and  to  be  known  by  souls  according  to  intellect  alone ; 
because  he  subsists  in  the  first  intellect  according  to  one  union  with  it. 
Saturn  therefore,  as  being  the  first  intellect,  is  defined  according  to  its 
proper  order,  but  as  a  pure  and  incorruptible  intellect,  he  has  the  unde- 
fined conjoined  in  himself.  And  on  this  account,  he  is  the  king  of  all  the 
intellectual  Gods.  For  as  intellect  he  gives  subsistence  to  all  the 
intellectual  Gods,  and  as  a  pure  intellect,  he  guards  the  total  orders  of 
them.  The  two  fathers  therefore,  [Saturn  and  Jupiter]  are  shown  by  the 
words  of  Plato  to  be  co-arranged  with  the  immutable  Gods,  according  to 
union  indeed,  the  first,  but  according  to  separation  the  third. 

If  you  are  willing  however,  to  survey  the  one  inflexible  guard  of  them 
with  respect  to  each  other,  according  to  which  the  third  father  is  stably 

1  For  avrqt,  it  it  requisite  to  read  utrw. 

» 


Digitized  by 


CHAP.  XXXIV. 


OF  PLATO 


407 


in  the  first,  as  being  the  intellect  of  him,  and  energizing  about  him,  again 
direct  your  attention  to  the  bonds  in  the  Cratylus,  of  which  indeed, 
partible  lives,  and  the  lives  deprived  of  intellect,  and  which  are  stupidly 
astonished  about  matter,  are  unable  to  participate.  But  a  divine  intel- 
lect itself,  and  the  souls  which  are  conjoined  to  it,  participate  of  these 
bonds  according  to  an  order  adapted  to  them.  For  the  Saturnian  bonds, 
appear  indeed  to  bind  the  mighty  Saturn  himself,  but  in  reality,  they  • 
connect  about  him  in  an  undefiled  manner  the  natures  that  throw  the. 
bonds  around  him.  For  a  bond  is  the  symbol  of  the  connective  order  of 
the  Gods,  since  every  thing  which  is  bound  is  connected  by  a  bond. 
Again  therefore  from  these  things,  the  guardian  good  which  extends  from 
the  connective  Gods  to  the  intellectual  kings  is  apparent,  since  it  unites, 
and  collects  them  into  one.  For  a  bond  guards  that  which  is  connected 
by  it.  But  the  immutable  Gods  inflexibly  preserve  their  own  appropri- 
ate orders.  For  the  guardship  of  these  Gods  is  twofold ;  the  one  indeed, 
being  primary  and  uniform,  and  suspended  from  the  triad  of  the 
connective  Gods ;  but  the  other  being  co-existent  with  the  intellectual 
kings,  and  defending  them  from  a  tendency  to  all  secondary  natures. 
For  all  the  intellectual  fathers  ride  on  the  unpolluted  Gods,  and  are 
established  above  wholes,  through  their  inflexible,  undeviating,  and 
immutable  power. 

If  however,  it  be  not  only  necessary  that  these  two  fathers  should 
participate  of  this  guardian  order,  but  that  the  middle  vivific  deity  of 
them  should  be  allotted  a  monad  of  the  immutable  Gods  coordinate  to 
herself,  it  is  indeed  necessary  that  the  first  [guardianship]  of  the  unpol- 
luted leaders  in  the  intellectual  fathers,  should  be  triad ic,  and  should  have 
the  same  perfect  number  with  the  three  intellectual  Gods.  It  is  likewise 
necessary  that  the  first  of  these  leaders  should  be  stably  united  to  the 
first  [of  the  intellectual  kings] ;  but  that  the  second  should  in  a  certain 
respect  be  separated  from  the  second  of  these  kings,  together  with  a 
union  with  him.  And  that  the  third  should  now  be  entirely  separated 
from  the  third  king.  And  thus  the  unpolluted  proceeds  conformably  to 
the  paternal  order,  and  is  after  the  same  manner  with  it  triadically 
divided.    The  first  of  the  unpolluted  Gods  likewise  guards  the  occult 


Digitized  by  Google 


408  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

nature  of  Saturn,  and  the  first-effective  monad  which  transcends  wholes, 
and  establishes  perfectly  in  him  the  causes  that  proceed  from,  and  again 
return  to  him.  But  the  second,  preserves  the  generative  power  of  the 
queen  Rhea,  pure  from  matter,  and  undented,  and  sustains  from  the 
incursions  of  secondary  natures  her  progression  to  all  things,  on  which 
she  pours  the  rivers  of  life.  And  the  third  preserves  the  whole  fabrica- 
tion of  things  established  above  the  fabrications,  and  firmly  abiding  in 
itself.  It  likewise  guards  it  so  as  to  be  inflexible,  one,  and  all-perfect 
with  respect  to  the  subjects  of  its  providential  case,  and  expanded  above 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 


Let  us  now  then  from  this  indefinite  and  common  doctrine  about 
these  Gods,  adduce  the  Grecian  rumour  concerning  it,  as  delivered  to  us 
by  Plato,  and  demonstrate  that  he  as  far  as  to  the  very  names  follows 
the  theologists  of  the  Greeks,  just  as  in  the  mystic  theory  of  the  three 
kings,  and  the  narration  of  the  unpolluted  Gods,  he  does  not  depart  from 
their  interpretation.  For  who  that  is  in  the  smallest  degree  acquainted 
with  the  divine  wisdom  of  the  Greeks,  does  not  know  that  in  their  arcane 
mysteries,  and  other  concerns  respecting  the  Gods,  the  order  of  the 
Curetes,  is  in  a  remarkable  manner  celebrated  by  them,  as  presiding 
over  the  undefiled  peculiarity,  as  the  leader  of  the  goddess  £Rhea,]  and 
as  binding  in  itself  the  guardianship  of  wholes?  These  Gods  therefore, 
are  said  to  guard  the  queen  Rhea,  and  the  demiurgus  of  wholes,  and 
proceeding  as  far  as  to  the  causes  of  partible  vivification  and  fabrication, 
to  preserve  the  Proserpine  and  Bacchus  which  are  among  these  causes, 


Digitized  by  Google 


» 


CHAP.  XXXV.  OF  PLATO.  40g 

exempt  from  secondary  natures,  just  as  here  [i.e.  in  the  intellectual  order], 
they  defend  the  vivifications  of  total  life,  and  the  first-effective  monads  of 
all-perfect  fabrication.  Not  only  Orpheus  therefore,  and  the  theologists 
prior  to  Plato  knew  this  Curetic  order,  and  knowing,  venerated  it,  but 
the  Athenian  guest  also  in  the  Laws  celebrates  it.  For  he  says,  that  the 
nnncd  sports  of  the  Curetes  in  Crete,  are  the  principal  paradigms  of  all 
elegant  motion.  And  now,  neither  is  he  satisfied  with  having  mentioned 
this  Curctic  order,  but  he  also  adds  the  one  unity  of  the  Curetes,  viz.  our 
mistress  Minerva,  from  which  the  mystic  doctrine  also  of  theologists 
prior  to  him,  suspends  the  whole  progression  of  the  Curetes.  He  like- 
wise, surrounds  them  above  with  the  symbols  of  Minerva,  as  presiding 
over  an  ever-flourishing  life,  and  vigorous  intellection  ;  but  beneath,  he 
•  manifestly  arranges  them  under  the  providence  of  Minerva.  For  the 
first  Curetes  indeed,  as  being  the  attendants  of  the  intelligible  and  occult 
Goddess,  are  satisfied  with  the  signs  that  proceed  from  thence  ;  but  those 
in  the  second  Jind  third  orders,  are  suspended  from  the  intellectual 
Minerval  monad. 

What  then  is  it,  that  the  Athenian  guest  says  concerning  this  monad, 
which  converts  to  itself  in  an  undefiled  manner  the  Curetic  progressions  ? 
"The  core  i.e.  virgin,  and  mistress  that  is  with  us,  being  delighted 
with  the  discipline  of  dancing,  did  not  think  it  proper  to  play  with  empty 
hands ;  but  being  adorned  with  an  all-perfect  panoply,  she  thus  gave 
perfection  to  dancing."  Through  these  things  therefore,  the  Athenian 
guest  clearly  shows  the  alliance  of  the  Curetic  triad  to  the  Minerval 
monad.  For  as  that  triad  is  said  to  sport  in  armour,  so  he  says  that  the 
Goddess  who  is  the  leader  of  them  [i.e.  of  their  progression]  being 
adorned  with  an  all-perfect  panoply,  is  the  source  to  them  of  elegant 
motion.  And  as  he  denominates  that  triad  Curetic,  from  purity,  so  like- 
wise he  calls  this  goddess  Core,  as  being  the  cause  of  undefiled  power 
itself.  For  koron  (-nxop*)  as  Socrates '  says  in  the  Cratylus,  signifies  the 
pure  and  incorruptible.  Whence  also  the  Curetes  are  allotted  their 
appellation,  as  presiding  over  the  undefiled  purity  of  the  Gods.  Aud 

1  Kf  *tij{  is  erroneously  printed  in  the  original  for  X'wxgtrrm. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  3  F 


Digitized  by  Google 


410 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  V. 


the  monad  of  them  is  particularly  celebrated  as  a  mistress  and  as  Core 
[a  virgin]  she  being  the  supplier  of  an  inflexible  and  flourishing  dominion 
to  the  Gods.  The  word  koron  therefore,  as  we  have  said,  is  a  symbol  of 
purity,  of  which  these  Gods  are  the  primary  leaders,  and  according  to 
which  ■  they  are  participated  by  others.  But  their  being  armed,  is  a 
symbol  of  the  guardian  power  according  to  which  they  connect  wholes, 
guard  them  exempt  from  secondary  natures,  and  preserve  them  estab- 
lished in  themselves.  For  what  other  benefit  do  men  derive  from  arms 
except  that  of  defence?  For  these  are  in  a  particular  manner  the  safe- 
guard of  cities.  Hence  fables  also  ascribing  to  the  unpolluted  Gods  an 
unconquerable  strength,  give  to  them  an  armed  apparatus.  Hence 
adorning  the  one  unity  of  them  with  an  all-perfect  panoply,  they  estab- 
lish it  at  the  summit  of  the  progression  of  these  Gods.  For  the  all-perfect 
precedes  things  which  are  divided  according  to  parts,  and  the  panoply 
exists  prior  to  the  partible  distribution  of  guardian  powers.  And  it 
appears  to  me  that  through  these  particulars  Plato  again  asserts  the  same 
things  as  were  afterwards  revealed  by  the  Gods.  For  what  they  denomi- 
nate every  kind  of  armour,  this  Plato  celebrates  as  adorned  with  an 
all-perfect  panoply.  [For  the  Gods  say,]  "Armed  with  every  kind  of 
armour,  he  resembles  the  Goddess."  For  the  all-perfect  in  the  habit  of 
Pyrrhich  arms,  and  the  undefiled  in  power,  pertain,  according  to  Plato, 
to  the  Minerval  monad ;  but  according  to  the  narration  of  the  Oracles 
they  pertain  to  that  which  is  furnished  with  every  kind  of  arms. 

Farther  still,  rythm  and  dancing  are  a  mystic  sign  of  this  deity,  because 
the  Curetes  contain  the  undefiled  power  of  a  divine  life  ;  because  they 
preserve  the  whole  progressions  of  it  always  arranged  according  to  one 
divine  boundary ;  and  because  they  sustain  these  progressions  from  the 
incursions  of  matter.  For  the  formless,  the  indefinite,  and  the  privation 
of  rythm,  are  the  peculiarities  of  matter.  Hence,  the  immaterial,  the 
definite,  and  the  undefiled,  are  endued  with  rythm,  are  orderly,  and 
intellectual.  For  on  this  account,  the  heavens  also  are  said  to  form  a 
perpetual  dance,  and  all  the  celestial  orbs  participate  of  rythmical  and 

'  For  xtJf  nitii  necessary  to  read  x«J"  v 


CHAP.  XXXVI. 


OF  PLATO. 


411 


harmonious  motion,  being  filled  with  this  power  supernally  from  the 
unpolluted  Gods.  For  because  they  are  moved  in  a  circle  thejr  express 
intellect,  and  the  intellectual  circulation.  But  because  they  are  moved 
harmonically,  and  according  to  the  first  and  best  rythms,  they  participate 
of  the  peculiarity  of  the  guardian  Gods.  Moreover,  the  triad  of  the 
unpolluted  leaders  is  suspended  from  the  summit  of  the  intellectual 
Gods.  And  that  it  proceeds  from  this  summit,  Plato  himself  teaches  us, 
by  placing  the  first  cause  of  purity  in  Saturn  the  king  of  all  the  intellec- 
tual hebdomad.  For  purity  (to  xogw)  is  there  primarily,  as  he  informs  us 
in  the  Cratylus,  and  the  first-effective  cause  of  purity,  preexists  unically 
in  Saturn.  For  on  this  account  also,  the  Minerval  monad,  is  called  Cote 
(a  virgin)  and  the  Curetic  triad  is  after  this  manner  celebrated,  being 
suspended  from  the  purity  in  the  intellectual  father. 


CHAFFER  XXXVI. 


Concerning  the  undefiled  leaders,  thus  much  we  have  had  to  say, 
according  to  the  narration  of  Plato.  The  monad  therefore,  now  remains, 
which  closes  the  number  of  all  the  intellectual  hebdomad,  and  is  the  first 
and  uniform  cause  of  all  division,  which  must  in  the  next  place  be 
discussed  by  us.  The  sections  therefore,  of  the  intellectual  Gods  which 
are  celebrated  by  all  the  wise  in  divine  concerns  among  the  Greeks,  and 
which  obscurely  signify  the  separations  in  those  Gods,  are  effected  in 
them  through  the  seventh  monad,  which  is  the  cause  of  division,  and 
according  to  which  they  separate  themselves  from  the  Gods  that  are 
placed  above  them,  proceeding  into  another  order,  are  allotted  a  union 
exempt  from  subordinate  natures,  and  by  themselves  have  a  definite 


Digitized  by  Google 


412 


ON  TE1E  THEOLOGY 


HOOK  V. 


order,  and  a  progression  bounded  according  to  number.  Plato  however,, 
allows  indeed  poets  that  are  inspired  by  Phoebus,  to  signify  things  of  this- 
kind  obscurely  and  mystically;  but  he  excludes  the  multitude  from 
hearing  these  things,  because  they  believe  without  examination  in  the 
fabulous  veils  of  truth.  And  thi9  is  what  Socrates  reprobates  in  Euthy- 
phron,  who  was  thus  affected  in  consequence  of  being  ignorant  of  divine 
concerns.  According  to  the  divinely-inspired  intellect  of  Plato  therefore, 
transferring  all  such  particulars  to  the  truth  concerning  wholes,  and 
unfolding  the  concealed  theory  which  they  contain,  we  shall  procure 
for  ourselves  the  genuine  worship  of  a  divine  nature.  For  Socrates 
himself  in  the  Cratylus,  unfolds  to  us  the  Saturnian  bonds,  and  their 
mystic  meaning,  and  in  a  remarkable  manner  demonstrates  that  the 
visions  of  those  ancient  and  illustrious  men  do  not  fall  off  from  the 
truth. 

After  the  same  manner  therefore,  he  will  permit  his  friends  to  assume 
intellectual  sections,  and  the  power  which  is  productive  of  these,  accord- 
ing to  divinely-inspired  conceptions,  and  will  suffer  them  to  survey  these 
together  with  bonds  in  the  intellectual  Gods.  Farther  still,  the  fable  in 
the  Gorgias,  in  a  clearer  manuer  separates  the  empire  of  Jupiter  from 
the  Saturnian  kingdom,  and  calls  the  former  the  second  from,  and  more 
recent  than  the  latter.  What  is  the  cause,  therefore,  which  separates 
these  paternal  monads  ?  What  intellectual  power  produced  the  intel- 
lectual empire  from  that  which  is  exempt  from  it  ?  For  it  is  necessary 
that  there  should  be  with  the  Gods  themselves  the  first-effective  fountain 
of  division,  through  which  Jupiter  also  separates  himself  from  tlie  monad 
his  father,  Saturn  from  the  kingdom  of  the  Heaven,  and  the  natures 
posterior  to  Jupiter,  proceeding  into  an  inferior  order,  are  separated 
from  his  all-perfect  monad. 

Moreover,  the  demiurgus  himself  in  the  production  of  the  genera 
posterior  to  himself,  at  one  and  the  same  time  is  the  cause  to  them  of 
union,  and  the  source  of  their  all-various  divisions.  For  fabricating  the 
soul  one  whole,  he  separates  it  into  parts,  and  all-various  powers.  And 
in  the  Timaeus  where  the  demiurgus  is  said  to  do  this,  Plato  himself 
does  not  refuse  to  call  these  separations,  and  essential  divisions,  sectiom. 


Digitized  by  Google 


chap,  xxxvii. 


OF  PLATO. 


413 


He  likewise  cuts  off  parts  from  thence,  places  tliem  in  that  which  h 
between  these,  and  again  separates  parts  from  the  whole,  and  thus  the 
mixture  from  which  he  had  cut  off  these  parts,  was  now  wholly  con- 
sumed. Is  it  therefore  any  longer  wonderful  that  the  framers  of  fables 
should  denominate  the  divisions  of  the  intellectual  leaders,  sections,  since 
even  Timaeus  himself  who  does  not  devise  fables,  but  indicates  the 
essential  progression  of  souls  into  multitude,  uses  as  a  sign  the  word 
section  ?  And  does  not  also  Plato  in  the  greatest  degree  accord  with  the 
highest  of  theologists,  when  he  delivers  to  us  the  demiurgus  glittering 
with  intellectual  sections  ?  As  therefore  the  demiurgus,  when  producing 
the  essence  of  souls,  constitutes  it  according  to  true  being,  when  gene- 
rating life,  he  generates  it  according  to  the  life  which  is  in  real  beings, 
and  produces  the  intellect  which  is  in  souls  according  to  the  intellect 
which  is  in  himself, — thus  also  when  cutting  the  essence  of  the  soul  from 
itself,  and  separating  it,  he  energizes  according  to  the  sections  and 
separations  which  are  in  the  intellectual  order,  and  according  to  the  one 
and  intellectual  cause  of  them.  According  to  Plato,  therefore,  there  is 
a  first  monad  of  the  total  divisions  in  intellectuals,  and  together  witb 
the  twofold  triads,  I  mean  the  paternal  and  the  undefiled,  it  gives 
completion  to  the  whole  intellectual  hebdomad.  And  we,  following 
Plato,  and  other  theologists,  concede  the  same  things. 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 


Let  us  now,  however,  return  to  the  beginning,  and  demonstrate  that 
Parmenides  delivers  the  same  things  concerning  this  intellectual  heb- 
domad, and  that  he  produces  this  hebdomad ic  aibn  {eternity)  and  the 
peculiarity  of  the  Gods  which  is  intellectual  alone,  in  continuity  with. 


Digitized  by  Google 


414  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

the  triple  orders  of  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
Gods.  And,  in  the  first  place,  let  us  survey  what  he  says  concerning 
the  father  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  and  the  undefilcd  power  which  is 
co-arranged  with  him.  For  after  the  threefold  figure,  and  the  order  of 
the  Gods  which  perfects  all  things,  that  which  is  in  itself  and  in  another, 
becomes  apparent.  These  things,  however,  are  demonstrated  to  be 
signs  of  the  intellectual  summit  of  the  intellectual  monads.  For  the 
first  father  of  the  Gods  in  this  order,  at  one  and  the  same  time  is  allotted 
a  paternal  transcendency  with  respect  to  those  posterior  to  him,  and  is  the 
intellect  of  the  first  intelligibles.  For  every  imparticipable  intellect  is 
said  to  be  the  intellect  of  the  natures  prior  to  itself,  and  towards  them, 
from  whom  it  is  produced,  it  has  an  intellectual  conversion,  and  in  theni 
as  first-effective  causes  it  establishes  itself.  Whence  also  the  demiurgic 
intellect  is  the  intellect  of  the  natures  above  itself,  and  proximately  indeed 
of  its  own  father,  from  which  likewise  it  proceeds,  but  eminently  of  the 
intelligible  unities  beyond  [Saturn]. 

The  first  king,  therefore,  in  intellectuals,  is  both  an  intellectual  father, 
and  a  paternal  intellect.  lie  is,  however,  the  intellectual  father  indeed 
of  the  Gods  that  proceed  from  himself;  but  he  is  the  paternal  intellect 
of  the  intelligibles  prior  to  himself.  For  he  is  indeed  intellectual 
essentially ;  but  he  has  an  intelligible  transcendency  in  intellectuals ; 
because  he  is  also  established  analogous  to  the  unknown  order  of  the 
intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time,  intellectual  Gods,  and  to  the  occult 
order  of  the  intelligible  triads.  And  as  they  are  expanded  above  the 
triadic  hypostases  of  the  Gods  posterior  to  themselves,  thus  also  the 
father  of  intellectuals,  is  a  father  expanded  above  the  whole  intellectual 
hebdomad,  in  consequence  of  being  a  paternal  intellect.  And  analo- 
gously to  the  above-mentioned  orders  of  Gods,  he  establishes  himself  in 
them,  and  is  filled  from  them  with  paternal  and  intelligible  union.  On 
this  account  also,  he  is  occult,  shuts  in  himself  the  prolific  powers  of 
himself,  and  producing  from  himself  total  causes,  he  again  establishes 
them  in,  and  converts  them  to  himself. 

'  For  w  ovnp,  it  is  necessary  to  read  n  tam*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXVII 


OF  PLATO. 


415 


These  things,  therefore,  Parmcnides  also  indicating,  magnificently 
celebrates  this  order  by  these  twofold  signs,  and  characterizes  the  first 
king  and  father  of  the  intellectual 1  Gods  through  these  peculiarities. 
For  he  is  in  himself,  and  in  another.  For  so  far  indeed  as  he  is  a  total 
intellect,  his  energy  is  directed  to  himself,  but  so  far  as  he  is  in  the  intel- 
ligibles prior  to  himself,  he  establishes  in  another  the  all-perfect  intelli- 
gence of  himself.  For,  indeed,  this  subsistence  in  another,  is  more 
excellent  than  the  subsistence  of  a  thing  in  itself ;  since,  as  Parmenides 
himself  concludes,  the  subsistence  of  Saturn  in  another,  pertains  to  him 
according  to  whole,  but  the  subsistence  of  him  in  himself,  according  to 
parts.  Where,  therefore,  does  the  another  pre-exist?  And  to  what  order 
of  the  Gods  prior  to  Saturn  does  it  belong?  Or  is  not  this  also  divinely 
unfolded  by  our  preceptor?  For  he  says  that  this  another,  remarkably 
pertains  to  that  order,  according  to  which  the  power  of  difference  first 
shines  forth,  being  the  progeny  of  intelligible  and  paternal  power.  Hence 
in  the  first  triad  the  another  was  occultly,  so  far  as  power  also  had  there 
an  occult  subsistence ;  but  it  particularly  shines  forth  in  the  first  order 
of  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time,  intellectual  Gods.  For  there 
the  first  difference,  the  feminine  nature  of  the  Gods,  and  the  paternal 
and  unvocal  power  subsist. 

[Saturn  therefore]  who  is  the  first  of  the  intellectual  fathers  being 
intelligible,  so  far  as  he  is  a  whole,  establishes  himself  in  the  intelligible 
triads  prior  to  himself,  from  which  also  he  is  filled  with  united  and  occult 
goods.  And  on  this  account  he  is  said  to  be  in  another.  With  respect 
to  those  triads  indeed,  the  another  is  occultly  and  according  to  cause  in 
the  intelligible  [i.  e.  in  the  first  triad]  of  intelligibles ;  but  according  to 
essence  in  the  intelligible  of  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time, 
intellectual  Gods.  All  intelligibles  therefore  are  united  ;  the  intelligible 
indeed  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods  being  united  to  the 
intelligible  of  the  intelligibles  prior*  to  intellectuals;  but  the  intelligible 
of  intellectuals,  to  both.    And  the  subsistence  indeed  in  another,  adheres 

*  For  voir*,,  it  U  olmotwly  neceiwry  to  read  >«pw>. 

*  For  rpmrm,  it  U  neceswry  to  read  *?o  row. 


Digitized  by  Google 


416  ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


ROOK  V. 


to  the  difference  which  is  according  to  uuical  number.  But  unical 
number  is  suspended  from  the  occult  union  of  the  one  being;  on  which 
account  also  it  is  unical. 

Farther  still,  we  also  say,  that  there  is  a  twofold  conversion  in  those 
orders,  the  one  indeed  being  towards  themselves,  but  the  other  towards 
the  causes  of  them,  (for  it  neither  was  nor  will  be  lawful  for  divine  natures, 
to  convert  themselves  in  any  respect  to  natures  posterior  to  themselves). 
And  the  intelligible  Gods  generate  all  things  stably  ;  but  the  intelligible 
and  intellectual  Gods  who  illuminate  imparticipable  life,  impart  the 
original  cause  of  progression  to  all  things;  and  the  intellectual  Gods 
arrange  and  adorn  wholes  according  to  conversion.  Hence,  it  is  indeed 
necessary  that  the  summit  of  iutellectuals  which  pours  forth  from  itself 
the  whole  and  all-perfect  form  of  conversion,  should  be  characterized  by 
both  the  couvertive  symbols,  and  should  be  at  one  and  the  same  time 
converted  to  itself,  and  to  the  natures  prior  to  itself.  Hence,  because 
indeed,  it  is  converted  to  itself,  it  is  in  itself;  but  because  it  is  converted 
to  the  intelligible  orders  beyond  itself,  it  is  in  another.  For  the  another 
is  more  excellent  than  the  whole  intellectual  order.  As,  therefore,  the 
summit  of  intelligiblcs  primarily  subsists  according  to  the  intelligible 
peculiarity  itself,  and  is  firmly  established  above  wholes;  and  as  the 
summit  of  intelligiblcs  and  intellectuals  primarily  unfolds  the  peculiarity 
of  this  order,  subsisting  according  to  divine  diversity,  and  being  to  all 
things  the  cause  of  all-various  progressions ;—  thus  also  the  intelligible 
deity  of  intellectuals,  exhibits  from  himself  according  to  union  the  twofold 
forms  of  conversion,  being  indeed  in  another  according  to  the  more 
excellent  form  of  conversion,  but  in  himself  according  to  the  less  excellent 
form.  For  to  be  converted  to  himself  is  inferior  to  the  conversion  to 
more  excellent  natures. 

Again,  therefore,  the  subsistence  in  another,  is  the  illustrious  prero- 
gative of  the  intelligible  aud  paternal  peculiarity.  For  the  another  is 
intelligible,  and  difference  was  the  power  proceeding  from  the  intelligible 
fathers,  and  from  the  natures  firmly  established  in  them.  Hence,  that 
which  is  comprehended  in  this  power,  and  is  fdled  from  it,  is  paternal 
and  intelligible.    But  the  subsistence  of  a  thing  in  itself  is  the  proper 


■ 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXVII.  OF  PLATO.  417 

sign  of  the  unpolluted  monad.    For  as  we  have  before  observed,  the 
summits  of  the  two  intellectual  triads  are  conjoined.    And  the  monad 
.of  the  guardian  triad  has  eternally  established  itself  iu  the  paternal 
•monad,  and  again  establishes  in,  and  converts  to  itself  the  natures  which 
;have  proceeded  from  itself.    And  the  first  intellectual  father  is  indeed 
father  on  account  of  himself,  but  on  account  of  the  unpolluted  [monad,] 
ihe  comprehends  in  himself  the  genera  of  himself,  stably  recalls  them 
j[when  they  have  proceeded  from  him]  to  himself,  and  in  his  own 
allness  '  contains  the  intelligible  multitudes  of  intellectuals  in  onpro- 
rceeding*  union  with  their  monad. 

The  first  leader,  therefore,  of  the  guardian  order  subsists  in  conjunction 
with  the  father.  And  the  father  indeed  comprehends  the  unpolluted 
cause,  but  is  comprehended  by  the  first  intelligibles.  And  as  he  is 
intelligibly  established  in  them,  so  likewise  he  has  established  in  himself, 
and  constituted  about  himself,  the  one  summit  of  the  inflexible  Gods. 
Id  the  Parmenides,  therefore,  also  the  same  God  appears  to  us  to  be  a 
pure  intellect.  Because,  indeed,  he  is  intellect,  being  extended  to  the 
intelligible  place  of  survey,  and  on  this  account  being  in  another,  so  far 
as  he  is  wholly  established  in  it.  But  again,  because  he  is  pure  and 
immaterial,  being  converted  to  himself,  and  shuttiug  in  himself  aH  his 
own  powers.  For  the  parts  of  this  wholeness,  are  more  partial  powers, 
which  hasten  indeed  to  a  progression  from  the  father,  but  are  on  all 
sides  established  and  -comprehended  by  the  wholeness.  And  the  whole- 
ness itself  is  a  deity,  connectedly  containing  in  itself  intelligible  parts, 
toeing  parturient  indeed  with  intellectual  multitude,  generating  all  things 
stably,  and  again  embosoming  and  collecting  to  itself  its  progeny,  and 
us  the  more  tragical  fables  say*  absorbiug  and  depositing  them  in  itself. 
For  the  progeny  of  it  are  twofold;  some  indeed,  being,  as  it  were,  analyzed 
-into  it;  but  others  being  divided  from  it.  And  some  abiding  in  it 
•through  the  first  unpolluted  monad ;  but  others  proceeding  according  to 
the  prolific  cause  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  surmounting  the  union  of  the 

'  for  sauToniTi  read  rarontrt.  *  For  ik^t**  teU  «**4«,nfwu 

Proc.  Vox.  I.  3  G 


Digitized  by  Google 


418  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

father,  and  being  the  primary  leaders  of  another  order,  and  of  the 
arrangement  and  ornament  of  secondary  natures.  The  first  order  there- 
fore of  the  intellectual  Gods,  is  thus  delivered  to  us  by  Parmenides. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 


Th£  second  order  however,  after  this,  is  that  which  comprehends  the 
middle  genera  of  wholes,  is  the  cause  to  all  things  of  progression  and 
prolific  power,  and  is  in  continuity  with  the  first  order  of  ihe  intellectual 
Gods.    What  else  therefore  than  life  is  every  where  in  continuity  with 
the  intelligible  and  true  being?  For  it  is  the  medium  between  intellect 
and  the  intelligible,  conjoining  intellect  to  the  intelligible,  and  expressing 
the  intelligible  power  which  collects  together  the  one  and  being.    As  the 
intelligible  therefore  is  to  the  one  and  hyparxis,  so  is  life  to  power,  and 
intellect  to  being.    And  as  in  intelligibles,  the  one  is  the  object  of  desire, 
but  being  aspires  after  the  participation  of  the  one,  and  power  collects 
being  to  the  participation  of  the  one,  and  the  one  to  a  communion  with 
being,  (for  the  one  here  is  notimparticipable,  and  exempt  from  all  power) 
so  likewise  the  intelligible  is  the  object  of  desire  to  intellect,  but  iuteUect 
is  filled  with  it.    And  life  binds  indeed  intellect  to  the  intelligible,  but 
unfolds  the  intelligible  to  intellect.    Whence  also,  I  think,  those  who  are 
wise  in  all  divine  concerns,  call  the  one  and  hyparxis  intelligible.  But  that 
which  is  primarily  being,  they  call'  the  first  intellect,  conformably  to  this 
analogy.    Life  therefore,  is  the  medium  between  being  and  intellect,  in 
the  same  manner  as  power  subsists  between  the  one  and  being.    And  all 
these,  viz.  the  intelligible,  life,  and  intellect  are  primarily  in  intelligibles ; 

'  For  anOuorrts,  it  is  necewary  to  read  «i«x«cAowmf. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXX VIII. 


OF  PLATO. 


419 


but  secondarily  in  intelligibles  and  intellectuals ;  and  according  to  a 
third  diminution,  in  intellectuals.  In  intelligibles  however,  being  is 
according  to  essence ;  for  there  intellect  is  primarily  according  to  cause. 
But  in  intellectuals,  intellect  indeed,  is  according  to  essence;  but  the 
natures  prior  to  intellect,  are  according  to  participation.  Since  therefore, 
life  is  surveyed  in  a  threefold  respect,  in  intelligibles  indeed  according  to 
cause;  but  in  intelligibles  and  intellectuals,  according  to  hvparxis;  and 
an  intellectuals,'  according  to  participation,  it  is  indeed  necessary  that 
the  life  which  is  in  the  intellectual  order,  should  both  be  life,  and 
participate  of  the  causes  generative  of  life  prior  of  itself.  The  one 
therefore  of  the  intellectual  Gods  which  is  arranged  in  the  middle,  is 
not  motion,  but  that  which  is  moved.  For  prior  to  this,  it  has  been 
demonstrated  by  Plato,  that  all  life  is  motion.  For  soul  is  self-motive 
because  it  is  self-vital.  And  intellect  is  on  this  account  moved,  because 
it  has  the  most  excellent  life.  The.  first  vivific  cause,  therefore,  of  the 
intellectual  Gods,  is  primarily  allotted  motion.  If,  however,  it  was  the 
first-effective  and  highest  life,  it  would  be  requisite  to  denominate  it 
motion,  and  not  that  which  is  moved.  But  since  it  is  life  as  in  intel- 
lectuals, but  is  filled  from  exempt  life,  it  is  at  the  same  time  motion,  and 
that  which  is  moved.  Very  properly,  therefore,  does  Parmenides 
demonstrate  that  the  one  in  this  order  is  moved,  because  it  proceeds  from 
the  causes  of  all  life  that  are  placed  above  it,  and  is  analogous  to  the 
middle  centre  of  intelligibles,  and  to  the  middle  triad  of  intelligibles  and 
intellectuals.  Hence  also,  Socrates  in  the  Phaedrus  calls  this  middle 
triad  Heaven ;  for  the  whole  of  it  is  life  and  motion.  Hut  that  which 
is  moved,  is  the  middle  in  intellectuals,  as  being  filled  from  it,  [i.  c  from 
the  life  in  the  middle  triad  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals;.]  since 
eternity  also,  which  is  arranged  according  to  the  intelligible  wholeness, 
is  all-perfect  life,  and  all  life,  according  to  Plotinus.  There,  however, 
the  middle  is  life  according  to  cause ;  but  in  intellectuals,  it  is  life 
according  to  participation ;  and  in  the  order  between  these,  it  is  life 

•  la  the  original,  alter  n  U  wi*  m/Toi;  mi  it  it  nemury  to  supply  *mf  vwmtfir,  rv  I,  nif 

»«ip»S,  *.  r.  X. 


Digitized  by  Google 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


boor  r. 


according  to  essence,  proceeding  indeed  from  intelligible  life,  (as  Par  men  ides 
also  manifests,  characterizing  both  according  to  wholeness,  though  the 
'  wholeness  in  intelligibies  is  different  from  that  which  is  in  intelligibles  and 
intellectuals,  as  we  have  before  observed,)  but  producing  after  this, 
intellectual  life.  For  that  which  is  moved,  is  indeed  entirely  allied  to 
the  circulation  of  the  Heaveu,  and  to  intellectual  and -intelligible  life: 

Moreover,  the  permanency  which  is  coordinate  with  this  motion,  is  not 
one  certain  genus  of  being,. as  neither  is  motion.  For  beings  indeed  are 
naturally  adapted  to  participate  of  the  genera > of  being;  but  the  super- 
essential  goods  of  the  Gods,  are  expanded  above  the  order  of  beings.  If,  ■ 
therefore,  Parmenides  here*  assuming  the  one  itself  by  itself,  surveys  in 
this  motion  and  permanency,  he  evidently  does  not  attribute  the  ele- 
ments of  being  to  the  Gods,  but  assigns  to  them  peculiarities  appropriate* 
all-perfect,  and  transcending  wholes*  And  thus  asserting  that  Me  owe  is 
moved  and  stands  still,  according  to  motion,  indeed,  he  delivers  the  vivifie 
hyparxis  of  the  Gods,  the  generative  fountain  of  wholes,  and  the  leading 
cause  of  all  things.  But  according  to  permanency,  he  delivers  the  un- 
polluted monad  coordinated  with  motion,  and  which  connectcdly-contains 
the  middle  centres  of  the  guardian  triad.  For  as  the  summit  of  the 
guardian  triad,  is  united  to  the  first  lather,  according  to  the  first  hypos- 
tasis, thus  also  the  deity  who  contains  the  middle  bond  of  the  unpolluted 
leaders,  is  by  a  congeniality  of  nature  consubsistent  with  the  motive 
cause  of  all  the  Gods,  which  moves  wholes,  and  is  primarily  moved  from 
itself.  And  through  this  deity,  the  prolific  power  of  this  Goddess  [[  Rhea} 
is  firmly  established  in  herself.  Producing  likewise,  and  multiplying  all 
things,  she  is  [through  this  deity]  exempt  from  wholes,  and  inflexibly 
exists  prior  to  her  progeny.  With  respect,  therefore,  to  motion  here  and 
permanency,  the  former  indeed  is  the  fountain  of  the  life  and  generative 
power  that  proceeds  to  all  things ;  but  the  latter,'  establishes  the  whole 
vivifie  fountain  in  itself,  but  is  from  thence  filled  with  the  prolific  rivers  of 
life.  Parmenides,  therefore,  delivering  to  us  these  things,  and  the  pro- 
gression of  them,  demonstrates  that  that  which  is  moved  is  generated 
from  that  which  is  in  another,  but  that  which  stands  still,  from  that  which, 

'  In  the  original  *  U  is  omitted. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXIX.  OF  PLATO. 


421 


is  in  itself.  For  the  first  monad  of  the  paternal  triad  constitutes  the 
natures  posterior  to  it.  And  after  the  same  manner,  the  highest  of  the 
unpolluted  triad,  and  which  is  intelligible  as  in  this  triad,  imparts  at  one 
and  the  same  time  the  middle  and  last  monad  of  the  triad.  On  this 
account,  also,  motion  here  is  better  than  permanency.  For  as  a  subsist- 
ence in  another  is  according  to  cause  more  ancient  than  the  subsistence 
of  a  thing  in  itself,  so  likewise  that  which  is  moved,  is  causally  more 
ancient  than  that  which  is  permanent.  For  the  unpolluted  Gods,  are  in 
power  subordinate  to  the  fathers,  and  are  comprehended  in  them. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 


The  third,  therefore,  to  the  Saviour,  as  they  say,  and  let  us  direct  our 
attention  to  the  demiurgic  monad,  unfolding  itself  into  light  together  with 
tl»e  coordinate  Gods  it  contains.  In  the  first  place,  then,  here  also  the 
communion  of  the  one  with  other  things,  is  apparent,  and  we  must  no 
longer  consider  the  one  alone  by  itself,  but  according  to  its  habitude 
towards  other  things.  Because,  therefore,  the  demiurgic  order  produces 
wholes  from  itself,  and  arranges  and  adorns  a  corporeal  nature,  it  also 
generates  all  the  second  and  ministrant  causes  of  the  Gods.  For  what 
occasion  is  there  to  say  that  the  term  other  things,  is  a  sign  of  a  corporeal 
condition  of  being,  since  formerly  the  Pythagoreans  thought  fit  to  cha- 
racterize an  incorporeal  nature  by  the  one,  but  indicated  to  us  the  nature 
which  is  divisible  about  body,  through  the  term  others  f  In  the  second 
place,  the  number  of  the  conclusions  [in  this  part  of  the  Parmenides}  is 
doubled.  For  the  one  is  no  longer  demonstrated  to  be  alone  same,  or 
different,  as  it  is  to  be  in  itself,  and  in  another,  or  to  be  moved,  and  stand 
still,  but  it  is  demonstrated  to  be  the  same  with  itself,  and  different  from 


Digitized  by  Google 


422  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

itself,'  and  to  be  different  from  other  things,  and  the  same  with  other 
things.  But  this  twice  appeared  to  us  before  to  be  entirely  adapted  to 
the  demiurgic  monad,  both  according  to  other  theologists,  and  to  Socrates 
in  the  Cralylus,  who  says  that  the  demiurgic  name  is  composed  from 
two  words.  In  the  third  place,  therefore,  the  multitude  of  causes  is  here 
separated,  and  all  the  monads  of  the  Gods  present  themselves  to  the 
view,  according  to  the  demiurgic  progression.  For  the  demiurgic  order 
is  apparent,  the  prolific  power  co-ordinate  with  it,  the  undefiled  monad 
the  cause  of  exempt  providence,  and  the  distributive  fountain  of  wholes  ; 
and  together  with  these,  as  I  may  say,  all  the  orders  about  the  demiurgus 
are  apparent,  according  to  which  he  produces  and  preserves  all  tilings, 
and  being  exempt  from  the  things  produced,  is  firmly  established 
in  himself,  and  separates  his  own  kingdom,  from  the  united  empire  of 
his  father. 

How,  therefore,  and  through  what  particulars  do  these  things  become 
apparent  ?  We  reply,  that  the  same  with  itself  (for  this  Par  men  ides  first 
demonstrates)  represents  to  us  about  the  nature  of  the  one,  the  monadic 
and  paternal  peculiarity,  according  to  which  the  demiurgus  also  subsists. 
Hence,  likewise,  the  one  is  said  to  be  the  same  with  itself.  For  the 
another  is  in  the  demiurgus  according  to  the  transcendency  of  different 
causes ;  but  the  same,  appears  to  be  a  sign  of  his  proper,  viz.  of  his 
paternal,  hyparxis.  For  being  one,  and  the  exempt  father  and  demi- 
urgus of  wholes,  he  establishes  his  proper  union  in  himself.  And  in  this 
one,  Parmenides  in  a  remarkable  manner  shows  the  uniform,  and  that 
which  is  allied  to  bound.  But  the  same  with  other  things,  is  the  singular 
good  of  prolific  power,  and  of  a  cause  proceeding  to,  and  pervading 
through  :dl  tilings  without  impediment.  For  the  demiurgus  is  present 
to  all  things  which  he  produces,  aud  is  in  all  things  the  same,  which  he 
arranges  and  adorns,  pre-establishing  in  himself  the  generative  essence 
of  wholes.  If,  therefore,  we  rightly  assert  these  things,  bound  and 
infinity  subsist  in  him  demiurgically.  And  the  one  iudeed  is  in  the 
sameness  which  is  separate  from  oilier  things,  but  the  other  is  in  the 

•  After  %K\x  in  the  original  it  i*  necesnrr  to  wpply  the  word*  xai  twtov  Mrm»,  %%i  ir«for  mvtki. 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXIX. 


OF  PLATO. 


423 


power  which  generates  other  things.  For  every  where  power  is  prolific 
of  secondary  natures.  But  the  principle  which  subsists  according  to 
bound,  is  the  supplier  of  an  united  and  stable  hypostasis. 

Moreover,  the  different  from  other  things,  manifests  his  undefined  purity* 
and  his  transcendency  which  is  exempt  from  all  secondary  natures.  For 
the  first  intellect  was  on  this  account  pure  and  incorruptible,  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Cratylus,  because  it  is  established  above  coordination  or 
communion '  with  all  sensible  natures.    For  as  some  one  of  the  Gods 
says,  he  does  not  incline  his  power  to  matter,  but  is  at  once  exempt  from 
all  fabrication.    But  the  demiurgic  intellect  receiving  from  thence  total 
power,  and  a  royal  dominion,  adorns  indeed  sensibles,  and  constitutes 
the  whole  of  a  corporeal  nature.     Together  however,  with  prolific 
abundance,  and  the  providential  attention  to  secondary  natures,  he 
transcends  his  progeny,  and  abides  in  his  own  accustomed  manner,  as 
Timneus  says,  through  the  inflexible  guard  which  subsists  with  him,  and 
the  power  imparted  to  him  from  it,  which  is  uncontaminated  with  other 
participants.    Hence,  through  the  never-failing  supply  of  good,  and 
providential  energies,  and  the  generation  of  subordinate  natures,  he 
is  the  same  with  then.    For  he  is  participated  by  them,  and  fills  his 
progeny  with  his  own  providential  care.     But  through  his  purity, 
undented  power,  and  inflexible  energies,  he  is  separate  from  wholes,  is 
disjoined  from  them,  and  is  im participate  by  other  things.    And  as  the 
first  king  of  intellectuals  is  allotted  his  non-inclination  to  matter,  through 
the  guard  which  is  united  to  him,  and  through  the  undented  monad ; 
and  as  the  vivific  goddess  possesses  her  stable  and  indexible  power 
from  the  second  cause  of  the  guardian  Gods ;  thus  also  the  demiurgic 
intellect  preserves  a  transcendency  exempt  from  other  things,  and  a 
union  separated  from  multitude,  through  the  third  monad  of  the  leaders 
of  purity.    For  the  cause  of  separate  providence  is  a  guard  coordinate 
with  the  deiniurgus,  who  hastens  to  produce'  all  things,  and  to  pervade 
through  all  things.    But  the  guard  which  is  the  supplier  of  stable  power, 

•  For  xtwavuo,  it  is  necessary  to  read  xonwv.aj. 

1  The  word  ra^ayup  is  omitted  in  the  original,  but  ought  doubtless  to  be  inserted. 


Digitized  by  Google 


424 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY 


BOOK  r. 


is  coordinate  with  the  vivific  deity,  who  is  moved  to  the  generation  of 
wholes.  And  with  the  intellect  that  is  multiplied  according  to  intellec- 
tual conceptions  [i.  e.  with  Saturn,]  the  guard  is  coordinate,  that  imparts 
an  undented  union  of  the  conversion  of  all  his  energies  to  himself.  The 
monad,  therefore,  remains,  which  is  arranged  as  the  seventh  of  these 
intellectual  monads,  which  is  present  with,  and  energizes  with  all  of 
them,  but  particularly  unfolds  itself  into  light  in  the  demiurgic  order, 
and  which  Par  men  ides  also  producing  for  us  together  with  the  whole 
demiurgus,  defines  it  in  difference,  in  the  same  manner  as  he  does  the 
undefined  cause  in  the  demiurgus.  He  says  however,  that  this  difference 
separates  the  demiurgic  moo  ad  itself  from  itself.  For  we  have  before 
observed  that  this  order  is  the  supplier  of  separation  to  all  the  Gods. 
As  therefore,  the  demiurgus  is  the  same  with  himself,  through  the  pater- 
nal union,  after  the  same  manner  he  is  separated  from  himself  and  his 
father  through  this  difference.  Whence  therefore,  does  he  derive  this 
power?  From  being  in  himself,  says  Parmcnides,  and  in  another.  For 
these  were  indeed  unitedly  in  the  first  father,  but  separately  in  the  third. 
Separation  therefore,  preexisted  there  according  to  cause;  but  in  the 
demiurgus  k  shines  forth,  and  unfolds  the  power  of  itself. 

That  the  cause  however  of  division,  is  in  a  certain  respect  in  the  first 
father,  Parmenides  manifests  in  the  first  hypothesis,  when  he  says,  "  that 
every  thing  which  is  in  itself  is  in  a  certain  respect  a  duad,  and  is 
separated  from  itself."  There  however,  the  duad  is  occultly  ;  but  here  it 
subsists  more  clearly,  where  also  all  intellectual  multitude  shines  forth  to 
the  view.  For  difference  i»*  the  progeuy  of  the  firmly-abiding  duad 
which  is  there.  This  therefore  separates  the  demiurgic  intellect  from  the 
Gods  prior  to  it,  and  divides  the  monads  in  it  from  each  other.  For  if 
so  far  as  it  is  in  another,  it  is  united  to  the  intelligible  of  itself,  but  so  far 
as  it  is  in  itself  it  is  separated  from  it,  because  it  proceeds  according  to 
each  order  of  its  own  intelligible,- — if  this  be  the  case,  it  is  necessary  that 
this  difference  should  be  the  cause  to  it  of  separation  from  its  father. 
All  the  intellectual  monads  therefore,  have  appeared  to  us  to  subsist 
coordinately  with  each  other.  And  the  subsistence  indeed,  in  another  is 
fXw  sign  of  the  father.    Jiut  the  subsistence  in  itself,  is  the  sign  of  the 


Digitized  by  Google 


CHAP.  XXXIX.  OF  PLATO.  42j 

first  unpolluted  monad.  Again,  motion  is  the  sign  of  vivific  goodness ; 
but  permanency  of  the  indexible  power  conjoined  with  motion.  And  same- 
ness with  itself,  and  with  another,  is  the  sign  of  the  demiurgic  peculiarity ; 
but  the  being  different  from  other  things,  is  the  sign  of  the  guard  about 
the  demiurgus.  And  in  the  last  place,  the  being  (liferent  from  itself,  is 
the  sign  of  the  seventh  intellectual  monad,  which  is  according  to  cause 
indeed,  and  occultly  in  the  first  father,  but  is  allotted  its  hypostasis  more 
clearly  in  the  demiurgus.  Parmenides  likewise  appears  to  me,  when 
dividing  the  signs  of  fabrication,  to  have  unfolded  in  the  middles 
themselves,  the  peculiarities  of  the  undefiled  monad,  and  of  the  dividing 
monad,  so  far  as  they  also  are  in  a  certain  respect  comprehended  in  the 
fabrication.  For  he  shows  in  the  first  of  the  conclusions  that  the  one  is 
the  same  with  itself;  in  the  second,  that  it  is  different  from  itself ;  in  the. 
third,  that  it  is  different  from  other  thing* ;  and  in  the  fourth  that  it  is 
the  same  with  other  things.  For  he  co-arranges  indeed,  the  dividing 
power  with  the  paternal  union;  but  connects  with  a  transcendency 
separate  from  secondary  natures,  the  providential  cause  of  them.  For  in 
the  Gods,  it  is  necessary  that  union  should  exist  prior  to  separation,  and 
and  a  purity  unmingled  with  secondary  natures,  prior  to  a  providential 
inspection  of  them ;  through  which  likewise,  being  every  where,  they  are 
no  where,  being  present  with  all  things,  they  are  exempt  from  all  tilings, 
and  being  all  things,  they  are  not  any  of  their  progeny. 


END  OP  VOL.  I. 


JVoc.  Vol.  I.  3  II 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Just  Published,  Price  6s.  [Continued  Quarterly.] 

%\>t  Classical  journal, 

NO.  XXVI. 

CONTAINING  AVARIRTYO* 

CLASSICAL,  BIBLICAL,  AND  ORIENTAL  LITERATURE. 

THE  FOLLOWING  SCARCE  TRACTS 

J  re  inserted  in  the  Ncm  be  its  already  Published. 
A  Complete  Set  of  which  may  be  hud,  in  87  No*,  or  13  Vols.   Pr.  8/.  It. 


T.  tie  Grttrornm  Verhatx  Ke^iii  ftettendts  ;  aC.  S.  G.  Hauptmann. 

II.  An  Introductory  Kuay  on  the  Prrpotitiont  of  the  Greek  Langin>j  c  ; 
Ry  James  Moor,  LL.  D.  Gr.  Prof,  in  the  Univ.  of  Glu»gow. 

III.  A  Chart  often  AVnwrn/i,  in  200  Languages,  Kith  a  Deuriptite  Enwv. 
Itv  th.  Kev.  R.  Patrick,  Hull. 

I V.  Itishop  Pearson'*  minor  Tracli,  chronologically  arranged. 

V.  Account  of  Hemlaneum ;  By  the  Her.  Mr.  Hayter. 

VI.  G.  Cunteri  de  ratiemt  F.mendandi  Crtttot  Auctvrei,  Syntagma  reeens 
ittelum. — VII.  Wasse  On  Latin  Schotiaitt. 

VIII.  Carolina  Homerica,  Ilia)  etOdystea,  a  Rkapiudarum  Interpolatumi- 
hu*  repvrgeta,  rt  in  prutinam  formam,  quatcnut  reenperanda  met,  tarn  ex  vtte- 
mm  wvnumeatorumjMe  ft  auctoritate,  qnam  rsantiqni  termonit  Indole  ac  Hu- 
tione,  redo  eta  ;  can  Kotii  ac  Prolegomena,  in  qnihut  decorum  origine,  aiutorc, 
ct  ctote,  itemque  de  pritxi  mattirdatt,  dUigenter  inqnintur,  oneri  et  stadia 
Ricardi  Payne  Knight.   Editio  Secunda. 

This  Edition,  with  many  additions,  h  printed  exclusively  in  the  Clan. 
Jour.— A  copy  of  the  first  edition,  of  which  only  SO  were  printed,  was  lately 
>old  by  auction  f>>r  above  It. 

IX.  "  T.  Falconer's  too  Letter*  on  the  Oxford  Sirato. 

X.  Oretiodc  PubHeis  Alhenicnrium  Jlorihus  a  ValckenaeT. 

XI.  Lamberti  Bos  regular  pneeipu*  acceniuum. 

XII.  Rnbnken's  Animadev.  in  Xenophontii  Memorabilia. 

XIII.  Orotio  de  Lingua  A  ratica  utilitatc,  antiquitate,  el  tract  ant  ia :  a 
Hyde. — XIV.  Dt  Ludis priratu  ac  dcmcttieitvctcrum  ;  a  J.  C.  Bulengero. 

XV.  Funic*  quo*  Tacitut  in  tradendis  rebus  ant*  It  gestis  videaiur  seqnutut 
paucis  inditat  3.  II.  L.  Meicrotto.  1795. 

XVI.  No; at  urn  Romanarum  ae  LUcraruu  tingularium  compendiique  scripti- 
onit  in  antiqt.it  codicibus  et  monumeatit  obvii  Intcrpretatw,  ex  nriii  ouctortbus 
coiietta.—XVIL  Fragment  of '  Lengus—xeith  Latin  translation. 

XVIII.  Oratio  de  constitutions  Tragtdiamm  et  Sopientia  ertili,  etqsseeloqvtn- 
tin  ix earnm  Lect'ume  haurienda. 

XIX.  Remarks  on  the  Miscellaneous  Observations  on  Authors,  ancient  and 

XX.  An  Anstter  to  a  late  Book  written  against  Dr.  Bent  ley,  relative  to  tome 
Manuscript  Note*  on  CaJlimachu*. — XXL  Ricardi  Bt*TLru  Oratiuncula. 

XXII.  Ttntamtn  de  Potti*  EUguseis ;  anetore  J.  Aodisomo. 

XXIII.  An  Inquiry  into  the  VenafUation  qf  Homer,  and  the  useqf  the  Di- 
gamma  in  An  Foam ;  by  Paorcssoa  Dpn**a. 

XXIV.  Twilvi  Plates  of  the  variout  form*  ef  the  Creek  Alphabet  in  differ- 
ent age*  s  milk  the  Abbreviations  and  Connexion!. 

XXV.  A  Discourse  on  Ancient  and  Modern  Learning.  By  the  late  Rt.  Hon. 
Jos.  AtmtBov. — XXVL  Ricatdi  Benileii  EpittoU  Duet  ad  Ti.  Hemtterhusium. 

XX  VII.  D.  Heinsii  Oratio  de  Utilitate,  qu*  e  lectio ne  Tragcediaium  per- 
il'** many  University  Prite 


1Thc  pamphleteer  ; 

CONTAINING  THE  BEST  PAMPHLETS  OF  THE  DAY. 

Each  No.  on  the  average,  will  contain  ten  or  twelve  Pamphlets :  thus 
reducing  the  price  of  each  to  about  sixpence. — The  peculiar  advantage 
of  this  plan  is,  that  it  will  form  an  hnperuhabte  Record  of  the  most  valu- 
able pamphlets,  and  will  also  offer,  through  the  means  of  Clubs  and  In- 
stitutions, a  yery  extensive  circulation.— Old  Pamphlets  will  be  inserted, 
if  very  valuable  and  scarce. — Very  celebrated  French  Pamphlet*  will  be 
occasionally  translated  and  inserted. — Communications  are  requested  to 
be  sent  to  Tooke't  Court,  for  the  Editor.  [Post-paid.] 

NO.  1 5.  IS  JUST  PUBLISHED. 
The  Pamphleteer  contains  the  following  Pamphlets  tchich  are 
at  the  present  Time  particularly  interesting. 

XIV.  History  of  Tocssaibt  Louvcrti'bz. 

XV.  Judge  Firtmu  \  Celebrated  Chafer 
to  t>»  Grand  Jury  ot"  Wcxiurd. 

XVL  The  Bitliup  ot  LltrCOUr,  I.ofd  Cm 
vill*.  Bishop  Mil* ik,  Mr. C.  Bonn,  Mr. 
Le  Mriciusb,  and  other*,  on  the  Catiioi  l< 

QUESTION". 

XVH.  SirS.  Ramillt  oo  the  Si  .viTnur 
XVUL  M.  lim.  <  Pamphlets 
on  M:xi«Tt  hial  F-r«[M«ii;b..]ij —  J  he  Liar  «- 
tv  of  the  Pans,  ice.  dec 

XIX.  Amsmcab  Encroachment*  on  Bni- 
tim  Right* ;  a  new  Editioo.    By  N.  A  rent- 

Brief  Account  of  the  Jem-its,  with 
Historical  Proof*  in  support  of  it,  tending  tu 
cs(abli*h  the  Dancer  of  the  Revival  of  that 
Order  to  the  World  at  large,  and  particularly 
to  the  United  Kingdom. 

XXI.  An  Inquiry  into  thr  Rtst  or  Pm<  u 
in  Europe,  during  the  last  twenty-five  yeur«, 
compared  with  that  which  ha*  taken  place 
in  England;  with  Observations  on  High  and 
Low  price*. 
F.RJ. 


I.  Cam<ot's  Memorial  to  Louts  XVIII. 

II.  ('it4T»it'B*i*nD  on  Bcob apabte  and 
l.e  Rouaaoaa. 

III.  Mis-.nn  on  the  Balance  or  Powlb  I 


IV.  Prumia  and  Saeovt,  by  Counsellor 
Oh  run.  ' 

V.  l*rinreT*LLKT**«oonthe  Cumniercial 
I  iitercuttrM  of  Obeat  Bbitaib  with  Amebic*. 

VI.  Foasrea  on  the  Ua*  and  TtNDt»er  of  j 
Dr.  0»u'»  "»»*tero  of  (  hmululo  saapper- 


VII.  Mr.  Va«*ittabt'*  Outline  of  a  Plar 
or  1'ikabce. 

VHL  Mr.  Uoasisson  on  Mr.  Vabsittabt'. 
Plan  of  Fivavra. 

IX.  Lord  8  a  aw  eld  on  the  Cuvaucai 
Sitoatio*  of  Great  Britain. 

X.  Mr.  P.  Eliot  on  the  Political  and 
lin»Kui.M«it  of  the  Nation. 

XI.  Sir  P.  Fbabci*'*  Letter  Miative  to  Lord 
Out. 

XII.  Variou*  Pamphlet*  on  theCoBB'  Law*. 
Xtll.  Narrative  of  the  Journey  and  luipri- 

soorucnt  ot  "Pi  i'*  VII.  with  hi*  Portrait. 


By  Aamuft  YoVEO,  K>u. 


t%X.  8cc.  &C. 

A  SECOND  , EDITION  or  No.  I 


Tki*  Work  Uo$  mlto 


The  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer, 
Rt.  II.  Lord  Grenville, 
III.  H.  Lord  Sheffield, 
Thr  Bishop  of  Lincoln, 
Sir  U.  Parnell,  Bart. 
Sir  J.  Bulk*,  Bart.  K.  B. 
«>r  P.  Fraud*,  K-  B. 
Sir  S.  Romilly,  Bart. 
Rl.  H.  W.  Wilbertbrcc.M.P. 
J.  Bruce,  E»q.  M.  P. 
W.  Huakissou,  Em.  M.P. 
C.  Martb,  Eaq.  M.  P. 
Mr.  S*rj.  Onvlow,  M.  P. 
J.  Stephen,  E»q.  M.  P. 
H.  WrotteMeTTWM.P. 
SirH.  B.  Dudley,  Sa,t. 


Esq.F. 

»7Sq.F.RJ?. 

LompUle  Stt$,  in  7  i  nh.  may  t><  had  in  hd*.  Pr.  *l. 


the  bftt 
difttnpuishtd 

Sir  T.  Bimaid, 
Judge  Fletcher, 
Baron  Smith,  F.  R.S. 
Bishop  Milner,  D.  D 
Arrhdearon  D 
Dr.  II.  Nar»l., 
Dr.  Val 
Dr. 

Dr.  Pellet, 
Dr.  I.  Jobintone, 
Rev.  P.  Gandoluhy, 
Rev.  S.  T.  Wylde, 
Rev.  T.  Le  MeMirier, 
Rev.  J.  C.  Eustace, 
A.  Young,  Eaq.  F. 
J.  P" 
N. 


is  just  published. 

«f  the  Jollaming  SoUt  and 


T.  Pursier,  Esq.  F.l.  s. 
F.  PercivaJ  Elliot,  Esq. 

B.  Montague,  Esq. 
R,  M.  Kcmson,  Esq. 

C.  Butler,  Esq. 
C.  Duppa.  F*q. 
J.  Longlrv,  Esq. 
O.  Joy,  Esq, 

A.  Borkct,  Esq. 
John  KaiMaUh,  F.-q. 
W.  C.  Jacktnn,  K«q- 
T.  M.  Muogravc,  Esq. 
J.  Ptulippart,  Esq. 
J.  Bavcrstock,  Esq. 
J.  Fears,  Em|. 
T.N.TalWrd,  Esq. 


11*.  Emr^Net.  ^.Ci.tftJk. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Google 


If 


