*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SIX BOOKS OF PROCLUS, THE PLATONIC SUCCESSOR, ON THE THEOLOGY OF PLATO (VOL. 2 OF 2) ***




                                PROCLUS

                                  ON

                        THE THEOLOGY OF PLATO.

                   _Proc._      _Vol. II._      _a_




                                  THE

                         SIX BOOKS OF PROCLUS

                        The platonic Successor,

                       ON THE THEOLOGY OF PLATO,

                      TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK;

                               TO WHICH

                       A SEVENTH BOOK IS ADDED,

  IN ORDER TO SUPPLY THE DEFICIENCY OF ANOTHER BOOK ON THIS SUBJECT,

             WHICH WAS WRITTEN BY PROCLUS, BUT SINCE LOST.

                 ALSO, A TRANSLATION FROM THE GREEK OF

                    PROCLUS’ ELEMENTS OF THEOLOGY.

                          TO WHICH ARE ADDED

               A TRANSLATION OF THE TREATISE OF PROCLUS,

                        On Providence and Fate;

        A TRANSLATION OF EXTRACTS FROM HIS TREATISE, ENTITLED,

                   TEN DOUBTS CONCERNING PROVIDENCE;

                                  AND

              A TRANSLATION OF EXTRACTS FROM HIS TREATISE

                      ON THE SUBSISTENCE OF EVIL;

          _As preserved in the Bibliotheca Gr. of Fabricius_.


                           BY THOMAS TAYLOR.


    Αλλ’ εστιν, εστι, καν τις εγγελα λογῳ,
    Zευς, xαι θεοι, βροτεια λευσσοντες παθη.
                                   _Euripides._

    There are, there are, though laugh the scoffer may,
    Jove and the Gods, who mortal ills survey.

    ωσπερ εισι θεoι πολλοι, και κυριοι πολλοι.
                                Corinth, I, Cap. 8. v. 5.

    As there be GODS many, and LORDS many.


                             TWO VOLUMES.
                               VOL. II.

                                LONDON:
                        PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR,
            _By A. J. Valpy, Tooke’s Court, Chancery Lane_.
  AND SOLD BY MESSRS. LAW AND Co.; LONGMAN AND Co.; BALDWIN AND Co.;
                      AND ALL OTHER BOOKSELLERS.

                                 1816.




                               PROCLUS,

                        THE PLATONIC SUCCESSOR,

                                  ON

                        The Theology of Plato.




                               BOOK VI.




                              CHAPTER I.


The hebdomatic _aion_ (eternity) therefore, of the intellectual
Gods has been through these things celebrated by us, following the
mystic conceptions of Plato. But after this, let us in the next place
contemplate the multiform progressions of the ruling orders, and refer
the one union of them to the intellectual theory of Parmenides. For
this order is woven together in continuity with the demiurgus and
father of wholes, proceeds from, is perfected by, and converted to
him, according to his perfective power. Hence also, it is necessary to
connect the narration about the governors of the universe, with the
discussion concerning the demiurgus, and to assimilate words to the
things of which they are the interpreters. For all the series of the
ruling Gods, are collected into the intellectual fabrication as into a
summit, and subsist about it. And as all the fountains are the progeny
of the intelligible father, and are filled from him with intelligible
union, thus likewise, all the orders of the principles or rulers, are
suspended according to nature from the demiurgus, and participate
from thence of an intellectual life. And let no one be offended with
me, on hearing in this place the names of fountain and principle, nor
accuse these names, as not at all pertaining to Plato. For, as we have
before observed, Plato does not leave unnoticed any one of these mystic
names. But in his discussions about souls, when he denominates them the
fountains and principles of motion, he at the same time indicates the
difference between the peculiarity of fountain, and the peculiarity of
principle, and the inferiority of principle with respect to the exempt
transcendency of fountain.

He likewise manifests that the self-vital extends to all things as far
as to soul, from fountain; but the unbegotten from principle. And this
is because the fontal genus indeed of the Gods is self-begotten, and
first-effective, and produces other things from itself; but the ruling
genus of the Gods, and which has the relation of a principle, though
it proceeds from the fountains, and is allotted a more partial order
among beings, yet it is expanded above every thing which is generated,
and neither is in a certain respect connected with generated natures,
nor communicates with a sensible nature. For the mundane Gods, indeed,
are in a certain respect generated; whence also, they are denominated
generated by Timæus, and this whole world is likewise called by him
a generated god. But the ruling Gods, and who have the relation of
principles, are perfectly exempt from generated natures, and are not
co-arranged with them. Hence also, the unbegotten is most particularly
adapted to them. Those Gods, however, who preside over the liberated
dominion being the media between the unbegotten and generated Gods,
come into contact indeed with the latter, but do not give completion to
the choir of mundane Gods. Hence, they are in a certain respect both
generated and unbegotten. The Gods, therefore, who are the summits of
supermundane natures, and the rulers of wholes, are alone allotted an
unbegotten subsistence in the orders that proceed from the demiurgus.
Hence, likewise, this peculiarity is from thence derived to souls.
For, as Plato says, principle is unbegotten. For it is necessary that
every thing which is generated should be generated from a principle,
but that the principle should not be generated from any thing.

At the same time, therefore, it is manifest through these things,
how the [ruling] principles proceed from the Gods prior to them. For
they are not allotted a progression from them according to motion,
nor in short, according to mutation; but the orders of the ruling
Gods subsist by their very being, according to their prolific power,
and unenvying and exuberant will; and the self-begotten power of the
intellectual Gods, gives to the principles also the first generation
from itself. Whether, therefore, some one is willing to adopt these, or
other names of the divine orders, we shall consider it as a thing of
no consequence. But receiving the peculiarity of them, whatever it may
be, according to the rumours of theologists, we shall transfer their
mystic tradition to the Platonic narration. For thus we shall make the
investigation of what follows conformable to what has been before said,
and what we assert will be adapted to the things themselves.




                              CHAPTER II.


Again therefore, let us assume the principles of the science concerning
these Gods, and demonstrate that the theory pertaining to them is
consequent to the first causes. The intelligible Gods therefore,
surpass wholes according to supreme transcendency, and primarily
participate the union and divine light, in which all the Gods perfectly
establish their hypostases. They likewise unically produce all things
from themselves, according to the paternal and exuberant will of the
communication of good, and pre-establish in themselves occultly the
first effective causes of secondary natures. For the whole and common
measures of forms presubsist in them, and they comprehend according to
one cause the uniform genera of being, and prior to these, bound and
infinity, from which the superessential orders of the Gods generate all
beings.

But in the second rank after these, the intelligible and at the
same time intellectual Gods subsist, being divided indeed according
to the same number, and preserving the measure of the all-perfect
triad in a second order, but producing into multitude the unities of
intelligibles, and transferring the unical boundaries of those triads
into essential hypostases, and which participate of _the one_.
Instead of powers however, which are whole, without separation, and
occult, they are transferred into divided causes, and which proceed far
from _the one_.

Again, in the third rank after the intelligible Gods, those that are
called intellectual are arranged at one and the same time indeed,
proceeding into an order diminished with respect to that which is
prior to it, and changing the number according to which they subsist.
For instead of the perfective triads, they are intellectually divided
according to hebdomads. And with respect to the hebdomads, the division
of them into two triads, is supernally derived from the first triads;
but the terminations of them into monads, express the ends of those
orders. For every thing which is the peculiarity of difference and
multitude, proceeds from thence to all the genera.

Again therefore, from these, the multiform orders of the ruling
principles are generated, being divided indeed analogous to all the
intelligible Gods, and to those that are prior to these intellectual
Gods, viz. to those that are called intelligible and at the same
time intellectual. They have however, their proximate and peculiar
hypostasis from the one fabrication; but their united generation
together with intellectuals, from the third triad of intelligibles. For
that all-perfect cause produces also from itself, the whole orders of
the Gods. Hence likewise Parmenides denominates it infinite multitude,
as unfolding into light all the genera of being, and all the orders of
divine natures, and as being sufficient through one all-perfect power
to the generation of wholes.

Farther still, we may also assert this of these leading and ruling
Gods, that the intellectual monads make their progression according
to imparticipable intellect, in the same manner as the Gods prior to
them illuminate imparticipable life, and prior to all things, the
intelligible Gods constitute about themselves truly existing and
intelligible essence. For every God is participated indeed by beings,
and on this account falls short of the unity which is imparticipable
and exempt from all things. But a different deity proceeds according
to a different peculiarity. And some of the Gods indeed, being
defined according to the ineffable good itself, comprehend the
intelligible causes of wholes. But others produce the vivific powers,
and connectedly contain the first genera of the Gods. Others again,
unfold into light all the intellectual involutions, and preside over
the participants of the unities that produce divided hypostases.
Since therefore, the intellectual Gods primarily subsist according
to imparticipable intellect, and on this account are denominated
intellectual, the orders that first proceed immediately after them,
illuminate the summit of participated intellect, and are intellectual
indeed, as with reference to the inferior orders, and which are now
divided according to providential energies about the world. But they
are secondary to the first intellectuals, and are allotted a more
partial government; just as the first of intellectuals, are indeed
intelligible with respect to the Gods produced from them, but fall
short of the union of first intelligibles. As therefore, they unfold
into light the first and imparticipable life, which the intelligible
monads pre-established in themselves according to cause only, and
occultly; (for all the causes of wholes are pre-assumed there according
to one ineffable union) after the same manner also, these Gods, shining
forth the first of the intellectuals, express the Gods from whom they
derive their subsistence, and are intellectual indeed, but produce the
pure, uniform, and total hyparxis of the fathers, into a secondary,
and multiplied progression, which is divided about themselves, and
into a diminution of essence. By first emissions also from the
first-effective, and self-subsistent fountains, they shine forth
similarly to the intellectual Gods.

Hence also, they bind to themselves the ruling and generative causes
of all the partial orders, and which exist prior to these orders both
in dignity and power. And in short, they have the same transcendency
with respect to the other Gods [subordinate to them,] which the
intelligible Gods have to those that are produced from them. For the
intelligible Gods being expanded above all the intellectual genera,[63]
have pre-established the intelligible hyparxis, by itself, unmingled
and pure; and these ruling Gods have also established in themselves
the supermundane union, and this peculiarity perfectly exempt from
mundane natures. And as in the imparticipable and total hypostases,
there is indeed, the intelligible genus, itself by itself; there is
also the intellectual which is foreign from this; and there is that
which is collective of both, which is celebrated as subsisting in
the middle, and is denominated intelligible and at the same time
intellectual,--thus also, in these partial orders, the peculiarity
of the supermundane Gods, pre-exists by itself exempt from the parts
of the universe, unco-ordinated with this world, and on all sides
comprehending it according to cause.

But the essence of all the mundane Gods is allotted the third
order, being proximately carried as in a vehicle in the parts of
the world, giving completion to this one and only begotten God,
and connectedly-containing the different progressions in it. The
government however of the liberated Gods is allotted the middle bond
of the extremes, possessing sovereign authority over all [mundane]
natures, and in a certain respect communicating with the divisions
about the world, but unitedly ascending at the same time into many of
its parts, and collecting the divided numbers of the mundane Gods into
unical bounds, and more simple causes. Every genus likewise, of the
mundane Gods is spread under this liberated order, being on all sides
connected, contained, and perfected by it, and filled with the first
of goods. If therefore, there is any thing supermundane in the Gods,
and if it imparts a certain definite hyparxis of essence to them, and
defines a certain peculiarity of powers and a transcendency of order by
itself, we must admit that it primarily subsists in the ruling Gods,
being derived to them from the intellectual fathers, unmingled with
a mundane nature. And this supermundane order indeed is universal,
as with reference to all the partible rivers of the Gods, but it is
partial, as with reference to the all-perfect, one and whole kingdom of
the intellectual Gods. For it is everywhere necessary that the leading
causes of secondary orders, should be in a certain respect assimilated
to the terminations of the orders established above them.

And thus the progression of the Gods is one and continued, originating
supernally from the intelligible and occult unities, and ending in the
last division of a divine cause. For, as in sensibles the most gross
and solid bodies, are not immediately connascent with the etherial
expanse, but those which are simple and more immaterial than others,
are proximately spread under the celestial periods, and of containing
bodies, those which are primarily[2] contained, are allotted a greater
communion than those which are situated remotely, and are conjoined
to them through other media; thus also, in the divine essences prior
to the world, the second orders are in continuity with those prior
to them. The progressions of beings however, are completed through
similitude. But the terminations of the higher orders are united to the
beginnings of second orders. And one series and indissoluble order,
extends from on high, through the surpassing goodness of the first
cause, and his unical power. For because indeed, he is _one_,
he is the supplier of union; but because he is _the good_, he
constitutes things similar to him, prior to such as are dissimilar.
And thus all things are in continuity with each other. For if this
continuity were broken, there would not be union. And things dissimilar
to each other being placed in a consequent order, that which is more
similar to the principle, would not have a more ancient and honourable
progression into being. If therefore, we assert these things rightly,
it is necessary that the first hypostases of the partial orders should
be total, according to an intellectual transcendency which they are
allotted in the divided genera of the Gods, and thus that they should
causally comprehend all secondary natures, and conjoin them to the
Gods prior to themselves. The order of the ruling Gods therefore, is
in continuity with the kingdom of the intellectual Gods. Hence also,
Parmenides proximately constitutes it from the demiurgic monad. These
things however, will afterwards be apparent.




                             CHAPTER III.


For the present, however, let us survey the common peculiarity of the
whole of this order, that we may to the utmost of our power admire the
divinely-inspired intellection of Plato, which unfolds to us the most
mystic of dogmas. The progression, therefore, of these Gods is said to
be supermundane, as we have observed, and to have the second dominion
in wholes, after the intellectual Gods. But being defined according
to the hyparxis itself of this essence, it unfolds indeed the united
nature of the intellectual Gods; but produces into multitude the causes
comprehended in them. It also arranges and adorns the more partial
genera of beings, from total and first-effective monads, divides them
according to the best[3] order, and co-arranges them to each other.
But it collects and binds all secondary natures, and inserts in them
an admirable communion of essences and powers. Besides this, likewise,
it conjoins all the natures posterior to itself, to those prior to
itself, and calls forth the beneficent will of exempt causes, into the
providential care of secondary natures, but establishes the hyparxes of
subordinate in first essences, and imparts to all beings continuity,
and one series of hypostasis. Conferring also all these benefits, it
comprehends in itself the supply of them according to one peculiarity.
For it assimilates all things, subordinate natures, to those prior
to them, and co-ordinate natures, to each other. And through this
similitude, at one, and the same time, indeed, it unfolds the essences
and multiform powers of them, and is the collector of many things into
union, and of divided natures, into the divine communion of goods.

From hence, therefore, the orders of different images primarily
subsist. For every image is produced according to a similitude to its
paradigm. But that which assimilates secondary to first natures, and
binds all things through similitude, especially pertains to these Gods.
For what else is able to assimilate the world itself, and every thing
in the world to their paradigms, but this supermundane genus of Gods?
For all intellectuals constitute the natures in the world according to
one union, and an all-perfect providence, and impartibly preside over
the essence of them. But the liberated genus of Gods, in a certain
respect now comes into contact with the world, and co-operates with
the mundane Gods. It is necessary, therefore, that the assimilating
nature should every where according to essence indeed be exempt from
the things assimilated, and which are impressed through similitude;
but that it should adorn secondary natures with separation, and a
division according to species. For how would it be possible for it to
assimilate some things to others, and appropriately conjoin all things
to their paradigms, unless it proceeded as far as to the last forms,
and separated all those things from each other, of which there are
immoveable pre-existing causes? For the demiurgus, indeed, appears
to assimilate all things to himself, as Timæus says, being good, he
produced all things similar to himself on account of his beneficent
will. He likewise imparts to the world the order of time, by this
mean rendering the world more similar to intelligible animal. And in
short, on account of the similitude of the universe to its paradigm, he
produces all things, and perfects his own fabrication.

In the demiurgus, however, all things, and likewise the second genera
of Gods, are according to cause. And as he is the plenitude of all the
natures prior to himself, thus also, he comprehends the united causes
of the natures posterior to himself. Hence, he perfects the universe,
energizes assimilatively, vivifies wholes, is the father of souls,
the plastic framer of bodies, the supplier of harmony, the author of
bonds, the cause of the impartible and partible genera, and the maker
of all figures. And these things, indeed, he constitutes unically; but
the Gods posterior to him in a divided manner. Let not, however, any
one assert, that the assimilative nature is primarily in the demiurgus,
but [let him rather say] that existence is present to the demiurgus
according to sameness.[4] But if from him similitude subsists in all
things, and his very being is in sameness, as Parmenides teaches us,
we must indeed admit, that such a genus of Gods [as the assimilative]
is proximate to him, which also first unfolds his whole fabrication,
and inserts it in secondary natures, but is essentially different
from and posterior to him, and falls short of the first-effective
principle of all things which he contains. In short, the demiurgic
monad, and all the multitude co-arranged with it, presides over the
similitude of wholes, uniformly, originally, and impartibly; but the
order of the ruling Gods, divides indeed that which is united in the
demiurgic fabrication, expands that which is total in the energy of the
intellectual Gods, and produces into variety the simplicity of their
providence. Hence similitude extends from these to all the natures in
the world, and to the first, middle, and last forms of life. For that
which is assimilated presides over a second form of communion with
appropriate principles, on account of progression from causes.

If, however, you are willing by investigating each particular to
survey the providence pervading to all things through similitude, you
will find that the whole world is the image of the perpetual Gods on
account of this, and also that all the wholenesses in it are in a
similar manner suspended from their paradigms, that whole souls always
dance about the intelligible, and that the more excellent genera that
follow the Gods, and such of our souls as are happy, are on account
of similitude extended from the wandering produced by generation, to
their proper fountain. In short, you will find, that all progressions
and conversions are effected and perfected on account of the cause of
similitude. For every thing which proceeds subsists through similitude
to its generator, and every thing which is converted, in consequence
of being assimilated to its proper principles, makes a conversion to
them. Moreover, similitude eternally guards the never-failing nature
of all the forms in the world, extending supernally from the Gods
themselves. And the stable similitude of forms, brings back again to
the circle of generation, the unstable mutation of particulars, not
only in immaterial, but also in material forms, which are conversant
with mutability. And it closes in a finite period, the infinite variety
of generated natures. But it refers the all-various division of reasons
[i.e. of productive principles] to their united and first-effective
cause. And on this account, the world being perpetually all-perfect,
is completely filled by total genera and species. Hence also, it is
similar to intelligible animal, possessing and comprehending all such
things after the manner of an image, as all-perfect animal possesses
paradigmatically.

We must not, therefore, suppose that the genus of similitude is
something small, and extended only to a few things, since it is the
cause of perfection to the whole world, gives completion through
similitude to its first generation and self-sufficiency, and supplies
from itself, its entire comprehension of all things. But neither
must we admit that a production of this kind, is to be referred to
one certain intellectual form. For that which extends[5] to all the
superessential, essential, psychical, incorporeal, and corporeal
genera, exists prior to all forms and genera, and to incorporeal
and corporeal causes. For the Gods in the world, do not proceed
assimilated to their causes, on account of the intellectual form of
similitude. Nor on account of the paradigmatic idea of the dissimilar,
are the superessential unities of the Gods divided, the intellectual
nature separated from itself, and the psychical essences allotted
a progression in order; but, I think, that both similitude and
dissimilitude have their hypostasis analogous to intellectual sameness
and difference. And as they are primarily in the Gods themselves,
but secondarily in intellectual forms, being unfolded into light
together with the hyparxes of the Gods, thus also, this similitude and
dissimilitude, are allotted indeed a precedaneous hyparxis in the
superessential unities, but a successive hyparxis in the descending
progressions of beings. And on this account Parmenides, as he evinced
that _the one_ is moved and stands still, is same and different,
separate from being, thus also he demonstrates to us the similar and
the dissimilar in the uniform hyparxes themselves of the Gods. And
Socrates indeed presents to our view in the beginning of the dialogue,
the similar and the dissimilar, and defines each paradigm of these
to be separate, and exempt from the many similars and dissimilars.
But Parmenides recurring to the superessential hypostases of wholes,
produces beings from thence, according to the peculiarities of the
first causes.

For as every thing in generation is adorned with forms from essences,
thus also the peculiarities of hyparxes extend to all essences from
superessential natures. For generation is the image of essence; but
essence has its progression according to superessential union. The
genus of similitude, therefore, is primarily in the Gods; but is
divided secondarily in intellectual forms. And on this account the
progressions of the whole of things are according to similitude;
but the conversions of all things to their principles are through
similitude, it being said that all things proceed, and receive the
power of conversion from divinity. The intelligible paradigm indeed
preassumes in itself the occult cause of the assimilative Gods. For
it is not sluggish from itself, and established unprolific. But it
produces all things essentially assimilated to itself, constitutes
them paternally, and is by its very being alone. It likewise imparts
by illumination hyparxis to secondary natures, and the power of
assimilation to itself. But again, that which is demiurgic of the
divine genera, being suspended from the precedaneous cause of the
intelligible paradigm, and adhering to, and energizing about it,
assimilates indeed all things both to itself and the paradigm, but
does not define its proper hyparxis in the genus of similitude. For it
comprehends intellectually and unitedly the causes of the similitude
of wholes, and employs such like genera of Gods as ministrant to
the generation of secondary natures. But the tribe of ruling Gods,
being wholly arranged in the partible orders, but first unfolding
the intellectual fabrication of the father, is suspended indeed from
him[6] through the similitude of the causes pre-existing in him, but
extends and expands all things to the demiurgic union. It converts,
however, the partible genera of the Gods to impartible intellectual
sameness. But it assimilates the proceeding orders to the intelligible
paradigms, and gives completion to the one series of all beings. Very
properly, therefore, do those who are wise in divine concerns assert,
that the last triad of intelligibles is the cause of the fontal and
ruling Gods, and that the whole series of rulers subsists about the
intellectual father. For the genus of assimilating natures pertains
to the perfect paradigm, just as the genus of things assimilated
pertains to the extremity of the intellectual order. For all things
are assimilated to the first paradigm, and the conversion of all
secondary natures to it is through similitude. And with the demiurgus
of wholes, the cause of intellectual sameness and difference is united,
being partibly unfolded into light through the power of similitude and
dissimilitude, and producing the one and whole form of that fabrication
in all beings through divided energies, and the separations of essence.
Through these things, therefore, we have reminded the reader, that the
first and most total of the partible divine genera, and which is united
to the intellectual orders, is allotted the assimilative peculiarity,
and being defined according to this, conjoins all things to the
demiurgic monad; and [we have also shown] how it proceeds from the
intelligible paradigm to all mundane natures, and is the primary origin
of their generation.




                              CHAPTER IV.


Again, it follows in addition to what has been said, that we should
separate all the assimilative powers, properly arrange them, and survey
them proceeding about the one essence of the Gods. Plato, therefore,
asserts that the first and most ruling of these powers, are those
that unfold the intellectual production of the father, and expand it
to all the divided orders of beings. But that the second, are those
which are connective of wholes, and which preserve one series and
indissoluble connexion of the divine progressions. And that the third,
are those which are the primary leaders of perfection to all secondary
natures, and produce through similitude self-perfect conversions to
principles. But next to these he arranges those powers that extend
all the proceeding genera of the Gods to impartible monads, and which
pre-exist as the collectors of partible natures. Farther still, he
likewise asserts that other assimilative powers give subsistence to
the divided genera, and are definitely the suppliers of existence and
essence to first and last natures. And besides all these, that other
powers are the causes of undefiled distribution, and of perpetually
stable perfection.

Moreover, together with these, I should arrange the authors of prolific
production, and those that pour upon and distribute to all secondary
natures the partible rivers of life. And farther still, after these,
I should arrange the powers that elevate secondary beings, cut off
every thing material, confused, and inordinate, and are the suppliers
of all goods. For there is no one of all the beautiful things in the
world that does not proceed from this[7] order of Gods, which fills its
participants with divine goods. Or whence indeed is the world always
established in its proper principles, whence does its circulation
remain immutable, and whence is the universe connected by indissoluble
bonds? For the ends of its periods become the principles of the
subsequent revolutions. But the circle of generation imitates the
invariable supply of the celestial orbs, and all things are converted
to more divine natures. Matter, indeed, is assimilated to beings,
through the last representations of the production of form. But that
which is moved in a confused and disordered manner, is circularly led
to order and bound by demiurgic reasons, being assimilated to natures
which always subsist with invariable sameness and permanency. Things,
however, which are borne along in a diversified generation, and
multiform mutations, are assimilated to the celestial orbs, and being
moved in an all-various manner, follow the revolutions of the heavenly
bodies. But the convolutions of the heavens, represent as in images the
psychical periods; and the circulations of the spheres inscribe as it
were the intellections of the celestial souls. Time itself, likewise,
which proceeds according to number, and forms a circular dance, is
in a certain respect[8] assimilated to stable intellections, and to
[eternity] the measure of all intelligibles. For the whole of this time
was generated an image of eternity abiding in one, since it is evolved
after the same manner according to number. All things, therefore,
are allotted a progression into existence, and the distribution of
perfection according to measure, from the assimilative leaders, and
connect the essence of themselves through similitude.

Moreover, this order of Gods in a particular manner, presides over
the sympathy of things in the world, and their communion with each
other. For all things concur with each other through similitude, and
communicate the powers which they possess. And first natures, indeed,
impart by illumination the gift of themselves to secondary natures,
in unenvying abundance. But effects are established in their causes.
An indissoluble connexion, likewise, and communion of wholes, and a
colligation of agents and patients, are surveyed in the world. For in
effects their generative causes subsist through similitude. And in
causes, the progeny that proceed from them are contained according to
comprehension. All things, likewise, are in each other, and similitude
is the collector of all things. On this account, also, celestial,
impart to sublunary natures, an exuberant and unenvying communication
of their own effluxions; but sublunary, being in a certain respect
assimilated to celestial natures, participate of an appropriate
perfection. A chain likewise extends from on high, as far as to the
last of things, secondary, always expressing the powers of the natures
prior to them, progression indeed diminishing the similitude, but all
things at the same time, and even such as most obscurely participate
of existence, bearing a similitude to the first causes, and being
co-passive with each other, and with their original causes. For there
is naturally a two-fold similitude in things which have proceeded from
their causes. For they are assimilated to each other, according to
their progression from _the one_, and their conversion again to
it, and they are also assimilated to their ruling and first-effective
causes. And through the former similitude, indeed, the elements
conspire, are connascent, and are mingled with each other. But through
the latter, they hasten to their proper principles, and are conjoined
with their paradigms. On this account, all things which participate of
the solar effluxion, are suspended from the circulation of the sun; I
mean, not only the genera that are more excellent than us, but likewise
the number of souls, animals, plants, and stones. But all things adhere
to the Mercurial circulation, which receive the peculiarity of this
God. And the like takes place in the other [mundane] Gods. For all of
them are leaders and rulers in the universe. And many orders indeed of
angels dance round them; many numbers of demons; many herds of heroes;
the copious multitude of partial souls; the multiform genera of mortal
animals; and the various powers of plants. And all things indeed
aspire after their leaders, and in all things there is an impression
of their proper monad; but in some this impression is more clear, and
in others more obscure; since similitude also subsists in a greater
degree, in the first progeny, but is obscured in the middle, and last
progeny, according to the ratio of progression. Images, therefore,
and paradigms, are allotted their hypostasis on account of collective
similitude. And every thing on account of similitude is familiar to
itself, and to co-ordinate natures. But there is an unshaken friendship
between the co-ordinate natures in the world through the presence of
similitude; since contraries, also, and things which are most distant
from each other, are irreprehensibly bound through it, and connected so
as to produce the perfection of the universe.

In short, therefore, we may say, that the assimilative leaders
of wholes, produce and generate all things from themselves. For
progressions are through similitude; and every thing which is
constituted, is wont to be assimilated to its generative cause. The
assimilative rulers also convert all things to their principles; for
every conversion is through similitude. They likewise bind co-ordinate
natures to each other. For the communion of the one cause [of all]
produces similitude indeed in its participants, but from this, it
inserts in them an indissoluble connexion. They also cause all things
to sympathize, be friendly, and familiar with each other; exhibiting
indeed, through participation, more elevated in more abject natures;
but subordinate in more perfect essences, through causal comprehension.
They likewise extend series and periods from on high, as far as to
the last of things. And they produce monads indeed, into diminution,
through appropriate numbers; but collect multitudes into union, through
communion according to essence. They also adapt wholes to parts; but
comprehend parts in wholes. And things imperfect, indeed, they perfect,
through contact with ends; but they guard immutably perfect natures,
through a similar cause. They likewise lead into definite order, by
similar forms and reasons, the sea of dissimilitude; but they terminate
the very-mutable generation of sublunary natures, by stable paradigms.
Thus much, therefore, we have to say in common concerning the order
of divine natures, which we assert to be proximate indeed to the
intellectual Gods, but to be the leader, and cause of the assimilation
of all secondary natures to their proper principles.




                              CHAPTER V.


In the next place, I wish prior to the theory of Parmenides to teach,
what the Gods are, possessing this peculiarity, of whom Plato makes
mention in other dialogues. For perhaps thus the doctrine of Parmenides
will become more credible, and more manifest to reason. The ruling
Gods, therefore, are divided in a three-fold manner; and some of them
indeed are united to the intellectual kings, and extend the whole
series under themselves to a union with those kings; but others give
completion to the middle genera, and distribute the all-perfect
progression of these Gods; and others close the end of this order,
and unfold the powers of these divinities to secondary natures. This
being the case, those Gods that are arranged in the summits, do not
immediately participate of the similitude of the assimilative Gods;
but some of them are in a certain respect established above it, are
are essentially connected with the intellectual Gods; but others
proceed from it, and are mingled with the secondary genera. Hence,
those only who give completion to the middle breadth, genuinely define
in themselves the hyparxis of this order. We, therefore, likewise
beginning from these, shall embrace by a reasoning process the whole
theory of Plato. For we shall find in these, the perfect measures of
the ruling order, perfectly delivered to us by him.

Again, therefore, let us refer the whole progression of these
middle orders to a triad, it being allotted a division of this kind
supernally, from the three intellectual fathers. Hence, indeed, this
whole order of Gods, is suspended from the demiurgic monad. But the
demiurgic intellect produces indeed some of them from itself and
the intellectual father; but others from itself,[9] and the whole
vivification; and others from appropriate rivers. Hence, also, of
the Gods that thus derive their subsistence, some are allotted a
paternal dignity, and are ruling fathers; but others are allotted a
generative; and others an elevating and convertive dignity. But since
a certain order of the unpolluted Gods is conjoined with each of the
intellectual kings, it is indeed necessary that in the ruling Gods
also, a second progression from them should shine forth to the view,
and that on this account the guardian order should be connascent with
the above-mentioned triple orders, being appropriately consubsistent
with each of them; viz. paternally indeed in the first; but vivifically
in the middle; and intellectually and convertively tn the third
order. And thus it is necessary that this whole order of Gods should
be divided by paternal powers, and prolific progressions, by powers
that lead upward all secondary natures, and by those that are of an
undefiled guardian characteristic. For being allotted their hypostasis
from the intellectual Gods, some indeed ascend totally into parts, but
others partibly pour on wholes, the exuberant powers of themselves.
They likewise distribute the providence of the demiurgus and father,
some indeed arranging and adorning the universe with the first, middle,
and last forms of production; others educing the rivers of life, and
pouring them on all things; others elevating the natures that have
proceeded, and recalling them to the father; and others presiding over
purity, and being the guardians of secondary natures.




                              CHAPTER VI.


Again, therefore, receiving the beginning of the theory of Plato from
the paternal cause, we assert as follows: The demiurgus and father of
this universe, being allotted this order in the intellectual kings, as
was before demonstrated, as he produced wholes totally, and referred
all things to the one form of the world, and the one perfection of the
universe, thus also he arranged and adorned the parts of the world, and
gave completion to the whole, contriving that all immortal and mortal
natures should be generated for the sake of the universe. And this is
what Plato introduces him saying in the Timæus to the junior Gods:
“That mortal natures therefore may exist, and that this universe may be
truly all, convert yourselves according to nature to the fabrication of
animals.” Since, however, after the monad, it is every where necessary
that a multitude should be generated proximate to the monad, and that
prior to an all-perfect division, united number should subsist (for
that which has proceeded to all things is not allied to that which
abides, nor is it possible that what is all-variously divided, should
be connascent with that which is impartible)--this being the case, the
demiurgus of wholes, produces indeed from himself, and his father a
number proximate to the monad of the fathers. But the three [fathers]
deriving their subsistence from one father, and first receiving the
power and dominion of fabrication, produce other second and third
fabricators from themselves, till through a diminution proceeding
according to [appropriate] measures, they evolve the whole demiurgic
number, the cause of which indeed, the demiurgic monad comprehends in
itself.

The orderly progression, however, of multitude becomes at length
apparent. And thus the three ruling fathers of wholes, separate their
productions, by first, middle, and last boundaries of fabrication,
and are all of them total, but they are fabricators and fathers of
parts totally; through being in continuity indeed with the monad,
not changing the form of production; but on account of diminished
progression, not possessing an energy impartibly extended to all
things. And the one demiurgus indeed, being arranged prior to the
triad, comprehends in himself uniformly the productions of all [the
demiurgi]. But these three fathers multiply the unical dominion and
power of the first demiurgus, divide his impartible production, and
lead forth into secondary natures the stable energy of the father. And
the exempt monad indeed comprehends in itself the all-perfect measure
of the triad, according to supreme union; but the triad unfolds into
light from itself the undivided power of the monad.

Plato, therefore, celebrates indeed, in other dialogues, these three
fabricators and fathers, but particularly in the Gorgias, adducing as
a witness of the theory concerning them, divinely-inspired poetry,
he refers the whole progression of them to Saturn the father of the
intellectual Gods, and from thence gives to them their first production
into light. He exempts, however, the demiurgic intellect from the
triadic division of them, co-arranges it with the father, and says,
that they have an intellectual dominion secondary to him. He likewise
calls them the sons of Saturn, but indicates that they are allotted
their progression from Jupiter. For there is a twofold Jupiter both
according to Plato, and all the theology, as I may say, of the Greeks;
the one indeed convolving the end of the intellectual triad to the
beginning; but the other being allotted the summit of the ruling triad.
And the one being the demiurgus of wholes totally; but the other being
allotted the first parts of divided fabrication. And the one indeed
being arranged prior to the three fathers; but the other being the
first of the three, and proximate to the remaining fathers. Whence,
also, I think that many who discuss these particulars are ignorant
that Jupiter the demiurgus of the universe, is not the first of the
three fathers, and that Saturn the leader and ruler of the intellectual
kings, is not the same with the demiurgic intellect. For of those who
immediately suspend the triad of the ruling fathers from the paternal
kingdom of Saturn, some indeed refer the whole fabrication of things
to Saturn himself; but others ascribe to the summit of the triad the
generation of wholes. Is not, however, each of these impossible? For
the one abiding in himself, and converting to himself every thing which
has proceeded, is exempt from demiurgic production; but the other
being divided oppositely to the total[10] fathers, will not be the
impartible fabricator of wholes. For it is necessary that the whole and
all-perfect demiurgus of the world, should neither be connumerated with
the many[11] demiurgi, nor be the same with the cause which is stable,
and perfectly established in itself. For he has a subsistence contrary
to the cause which recalls that which has proceeded, and again exhibits
it unemanent from itself. To be present likewise to all things by no
means accords with that nature which energizes separately, and takes
away its generative power. How, therefore, can he who converts his own
children to himself, and shuts his own progeny in himself, possess
the same power with the demiurgus who unfolds all things into light,
and produces them into multitude? And how can he who is allotted the
universe in conjunction with the remaining demiurgi, be uniformly the
cause of the universe?

For, if you are willing, consider each of these three demiurgi, and
survey what will happen from this assertion. For we say that the first
of them is the cause of essence, and of existence to the fabrications
in the world; but that the second is the source of the motion, life,
and generation of sensibles; and that the third is the cause of the
divided production of form, of partible circumscription, and of the
circular conversion of wholes to their one principle. We likewise
definitely assert these things, admitting that the fabrication of each
of the three extends to the whole world. But surveying the peculiar
mode of fabrication in each, we say that the first is the effector of
essence, the second of life, and the third of intellect. And that the
first is the cause of hyparxis, the second of motion, and the third of
conversion. Hence, the whole world, so far as it participates of being,
is produced from the first father; but so far as it subsists through
motion, and is generation, it receives its progression from the second
father; and so far as it is perfectly divided, and after all-various
division, is converted to its proper principle, it is produced from the
third father.




                             CHAPTER VII.


These things, therefore, being thus determined, we may see how in the
Timæus, the demiurgus and father of this universe, at one and the
same time impartibly constitutes the world, gives to it essence, and
supplies it with existence, fashioning bodies, generating souls in
the middle of an impartible and partible essence, and constituting
intellects ingenerably [i.e. without generation] and indivisibly,
from the first genera. And farther still, besides these things, he
distributes different motions to souls and bodies, divides each of them
all-variously, according to harmonic reasons, binds them by analogies,
and converts them to himself, and his own will. How, therefore, can we
any longer rank such a demiurgus as this in the same order with one
of these three fathers. For those things which they are said to give
to the universe divisibly, he constitutes impartibly from himself. Nor
does he produce some things precedaneously, and others according to
accident, but by his very being he generates essence, supplies motions,
and extends the divisions of mundane forms, and after the progression
of other things, converts all things to himself, abiding in his own
accustomed manner.

In the second place, therefore, we say that the three demiurgi differ
from each other, because the first paternally comprehends the rest, and
is the father of this whole triad. But the second is the power of the
triad, and participates of the extremes according to the peculiarity of
powers. And the third is the intellect of the triad, and contains the
paternal, and intellectual power [by participation]. And in short, the
first is the father of both; but the second is the power of both; and
the third is the intellect of both. How, therefore, can the demiurgus
of wholes be the same with one of the above mentioned fathers? For he,
as Timæus says, is the father of all the world, and is allotted in
himself a paternal power and divine intellect, converting all things to
the watch-tower of himself. Again, therefore, we find that the partible
peculiarities of the three demiurgi, pre-exist in him impartibly and
uniformly. And as the demiurgic triad participates of union with him,
on account of the uncircumscribed transcendency of the monad, thus
also the monad antecedently and occultly comprehends in itself the
triad, according to the power of cause. Nor is it proper to confound
these with each other, but it is requisite to exempt the monad from
the triad, and to suspend the triad from the monad. And neither ought
we to make the three fathers, the rulers of total fabrication, nor to
rank the first of them in the same order with the one demiurgus. For
a co-ordinated entirely differs from an exempt cause. And that which
produces all things according to comprehension perfectly differs from
that which is similarly present to all things, and is equally distant
from all things. Besides this also, multitude is every where suspended
from its proper monad. And as _the one_ precedes the total orders
of things, so likewise each order of the Gods has its progression from
a monad; since also each God is allotted a union which antecedes the
multitude he contains. But if the whole genus of the Gods, and each God
proceed after the same manner, it is also necessary that each of the
divided orders should have the same mode of subsistence.

In the third place we say that both Plato and the ancient theology
of the Greeks assert, that these three demiurgi divide the uniform
kingdom of their father Saturn. And that one of these three every
where arranges and adorns the first of wholes, another the middles,
and another the extremities of wholes; and that each is allotted this
order, not in fabrication only, but also in the providence of partial
souls. For of these, some indeed are arranged and perfected under
the first, prior to generation; but others, that give completion to
generation, are arranged under the second; and others, that require
purification after generation, are perfected under the third. Moreover,
the first demiurgus, as it is written in the Timæus, produces the whole
world. For he constitutes the circulation of the _same_, and
arranges and adorns the circulation of the _different_, and all
sublunary natures as far as to the earth, which he fabricated to be the
guardian of night and day, being immoveably fixed about the axis which
is extended through the poles of the universe. He also fills the whole
parts of the world with their proper numbers, and gives generation to
all of them, both to those that revolve manifestly, and to those that
become manifest when they please. Again, he defines the whole period
to partial souls, the measures of their descent into generation, the
vicissitudes of the present life, and their restitutions to their
kindred star,[12] and he is also said to unfold to them all the laws
of Fate, and to point out to them the nature of the universe. Hence,
he is not one[13] of these three fathers, nor is he co-arranged with
them, but is perfectly exempt from the triad. According likewise to the
proper prerogative of his empire, he is expanded separately above each,
and in common above all of them. And the operations indeed, of these
fathers, are divided about him, and are distinguished by more partial
boundaries. But his fabrication is uncircumscribed, is one whole, and
is impartible.




                             CHAPTER VIII.


Let it therefore, from these things be manifest, that the demiurgic
monad, is exempt from the ruling fathers, and that according to one
undivided cause he generates beings eternally. But if Jupiter is
according to Plato, the one and whole fabricator of the only-begotten
world, as we have before demonstrated, and we grant these things
without being deceived, and if, as it is now said, and Socrates in
the Gorgias teaches us, the first of the demiurgi that divide the
kingdom of Saturn, is in a similar manner called Jupiter, there will
be according to this theory a twofold Jupiter, the one being an
intellectual God prior to the three fathers; but the other being of
a ruling, assimilative, and principal nature, and arranged at the
summit of the three. For Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, divide, says
Plato, the kingdom of their father, three leaders of wholes subsisting
from one great king as it were, and producing the one fountain of the
demiurgic series, into one all-perfect principal triad, which Plato
also indicating, denominates the providence divided in the three a
kingdom, attributing the first-effective, and the uniform to the Gods
prior to these. If these however, are not the only orders of Jupiter,
but there is also another Jovian multitude, how this proceeds will
be evident in what follows. For all these three fathers participate
of the same appellation, and are after the same manner celebrated by
poets inspired by Phœbus; but one is called simply Jupiter, another
marine Jupiter, and another subterranean Jupiter. The leader however
of the three, possesses primarily the paternal dignity in the triad,
and the appellation of the great Jupiter. For on account of the supreme
union which he is allotted with the fontal demiurgus, who is beyond
the three, he also participates of the same name as the total Jupiter,
without any distinction. And on this account, I think, Socrates in the
Cratylus, unfolding to us the arcane and mystic discipline concerning
the Gods, from names, and at one time co-arranging Jupiter with Saturn,
and at another with the remaining demiurgi, does not think it worth
while to speak twice about the same things, but in the intellectual
conceptions about the all-perfect demiurgus, he also thinks fit to
deliver the arcane discipline concerning the first of the three
demiurgi, through the truth of names. For in a certain respect, it
was not possible for him to do otherwise who shows that the theory in
things accords with names; since also, the father of this triad, is
inseparably united to the whole demiurgus. But of these things enough.

If you are willing however, we will add the following observations to
what has been said. For perhaps some one may apprehend that the fable
in the Gorgias, gives to the three sons of Saturn, a progression from
Saturn proximately, but not, as we have said, through the demiurgic
monad as a medium. For again, the three are said to divide the kingdom
of Saturn, but not of the whole demiurgus and father. That we may not
however, ignorantly wander beyond measure from the conception of Plato,
and the truth of things, in consequence of following fabulous fictions,
we must affirm from the beginning, that both the whole demiurgus,
and this triad of the ruling fathers, proceed from the father of the
intellectual Gods. But the whole demiurgus proceeding from a whole,
impartibly participates of his father. For he abides in the allness
of his power, and imitates, if it be lawful so to speak, his uniform
and unmultiplied nature, by being monadic and whole, and the father of
things first, middle and last. But the three demiurgi, in a divided
manner participate of, and proceed from their generating cause, being
divided indeed from each other, but dividing his unical providence. And
Saturn indeed, is a God one and numerous, establishing multitude in
himself, and occultly comprehending it in appropriate boundaries. But
Jupiter expresses the paternal monad, and produces the unical nature
of it into the providence of wholes. And the three sons of Saturn
unfold into light the multitude which is there, in the all-perfect
boundary of the triad. Hence also they are said to divide the kingdom
of their father,[14] which Jupiter possessed indivisibly. Hence, if
it be requisite to speak boldly, he indeed is a proceeding father,
hastening to arrange and adorn, and being parturient in order to the
generation of wholes. But they distribute his providence. This however,
is the same thing as to say they distribute the providence of Jupiter.
For the progression to them was from each of these divinities, from
Saturn indeed, according to the _from which_ (αφ’ου), but from Jupiter
according to the _by which_, υφ’ου.[15] For Jupiter indeed, unfolds
them into light; but they proceed from the Saturnian adyta.

If again, you are willing [to consider the affair] according to the
Parmenides of Plato, since in the Saturnian order there are both
wholeness and parts, if you assume the subsistence there of _that
which is in another_, according to whole, but of _that which is in
itself_, according to parts, Jupiter indeed, who is prior to the three,
proceeds from his father according to whole; but the three demiurgi,
according to parts. Hence, Jupiter reigns, possessing in himself, as
Socrates says in the Philebus, a royal intellect. But they reign in
a divided manner, and are allotted the universe according to parts.
Hence therefore, the Elean guest in the Politicus, celebrates these
two intellectual kings, one indeed, being the cause of the unapparent
life to wholes, and of the other circulation, but the other being the
source of the manifest order of things, and of the present period; and
he attributes to Jupiter the cause of both these periods. But at one
time indeed, he ascribes this cause to Jupiter, as leading all things
in the universe to the kingdom of Saturn; but at another, as binding
to himself the providence of secondary natures. For he is united to
his father by intellectual bonds, of which Socrates makes mention in
the Cratylus. He is likewise a whole extended to a whole, and as it
were adapts himself by his own light to the light of his father, and
possesses a second dominion. Hence also, he is said to define the
providence of his father. The Athenian guest however [in the Laws,]
extending us to the one demiurgic kingdom, to the law, and the total
justice which are there asserts, “that God, as it is said, possesses
the beginning, middle, and end of all beings, and bounds all things by
a circular progression according to nature, in a direct path.” For
because we do not think it right to consider Plato here as speaking
of the first God, or of any other of the intellectual or intelligible
fathers, but of the whole demiurgus, it is sufficient for those who
are moderately able to understand things of this kind, that he is
said to bound all things in a direct path, and to proceed circularly
according to nature. It is also sufficient, that Justice is said to be
the attendant of this God, being the avenger of those who transgress
the divine law. For the first God, and all the Gods who are established
above the perfective order, are exempt from this rectilinear, and also
from the circular progression, as Parmenides teaches us. They likewise
transcend all motion. But the first that proceeds after motion, is
the whole and all-perfect demiurgus. To this divinity therefore, it
pertains to bound wholes in a direct path, to proceed circularly, and
to be followed by Justice. For we say indeed, that the thing which
follows, follows that which is moved.

Moreover, the Gods who are secondary to the demiurgus, have not a
unical dominion over wholes as he has, nor do they antecedently assume
the beginnings, middles and ends of all beings. But some of them
indeed, preside over partial natures totally, as these three fathers;
but others preside over wholes partibly, as those who pour upon all
things the rivers of life, in a divided manner; and others preside over
parts partibly, as the last of the demiurgi, and who are conversant
with the world. The one and impartible demiurgus of wholes therefore,
alone comprehends in himself, the beginning, middle, and end of all
beings, and equally rules over all secondary natures according to one
cause. But Justice follows him, bounding the desert of the whole of
things, and circumscribing each thing in its proper limits. And these
things the Athenian guest manifests in the above-mentioned words; but
Orpheus clearly refers them to the whole demiurgus. For he says that
total Justice follows him, now reigning over, and beginning to arrange
and adorn the universe.

    Justice th’ abundant punisher of crimes,
    Aid and defence of all things, follows Jove.

Moreover, that Jupiter comprehends the beginnings, middles and ends of
wholes, the theologist says, in addition to these things,

    Jove’s the beginning, and the middle’s Jove,
    And all things flow from Jove’s prolific mind.

And it appears to me that Plato looking to all the Grecian theology,
and particularly to the Orphic-mystic discipline says, that God,
according to the ancient assertion, possesses the beginning, middle,
and end of all things, bounding the whole of things in a direct path,
and proceeding circularly according to nature, and that he has Justice
for his attendant, through which every thing that departs from the
providential empire of Jupiter is converted to it, and obtains an
appropriate end. Through these things therefore, we have reminded the
reader, that the Athenian guest also looking to the whole demiurgus,
proclaims things of this kind to his pupils. If however, these things
are rightly determined, it is indeed entirely necessary to exempt the
one demiurgus, according to essence, from these three [demiurgi]. For
if one of them indeed, comprehends the beginnings of every thing in
the world, but another the middles, and another, every where convolves
the ends, is it not necessary that he who uniformly rules over the
universe, should be established above divided causes? But, the Athenian
guest gives to him a power generative of this triad [of demiurgi].
For if he comprehends the beginnings, middles, and ends of the whole
of things, according to the primary cause indeed, he generates the
demiurgus, who arranges and adorns first natures; but according to
middle causes, the demiurgus who gives completion to the middle
boundaries of fabrication; and according to the end, the demiurgus who
adapts an appropriate production to the last of things.




                              CHAPTER IX.


The Athenian guest therefore, does all but clearly say, that the
distribution to the three sons of Saturn, the measures of providence,
and in short, progression, are suspended[16] from the great Jupiter,
and that it is he who supernally defines their allotments, and
uniformly comprehends all of them in himself. Moreover, with respect to
the assertions, that he bounds all things in a direct path, and that he
proceeds circularly according to nature, the former of these, manifests
the progression of wholes from him; for the direct is a symbol of
progression; but the latter manifests the conversion of wholes to him.
For he being intellectually converted in, and to himself, convolves
all things to the watch-tower of himself. But if the straight and
the circular first subsist in the perfective Gods, the demiurgus of
wholes is filled indeed from thence, but fills the natures posterior
to himself with the powers that proceed from him. And as according
to the triple cause of wholes, he constitutes the triad of demiurgi
in conjunction with his father, thus also according to these twofold
powers, he generates twofold [orders of] Gods; one indeed, which adorns
a sensible nature, according to the straight which is in him; but the
other which elevates all things to him, according to the circular.
Moreover, because he proceeds indeed from the whole fabrication, (i
e. from Rhea) but participates of the perfective triad, he connects
this straight and circular with motion. For to bound according to the
straight, and to proceed circularly, designate motion; the former
indeed, being significant of motion proceeding to all things, and
adorning all things with boundaries, forms and reasons; but the latter,
of motion convolving to itself, and calling upward all things to
itself.

Again, therefore, Plato placing in the one demiurgus the cause of the
triad, exempts him, who abides as it were in himself, from production
according to parts; but attributes to the triad a division according
to the demiurgus. For Timæus also, by placing in him a paternal cause,
a generative power, and a royal intellect, theologizes the same things
about him as the Athenian guest. The paternal, indeed, is every where
principal; but power belongs to the middle; and intellect closes the
end of the triad. For power, according to the Oracle, is with them;
[i.e. with father and intellect], but intellect is from him, [i.e.
from the father]. Hence, of the natures which have proceeded, one
is the father of the whole triad, but another the intellect of it.
And one indeed is allotted the beginning of total fabrication; but
another, gives completion to the middle of the generation of wholes;
and another, bounds the end of it. Nor must we here omit to observe the
accuracy of Plato, but survey[17] how the Athenian guest magnificently
celebrates the extremities of the three demiurgi, by more singular
names, calling one the _beginning_, and the other the _end_, but that
which is between the extremes even in causes, he manifests through
multitude. For he denominates it _middles_; since power also, as being
co-ordinate with the infinite, or rather being a certain infinity, is
the cause of multitude and division to wholes. Hence also, of the three
demiurgi, one indeed, is the cause to mundane natures of a stable[18]
collocation; but another, of generation proceeding to all things;
and another, of the circulation of things to the principle of their
progression.

Let us, however, return whence we digressed, to the discussion
concerning the first demiurgus, in which it was said, that Jupiter,
Neptune, and Pluto divide the kingdom of their father. For prior
to these, the demiurgus received the kingdom of his father in an
undivided and uniform manner. For both the demiurgic monad and the
triad, were thence allotted their progression from the beginning, and
their dominion over secondary natures; but the former impartibly,
and the latter partibly; and the former monadically, but the latter
triadically. That you may not, therefore, think that these three
proceed after the same manner from the father, as the one king who
is prior to the three, Socrates, [in the Gorgias] in the form of a
fable, says that they divide the kingdom of the father, and on this
account require secondary laws, and a subordinate order, and which is
adapted to parts. For the law under Saturn, and the law of Jupiter who
recently possesses the kingdom [of his father] appear to be by no means
adapted to the providence of those powers who produce a partial and
various form of life. And do you not see how Socrates gives to total
Jupiter and to Saturn an exempt transcendency, and connects one law
with both kingdoms; but to the three demiurgi that divide the kingdom,
he definitely assigns as it were another polity, and more various
laws commensurate to the subjects of their providential care? For he
says that Pluto, and the curators were present enquiring of Jupiter
respecting the second legislation; but that he placed over partible
lives, other judges, and laws adapted to these lives. Again, therefore,
Jupiter, who definitely assigns things of this kind, and who generates
the three judges, is not the same with the Jupiter who is prior to the
three [demiurgi]. For the latter was together with his father according
to a prior law, and the simplicity of a divine life; but the former
together with Pluto, leads into order and bound the variety of partial
natures, and is the leader of secondary laws.

The divine law, therefore, is with the intellectual kings, Saturn and
Jupiter; and also Justice the avenger of those who transgress the
divine law, as the Athenian guest says. But other more various laws are
with the three sons of Saturn, and also judges co-ordinate to such like
laws, as it is written in the Gorgias. And there indeed, [i.e. with the
intellectual kings,] all things are impartibly, and unitedly; but here,
[i.e. with the three sons of Saturn], all things subsist in a divided
and partible manner. And the things which are there being primary, the
law indeed is more Saturnian. But Justice follows the great Jupiter.
And the laws indeed pertaining to secondary natures, confer perfection
under the first of the sons of Saturn. But the judges give completion
to the empire of the third of these sons. And Pluto participates from
the second Jupiter of the separation of the laws; in the same manner as
the total Jupiter receives from Saturn the one law which is to be the
co-administrator with him in the total fabrication of things. In short,
the Jupiter who is co-arranged with Neptune and Pluto, is the summit of
the ruling triad; but the Jupiter who is co-arranged with Saturn and
the mistress Rhea, is the third of the intellectual[19] triad. Hence
also, Socrates, in the Cratylus, at one time ascends from Jupiter to
Saturn, and conjoins the two kingdoms; but at another time he proceeds
from Jupiter to Neptune and Pluto, and unfolds this one ruling triad;
just as in the Gorgias, he weaves together the Saturnian and Jovian
order, when he says that there is one and the same law in both. He
co-arranges therefore, the second and more partial Jupiter with
Pluto, according to the apparent correction of the prior law, and the
distribution of the second laws. And thus much may suffice concerning
these particulars.




                            CHAPTER X.[20]


It now remains that we should begin to speak about these three fathers,
following the mystic narrations of Plato, since all of them are
suspended from the demiurgic monad, and present themselves to our view
as the second [in rank] after it. These three leaders, therefore, of
wholes, and rulers, are emitted indeed from the intellectual fathers,
and are divided according to them; but they are unfolded into light
in all the partible orders of the Gods. For among the rulers they are
allotted the first order, and are analogous to the intelligible and
intellectual fathers, in the whole assimilative series, and having
made a second progression in the liberated Gods, they rule over the
universe. Together also with the mundane Gods, they give completion
to the apparent order of things, being allotted in one way an essence
in the heavens, but in another way distributing the total parts in
the sublunary region, but every where energizing paternally and
demiurgically, expanding the one fabrication, and adapting it to parts.

With respect, however, to the allotment and distribution of them,
in the first place, if you please, it is according to the whole
universe, the first of them producing essences, the second lives
and generations, and the third administering formal divisions. And
the first indeed establishing in the one demiurgus all things that
thence proceed; but the second calling all things into progression;
and the third converting all things to itself. In the second place,
the allotment and division of them are according to the parts of the
universe. For the first of them adorns the inerratic sphere, and the
circulation of it; but the second governs the planetary region, and
perfects the multiform, efficacious, and prolific motions in it; and
the last administers the sublunary region, and intellectually perfects
the terrestrial world. Again, in the third place, we may survey in
that which is generated, these three demiurgic progressions; since
Timæus also here makes mention of the offspring of Saturn. Jupiter,
therefore, administers the summit of generated natures, and governs the
spheres of fire and air. But Neptune all-variously moves the middle and
very-mutable elements, and is the inspective guardian of every moist
essence, which is beheld in air and water. And Pluto providentially
attends to the earth, and to every thing in the earth. Hence also he is
called terrestrial Jupiter.

In the fourth place, therefore, in the whole of generation, Jupiter
indeed is allotted the summits, and the parts which are raised above
others, in which also are the allotments of happy souls, as Socrates
says in the Phædrus, because they then live under Jupiter, beyond
generation. But Neptune is allotted cavities, and cavernous places,
with which generation, motion, and the incursion of concussions are
conversant. Hence, they call this God, the earth-shaker. And Pluto is
allotted the places under the earth, various streams, Tartarus itself,
and in short, the places in which souls are judged and punished. Whence
also, of souls themselves, they say that such of them as have not yet
proceeded into generation, but abide in the intelligible, are Jovian;
but that such as are conversant with generation, are arranged under
Neptune; and that such as are purified and punished after generation,
and wander under the earth, according to a journey of a thousand years,
or which are again converted and led back to their principle, are
perfected under Pluto.

In the fifth place, therefore, we must say that the allotments of these
divinities, are divided according to the centres of the universe. And
Jupiter, indeed, has the eastern centre, as being allotted an order
analogous to fire; but Neptune, the middle centre, which pertains to
vivification, and according to which especially generation enjoys
celestial natures; and Pluto the western centre, since we say that the
west is co-ordinate to earth, as being nocturnal, and the cause of the
unapparent. For shadow is from earth, and earth is the privation of
light from west to east. In short, according to every division of the
world, we admit that the first and most leading parts are Jovian; but
we say that the middle parts pertain to the kingdom of Neptune; and we
consider the last parts as belonging to the empire of Pluto.




                              CHAPTER XI.


Through these things, therefore, the triad of the ruling fathers
has been celebrated by us. Let us, however, survey another order in
this progression, prolific, and vivific, and which is delivered by
Plato in a divinely-inspired manner. For the proximate decrements
and generations from all the intellectual fathers, are unfolded into
light in the assimilative Gods. For here the partible progressions
exist of things which there subsist uniformly, since it is lawful for
progeny which every where are allotted an order inferior to their
causes, to give multitude to the monads, and to multiply the stable
hypostases of them, and to render the energies of the simplicity,
which is in first natures, more composite. As, therefore, from the
paternal monad [Saturn] a triad subsists of ruling demiurgi, thus also
from the vivific fountain [Rhea] which is allotted the middle centre
in the intellectual Gods, the vivific order of the assimilative Gods
is emitted. And here also there is a triad connectedly contained by
one monad; since the paternal triad also subsists according to one
perfect intellect, and was, as we have said, monadic. After the same
manner, therefore, the triad which is the supplier of life is monadic,
being indeed full of prolific power, and full of undefiled perfection.
It likewise participates of the whole vivification, and through the
rivers of life, fills all secondary natures with generative goods,
and produces the vivific light, into the unenvying and exuberant
participation of subordinate essences. And it converts indeed all
things to itself, but is present to all things, and imparts to them
its own appropriate powers. It likewise pervades from on high, as far
as to the last parts of the world, but every where preserves the union
of itself unmingled with its participants. And it embosoms indeed the
generative, perfect, and beneficent light of the demiurgic monad; but
weaves together with the third father [Pluto] the order of life; and
co-arranges the boundaries of wholes in a becoming manner.[22] In
short, it extends itself from the middle to all the genera of rulers,
both the first and the last. And together with them indeed, it perfects
all secondary natures, and co-arranges that which is generative,
with the demiurgus. In addition to these things also, it illuminates
all things with an analogous power, and connects the undefiled with
the convertive peculiarity. For stable power pertains indeed to the
demiurgic genera, but undefiled purity to the elevating genera.

Plato, therefore, in the same manner as Orpheus, calls this triad by
one name; but in a certain respect he also indicates the multitude of
the powers it contains. For all the theology of the Greeks denominates
the second vivification _Coric_, (i.e. _Virginal_) and conjoins it
with the whole vivific fountain. Plato also says, that it has its
hypostasis from this fountain, and energizes together with it. For
effects are never divulsed from the providence of their causes. But
wanderings indeed, and investigations, [belong to the powers that
energize providentially, just as[23]] participations according to
periods pertain to the subjects of providential energy. The divine
cause, however, of a partible life [i.e. Proserpine] conjoins herself
from eternity, with the whole vivific fountain [i.e. with Ceres] which
theologists call the mother of the ruling Goddess. And Plato every
where conjoins Proserpine with Ceres. And he pre-establishes indeed,
the latter as a generative cause; but he celebrates the former as
being filled from the latter, and filling secondary natures. Since,
however, the Coric order is twofold, one indeed shining forth above
the world, where it is also co-arranged with Jupiter, and constitutes
with him the one demiurgus of partible natures [i.e. Bacchus], but the
other, and which is secondary, shining forth in the world, where also
it is said to be ravished by Pluto, and to animate the extremities
of the universe, which are under the administration of Pluto,--this
being the case, Plato perfectly unfolds to us both these, at one time
indeed conjoining Proserpine with Ceres, but at another with Pluto,
and evincing that she is the wife of this God. For the rumour of
theologists who delivered to us the most holy mysteries in Eleusis,
says, that above indeed, Proserpine abides in the dwellings of her
mother, which her mother had fabricated in inaccessible places, exempt
from the universe, but that beneath she governs terrestrial concerns in
conjunction with Pluto, rules over the recesses of the earth, extends
life to the extremities of the universe, and imparts soul to things
which are of themselves inanimate, and dead. Where also you may wonder
that Proserpine associates with Jupiter indeed and Pluto, the former,
as fables say violating, but the latter ravishing the Goddess, but
is not connected with Neptune. For he alone of the sons of Saturn,
is not conjoined with Proserpine. [The reason, however, of this is,]
that Neptune possessing the middle centre in the triad, is allotted
a vivific dignity and power, and is characterized according to this.
From himself, therefore, he has the vivific cause, animates the whole
of his proper allotment, and fills it with middle life from his own
peculiarity. For Pluto indeed is the supplier of wisdom and intellect
to souls according to Socrates in the Cratylus. But Jupiter is the
cause of existence to beings, as the father of the triad. Proserpine,
therefore, being co-arranged with the extremes, and prior to the world,
with Jupiter indeed paternally, but in the world with Pluto, according
to the beneficent will of the father, in the former case she is said
to be violated by Jupiter, but in the latter, to be ravished by Pluto,
in order that the first and last of fabrications may participate of
vivification. For as the whole fountain of life [Rhea] being conjoined
with the whole, according to one impartible cause, illuminates all
things with life, thus also Proserpine, weaving in conjunction with the
leaders of the universe, things first, middle, and last, illuminates
them with the vivification of herself.

Moreover, we may know from Plato, through these signs, the union of
the whole triad, since denominating it _Core_ (i.e. a virgin or
Proserpine) he celebrates it with Ceres. But again, we must survey
where it is that he indicates the division of the triad. For there
are three monads in it, and one of them is arranged, as being the
highest, according to hyparxis, but another is arranged according to
the power which is definitive of life, and another according to vivific
intellect. And theologists indeed are accustomed to call the first of
these Coric, (i.e. virginal) Diana, but the second Proserpine, and the
third, Coric Minerva. I speak, however, of the authors of the Grecian
theology, since among the Barbarians [i.e. the Chaldeans] the same
things are manifested through other names. For they indeed call the
first monad, Hecate, but the middle monad, Soul, and the third, Virtue.
Since, therefore, these things are made known to us after this manner
by the names of the Greeks, Plato indeed indicates the order of Coric
Minerva, by denominating Minerva Mistress, celebrating her as Core,
asserting that she is the cause of the whole of virtue, and calling
her the lover of wisdom, and the lover of war, and also Ethonoe,
as being intelligence in manners. For all these names sufficiently
represent to us her intellectual and ruling nature, and that power
of her which promptly supplies the whole of virtue. But in the same
dialogue, he indicates the order of Proserpine, celebrating her as
Pherephatta, and employing this name, which is likewise used by all
other theologists. These things he manifests in the Cratylus, where he
unfolds the truth concealed in the name of Pherephatta. And in the same
dialogue he indicates the order of Diana, by calling her skilful in
virtue. For it is evident that the whole triad being united to itself,
the first [monad] of the triad,[24] unically comprehends the third, the
third is converted to the first, and the middle has a power extending
to both. There are, therefore, these three vivific monads, viz. Diana,
Proserpine, and our mistress Minerva. And the first of these indeed is
the summit of the whole triad, and which also converts to herself the
third. But the second is a power vivific of wholes. And the third is
a divine and undefiled intellect, comprehending in one, in a ruling
manner, total virtues. Timæus, therefore, manifests this, calling
the third monad (Minerva) philosophic, as being full of intellectual
knowledge, and true wisdom; but philopolemic, as the cause of undefiled
power, and the inspective guardian of the whole of fortitude. And
again, the Athenian guest, calls her Core, as being a virgin, and as
purifying from all conversion to externals.

If, however, you are willing, we will survey the triad of Core, from
what is said in the Cratylus concerning Pherephatta. She is called,
therefore, wisdom, and is said to come into contact with that which
is generated and borne along; she also produces fear in those that
hear her name, and excites astonishment in the multitude. With respect
to the appellation of wisdom, therefore, it is evident that it is a
sign [of the characteristic property] of Minerva, and the summit of
virtue. For if in us, all the sciences are the first of the virtues,
how is it possible that wisdom should not be rightly denominated, the
first-effective cause of all the virtues? And if philosophy pertains
to her, so far as she is wisdom, and immaterial intelligence, but
not because she is indigent of wisdom, (for no one of the Gods, says
Diotima, philosophizes), on this account, therefore, she is not
indigent of wisdom; and the intellectual good of the ruling order
entirely pertains to her. But to come into contact with that which
is borne along, and with generation, will in a particular manner
be adapted to soul. For it is soul that knows every thing which is
generated, and continually communicates with it. She, likewise, in a
certain respect comes entirely into contact with that which is borne
along. Moreover, the incommensurability of Pherephatta with multitude,
and the terrour and astonishment which she excites, are indicative of
the power in her which is exempt from all things, which is unapparent
to the many and unknown. For the Barbarians also [i.e. the Chaldeans,]
call the Goddess who is the leader of this triad, dire and terrible.
Hence Plato does not more clearly indicate these things to us about
this mighty Goddess [than the Barbarians;] but he announces names
adapted to the theology concerning her.

To the Core, therefore, that is beneath, and that associates with
Pluto, all the above-mentioned particulars are inherent according to
participation, and, as some one might say, according to similitude to
the total Core; but they are inherent in the ruling Core, according
to the first hypostasis. And in reality these three Goddesses are
consubsistent. As, likewise, the whole vivific deity comprehends in
herself the fountains of virtue and soul, which the demiurgus also
imparts to the world, causing it to subsist perfectly, thus too, this
deity [Core] possessing the primary cause of all the partible forms of
life, possesses likewise the principle of souls, and of the virtues,
and on this account, the ascent to partial souls [such as ours], is
through similitude, and virtue is a similitude to the Gods. Hence also,
the form of each of these, I mean of virtue and soul, presubsist in
the assimilative Gods; since, likewise, the immortality of souls is
inferred by Socrates, from their similitude to divinity. If, therefore,
they are allotted immortality essentially, it is indeed necessary
that the cause which assimilates them [to divinity] should primarily
be in the Gods. For they are assimilated to their fountain. But they
participate of similitude from the assimilative causes. Hence in these,
the cause of such an immortality of souls as this, shines forth. On
this account also, Socrates arguing from similitude says, it is fit
that souls should govern and despotically rule over bodies, since they
are allotted the power of governing and despotically ruling, from the
same cause from which they derive their similitude [to divinity.]
The one cause itself, therefore, of all the partible forms of life,
pre-exists in the assimilative rulers. But one, whole, and impartible
virtue exists prior to all the virtues which afford a similitude [to a
divine nature.] And neither is the essential similitude of souls, nor
the similitude of virtue, derived from any other source than that of
these rulers and principles.

Since, however, there are, as we have said, triple monads in Core;
and one, indeed, establishes all things in itself; but another leads
all things into generation; (for it belongs to soul to generate) and
another converts all things to itself; (for this is the illustrious
work of virtue) and since all things are perfectly pre-arranged in
Core,--this being the case, the monad which associates with Pluto,
participates, indeed, in a certain respect of the extremes, but is
particularly allotted its progression according to the middle. Hence
also, it is called Proserpine, because it comes into contact, as we
have observed, with generation and things which are borne along.
For the unmingled and the virginal were adapted to the extremes.
But mixture, and a contact with generated natures, are adapted to
the middle, which rejoices in progressions and multiplications.
This ravishment therefore, of Core, is indeed perfectly established
in Proserpine. But she also imparts herself, and the vivification
proceeding from herself to the last of things. Hence likewise, Socrates
in the Cratylus co-arranges Proserpine with Pluto, but every where
ranks total Core with Ceres, and comprehends her in the name of Core.
The power however, which proceeds from her to the realms beneath, he
comprehends in the name of Proserpine. For the psychical nature is in
this power essentially; but the remaining things are in it, as we have
said, according to representation, and not primarily. And thus much
concerning the vivific triad, since Plato has delivered to us but few
auxiliaries about it, from which as from firestones rubbed against each
other, it is possible to enkindle the light of truth.




                             CHAPTER XII.


In the third place, let us discuss the elevating, among the ruling
Gods, and the triad which converts all things to their principle. For
since there are three intellectual monads, as we have said, which are
pre-arranged in the Gods prior to these, three triads of the ruling
Gods proceed conformably to those monads; the paternal triad indeed,
conformably to the first intellectual monad; (whence also they are
called the sons of Saturn, and are said to have divided the kingdom of
their father) but the vivific triad conformably to the middle monad;
(whence also we are accustomed to co-arrange Core with Ceres as with
a precedaneous cause) and the convertive triad, conformably to the
third monad. Hence likewise we establish the peculiar cause of this
triad in the demiurgus. For all the triads of the ruling Gods, are
suspended from the demiurgic monad, and the progression to all of
them is from this. One of them however, he constitutes in conjunction
with his father; another in conjunction with the vivific Goddess; and
another from the fountain in himself. For in the all-perfect demiurgus
there are many fountains, which exist prior to all the second and
third generations. For there the fountain of ideas subsists, according
to which he adorns the universe, fashions the several particulars in
it with forms and reasons, and arranges, and leads them into bound
and morphe. For the fountain of souls likewise, and the fountain of
all the intellectual Gods which proceed from him, are there. For he
possesses a royal soul, and a royal intellect, according to the power
of cause, as Socrates says in the Philebus. For there also the fontal
sun subsists. Hence Timæus, after the generation of the seven bodies,
and their position into total circulations, says, that the demiurgus
enkindled that light which we now call the sun in the second of the
revolutions from the earth, as affording an hypostasis to the sun from
his own essence. For that which enkindles the whole sun, produces it,
and constitutes that which is enkindled.

The demiurgus therefore, possessing, and comprehending in himself
the solar fountain, generates likewise in conjunction with the
principles and rulers of wholes, solar powers, and the triad of solar
Gods, through which all things are elevated, perfected, and filled
with intellectual goods; from one[25] monad indeed, participating
unpolluted light, and intelligible harmony, but from the remaining two,
efficacious power, acme, and demiurgic perfection. How therefore, does
Plato deliver to us these divine orders, and where does he indicate
concerning them? Here then, he comprehends the whole triad through
one name, in the same manner as he does the triad prior to it. And as
there he manifests the whole genus of the vivific principles by the
name of Core, so likewise in these, he denominates the whole triad
Apolloniacal. But he indicates the multitude in this triad by the many
powers of this God.

In the first place therefore, let us survey how Plato, in the same
manner as Orpheus, considers the sun to be in a certain respect the
same as Apollo, and how he venerates the communion of these Gods.
For Orpheus clearly says that the sun is the same with Apollo, and
asserts this (as I may say) through the whole of his poetry. But the
Athenian guest indicates this through the union of these divinities,
constructing a common temple to Apollo and the sun, and at one time
making mention of both, but at another, of one only, in consequence
of their subsisting according to one union. But he says as follows:
“Every year after the conversions of the sun from summer to winter,
it is requisite that the whole city should assemble in the temple
common to the sun and Apollo, consecrating three of the citizens to the
God.” In these words therefore, speaking in common about both these
divinities, that it is fit there should be a temple of Apollo and the
sun, into which it is necessary the whole city should assemble, after
the summer solstice, he discourses in what follows about both, as if
they were one, adding, that three of the citizens should be consecrated
to the God; thus recurring from the division to the union of both.
But elsewhere, he latently indicates the communion of them with each
other. And again, in what follows, at one time he says that the
citizens [consecrated to the God] should offer common first fruits to
the sun and Apollo, but at another to the sun alone, in consequence
of Apollo being in the sun. According to Plato therefore, there is a
kindred conjunction of these divinities, a communion of powers, and an
ineffable union.

Socrates also in the Cratylus, proposing to discover the essence of
Apollo from his appellation, ascends to the simplicity of his hyparxis,
to his power of unfolding truth into light, and to his intellect
which is the cause of knowledge, thus sufficiently indicating to
us the unmultiplied, simple, and uniform nature of the God. But in
the [6th book of the] Republic, arranging the sun analogous to _the
good_, and sensible light, to the light proceeding from _the good_
to the intelligible, and calling the light which is present to the
intelligible from _the good_, truth, connecting likewise intellect and
the intelligible with each other, he evidently collects together these
two series, I mean the Apolloniacal and the solar. For each of these
is analogous to _the good_.[26] But sensible light, and intellectual
truth, are analogous to superessential light. And these three lights
are successive to each other, viz. the divine, the intellectual, and
sensible light; the last indeed pervading to sensibles from the visible
sun; but the second extending from Apollo to intellectuals; and the
first, from _the good_ to intelligibles.

Again therefore, these Gods are demonstrated to be connascent with
each other, according to their analogy to _the good_. But together
with union, they have also a separation adapted to them. Hence
by poets inspired by Phœbus, the different generative causes and
fountains of them are celebrated, from which being allotted their
hypostasis, they are separated from each other. But they are likewise
celebrated by these poets, as mutually connascent and united, and are
praised by the appellations of each other. For the sun vehemently
rejoices, to be celebrated in hymns as Apollo. And Apollo when he is
invoked as the sun, benevolently causes the light of truth to shine
forth. If therefore, the hyparxes of these divinities are united to,
and subsist together with each other, but many powers of Apollo
are delivered to us by Plato himself, and are happily allotted an
appropriate theory, it is certainly proper to collect from these by
a reasoning process, the solar progressions. But I say these things,
looking to Socrates in the Cratylus, and his conceptions through
images, which are there delivered, of the Apolloniacal powers. For
the name of this God being one, unfolds all his powers, to the lovers
of the contemplation of truth. This therefore is a very illustrious
indication of the Apolloniacal peculiarity, viz. to collect multitude
into one, to comprehend number in unity, to produce many things from
one, and through intellectual simplicity to convolve to himself all
the variety of secondary natures, and by one hyparxis to unite in
one, multiform essences and powers. This Socrates says happens to the
name Apollo, it being sufficient to signify in one, the various and
different powers of the God, so that receiving his last image, and the
most obscure representation from him, it is assimilated to his unific,
and collective hyparxis, and contributes to our recollection of the
Apolloniacal peculiarity. This one name therefore, possesses occultly
many indications of the powers of the God. And by this simplicity
indeed, which is exempt from multitude, the truth which the God through
prophesy unfolds to secondary natures, is presented to our view. For
the simple is the same with the true. But by the representation [in
his name] of dissolution and liberation, the purifying and undefiled
nature of the God is signified, and also his power which is the saviour
of wholes. By his emission of arrows, his power is indicated which is
subversive of every thing inordinate, confused, and incommensurate,
through a cause which is the source of the jaculation of arrows. And by
his revolution, the harmonious motion of wholes, and the symphony which
coalesces in itself, and binds all things, are indicated. Referring
therefore, these four powers of the God to forms adapted to the powers,
we may thus accommodate them to the solar monads. Hence the first of
these monads is enunciative of truth and the intellectual light which
subsists occultly in the Gods themselves. But the second is subversive
of every thing confused, and exterminative of all disorder. And the
third renders all things commensurate and friendly to each other,
through harmonic reasons. An undefiled however, and most pure cause
presides over these monads, illuminating all things with perfection,
and a subsistence according to nature, and expelling the contraries to
these.

Of the solar triad, therefore, the first monad, indeed, unfolds
intellectual light, and announces it to all secondary natures, fills
all things with total truth, and elevates them to the intellect of
the Gods. And this we say is the employment of the prophetic power of
Apollo, viz. to lead forth into light the truth comprehended in divine
natures, and to perfect that which is unknown to secondary natures.
But the second and third monads, emit efficacious and demiurgic acme,
in order to the production of wholes, and perfect energy, according
to which they adorn indeed every thing sensible, but exterminate
the inordinate and indefinite from the universe. And one of these
monads is analogous to the production in wholes through music, and to
the harmonious providence of things that are moved. But another is
analogous to the power which is subversive of all disorder, and of the
confusion and tumult which are contrary to form, and to the arrangement
of wholes. And the remaining monad which supplies all things with an
unenvying and exuberant communication of what is beautiful, which
extends the beneficial, and imparts true blessedness, closes indeed
the solar principles, but guards its triple progression. In a similar
manner also, it illuminates ascending natures, with the perfect and
intellectual measure of a happy life, presiding in the sun analogous to
the purifying and Pœonian powers of the king Apollo.

From what is written likewise in the Republic concerning the sun, we
may be able to collect the same things by a reasoning process. For
Socrates there gives to it a transcendency exempt from every thing
generated, and says that it is established above things which are
borne along in a sensible nature; just as _the good_ is perfectly
exempt from intelligibles. He likewise says that the sun generates
sense, that which is sensible, and generated natures, just as _the
good_ produces essence and true being, and is antecedently the
cause of intellect and intelligibles. If, therefore, this sensible
world is generated and generation, as Timæus says, and a divine
generated[27] nature, as it is asserted in the Republic, but the sun is
beyond generation, as Socrates affirms, and in short, is allotted an
essence different from sensibles, it is perfectly evident that it is
allotted a supermundane order in the world, and exhibits an unbegotten
transcendency in generated[28] natures, and an intellectual dignity in
sensibles. Hence, Timæus also delivers a twofold progression of the
sun from the demiurgus, one indeed being co-arranged with the other
planets, but the other exempt, supernatural, and unknown. For the
demiurgus, when producing the seven bodies of the planets, and placing
them in their proper circulations, at the same time constitutes the sun
with the other planets arranging the moon the first from the earth,
but the sun in the second circulation; and after these, he enkindles a
light in the solar sphere, similar to none of the others; nor does he
receive this light from the subject matter, but himself produces and
generates it from himself, and extends as it were from certain adyta
to mundane natures, a symbol of intellectual essences, and unfolds to
the universe that which is arcane in the Gods that are above the world.
Hence also the sun when he [first] appeared, astonished the [mundane]
Gods, and all of them were desirous to dance round him, and to be
filled with his light. This world likewise is beautiful and solar-form.

As we have said, therefore, from the fabrication [of the universe,]
in the Timæus, the sun is demonstrated to possess this order beyond
sensibles, and to be allotted an essence above every thing which is
generated, but every thing in the world receives from him, perfection
and essence. Hence also, Socrates in the Republic calls the sun the
offspring of _the good_, the demiurgus of a generated nature,
and the author of all mundane light. These things, therefore, we must
likewise understand analogously about the ruling order of the God; for
they are thence communicated to this visible sun. And on this account,
here also, the sun is allotted an exempt transcendency with respect to
the Gods in the world, because he possesses a precedaneous hypostasis
among the leaders and rulers of wholes.

Farther still, in those Gods likewise, the first effective cause of
light subsists, generating those supermundane and intellectual rays,
through which souls, and all the more excellent genera obtain an
elevating progression. With these Gods also, there is the demiurgic
duad which produces both simple and composite natures, those that are
of a more ruling, and those that are of an inferior order. And in
short, this demiurgic duad governs the twofold co-ordinations of the
world. Hence those who are wise in divine concerns call this primary
cause of light, and the demiurgic duad hands, as being efficacious,
motive, and fabricative of wholes. But they establish them to be
twofold, the one indeed being dexter, but the other sinister; which
things also Timæus admits to be primarily in the celestial periods,
and says that this division is derived from the first demiurgus. If,
therefore, the demiurgic monad constituted the solar order prior to the
world, why is it wonderful that in that order he should establish this
division according to the right and left? For Socrates also calls the
motive powers of the Parcæ hands, and says that the eldest of the three
moves the universe with both her hands; so that we must not refuse
to transfer the name of hands to divine concerns. Moreover, will not
likewise the last of the solar principles according to Plato be that
from which the interpreters of divine concerns say, a happy life, and
unpolluted fruits are derived to wholes? Since he calls the sun the
offspring of _the good_, and this essentially pertains to it. For
it is evident that as the good extends felicity to all beings, thus
also the sun extends to mundane natures measures of felicity adapted to
each, and gives completion to this through similitudes, and a tendency
to the whole demiurgus. Hence also I think, felicity is said to consist
in an assimilation to divinity. And felicity pertains to all the Gods
in the world, according to the one ruling cause of them. For thence
perfection and blessedness flow upon all things.




                             CHAPTER XIII.


And thus much, following Plato, we have collected by a reasoning
process, concerning these particulars. We shall add, however, to what
has been said, the theory pertaining to the unpolluted Gods, among the
ruling divinities. For Plato also gives us an opportunity of mentioning
these, since it is necessary that the rulers and leaders of wholes
should subsist analogous to the intellectual kings, though they make
their progression in conjunction with division and a separation into
parts. For as they imitate the paternal, generative, and convertive
powers of the intellectual kings, thus also it is necessary that they
should receive the immutable monads in themselves, according to the
ruling peculiarity, and establish over their own progressions secondary
causes of a guardian characteristic. And the mystic tradition indeed
of Orpheus, makes mention of these more clearly. But Plato being
persuaded by the mysteries, and by what is performed in them, indicates
concerning these unpolluted Gods. And in the Laws indeed he reminds
us of the inflation of the pipe by the Corybantes, which represses
every inordinate and tumultuous motion. But in the Euthydemus, he
makes mention of the collocation on a throne, which is performed in
the Corybantic mysteries; just as in other dialogues he makes mention
of the Curetic order, speaking of the armed sports of the Curetes. For
they are said to surround and to dance round the demiurgus of wholes,
when he was unfolded into light from Rhea. In the intellectual Gods,
therefore, the first Curetic order is allotted its hypostasis. But the
order of the Corybantes which precedes Core, (i.e. Proserpine) and
guards her on all sides, as the theology says, is analogous to the
Curetes in the intellectual order. If, however, you are willing to
speak according to Platonic custom, because these divinities preside
over purity, and preserve the Curetic order undefiled, and also
preserve immutability in their generations, and stability in their
progressions[29] into the worlds, on this account they were called
Corybantes. For το κορον, _to koron_, is every where significant
of purity, as Socrates says in the Cratylus; since also you may say,
that our mistress Core was no otherwise denominated than from purity,
and an unpolluted life. But in consequence of her alliance to this
order, she produces twofold guardian triads, one indeed in conjunction
with her father, but the other herself, by and from herself, imitating
in this respect the whole vivific Goddess. For she constitutes the
first Curetes.

Every where, therefore, the guardian and undefiled order is thus
denominated by the Grecian theology. Above, however, it is more simple
and impartible; but beneath, among the ruling Gods, it presents itself
to the view with division and variety. Hence the Corybantes require
the Minerval monad, and in a particular manner they are in want of the
third Minerval monad, which unites their progression, sustains their
armed motion, and in short, converts them to their proper principles.
Moreover, this number the triad, is adapted to these guardian powers,
as being perfect, and uniformly comprehending the beginning, middle,
and end of secondary natures; for every thing which guards, hastens
on all sides to comprehend that which is guarded. The triad also,
preserves the essences, powers, and energies of secondary natures, firm
and unmoved. In the intellectual Gods indeed the three [unpolluted]
monads, were divided about the three fathers; but here the triad is
said to guard Core on all sides, since she also has pre-established
triple monads in herself, as we before observed. All these monads,
therefore, are preserved immutable through the guardianship of the
unpolluted Gods, both in abiding and proceeding. And what else besides
this guardian genus of Gods is fit to be co-arranged with prolific
powers? For this co-arrangement is necessary, in order that these
guardian deities may sustain all the progressions of these powers,
and the multiplications in their generations, and may manifestly
render their motions immutably established in themselves. And on this
account indeed the Gods fill all things with themselves, and generate
all things, and do not depart from any thing either of first or last
natures. But by being in themselves, they are present to all things,
and filling themselves, they fill all secondary natures. And neither
does their inflexibility remain unprolific, nor does their fecundity,
receive any thing from subordinate natures, but prolific abundance,
and immutable power, are in them connascently conjoined. These things
have been briefly asserted concerning the undefiled deity, who is
co-arranged with the ruling Gods, both by Plato, and the Grecian
theologists.




                             CHAPTER XIV.


Again, resuming [the same subject,] let us discuss in common such
things as Parmenides delivers to us concerning the whole order of
Gods that are called assimilative rulers and leaders. For it is
necessary, as we have before observed, to refer the whole divided
theory [respecting the Gods] to the common and one mystic doctrine of
Parmenides. For there we shall find the connexion of the divine orders,
and their common powers delivered to us by Plato in a continued series.
The same and the different, therefore, define for us the peculiarity of
the demiurgic order. And according to these, we have unfolded in what
has been before said, the paternal and prolific cause of the demiurgus,
his unpolluted fountain, and the separative power in him, conformably
to which he divides his own kingdom from that of Saturn. Since,
however, the whole order of the assimilative Gods, is suspended from
the demiurgic monad, subsists about, is converted to, and perfected
by it, it is indeed necessary to refer the signs of this order to the
demiurgic signs, and to give to the former a well-ordered generation
proceeding in measures from the latter. For thus the coherence of the
divine genera with each other, will become more apparent, and the
evolution into light of secondary from more ancient natures, will
through these very things become perfectly known to us.

What, therefore, are the peculiarities of this order, which is
celebrated as of a ruling and leading nature by others,[30] but is
demonstrated by arguments to be of an assimilative nature? Every thing
then which is assimilative, imparts the communication of similitude,
and of communion with paradigms to all[31] the beings that are
assimilated by it. Together with the similar, however, it produces and
commingles the dissimilar; since in the images [of the similar] the
genus of similitude is not naturally adapted to be present, separate
from its contrary. If, therefore, this order of Gods assimilates
sensibles to intellectuals, and produces all things posterior to itself
according to an imitation of causes, it is indeed the first-effective
cause of similitude to natures posterior to itself. But if it is the
cause of this, it is also of the dissimilitude which is co-ordinate
with similitude. For it is necessary that all things which participate
of the similar, should also participate of the dissimilar. And this
order of Gods indeed imparts the similar in a greater degree than the
dissimilar to the progeny that are more proximate to their principles;
but it constitutes the essence of things that proceed farther from
their principles, according to dissimilitude rather than similitude.

For, in short, similitude will have in itself an hypostasis analogous
to the paternal causes, and to the causes which convert to principles.
But the hypostasis of dissimilitude is analogous to prolific causes,
and to those that preside over multitude and division. For similitude
indeed proceeds analogous to intelligible bound,[32] but dissimilitude
to intelligible infinity. Hence the former is collective, but the
latter separative of progressions. Since, however, every divine nature
begins its own energy from itself, and though its energy is directed
to secondary natures, and it imparts its own peculiarity to things
subordinate, yet it establishes and defines itself according to that
energy, prior to other things;--this being the case, that which
supplies other things with the participation of the similar[33] and
the dissimilar, from itself, will entirely possess in itself this
similitude and dissimilitude. It is also mingled from both these,
though here similitude is emitted in a greater degree, and there
dissimilitude. For generative are united to paternal causes, and
unpolluted causes to those that hasten to proceed to every thing.
Twofold co-ordinations likewise of the divine genera, are connected
with each other, energize together with, and subsist in each other.
For the genus of the ruling Gods, is similar and dissimilar to itself,
and to other things. But being similar and dissimilar to itself, it
conjoins itself[34] to, and separates itself from its principles,
preserving the proper boundaries of progression. That, however, which
is similar and dissimilar to other things, converts and congregates
other things to itself, and separates them from itself. Such,
therefore, are the peculiarities of these Gods.

But that the similar and the dissimilar proceed from the demiurgic
monad, and the signs which there pre-exist, into this order, Parmenides
sufficiently demonstrates to us. For the demiurgic same and different,
are the antecedently-existing causes, as he says, of the similitude
and dissimilitude in this order. Since, however, though this order of
Gods is the summit of the partible genera, and of genera which energize
partibly, yet it has a total transcendency with respect to them, in
order that being in continuity with the total orders of the Gods, its
progression may not be separately allotted its generation from divided
causes, but that each of the opposites, as it were, may proceed from
the whole demiurgus. For the similar is from same and different, and
the dissimilar receives its hypostasis from both these; and thus each
participates of the whole demiurgic monad. And this is an indication
of total[35] hyparxis, viz. to refer each of the parts that are, as
it were different, to the whole. Sameness, therefore, and difference
generate similitude; but the one indeed paternally, and the other
in an unpolluted manner; and the one generatively, but the other
separatively. And again, each constitutes dissimilitude in a manner
appropriate to itself. And thus the genera of the assimilative Gods are
varied, subsisting as paternal, generative, and collective of wholes.
For they are allotted their evolution into light, doubled according to
pre-existent causes. And the demiurgic duad energizing through each
of the causes that are pre-established in him, makes a progression
from each into secondary natures. The whole conclusions, likewise, are
dyadic, (or pertaining to the duad) but they are comprehended by the
demiurgic tetrad in pre-arranged boundaries. And the multitude of the
assimilative progressions is convolved to union, by the simplicity of
the intellectual genera.

Each also of the progressions, has indeed one progression supernatural
and unknown to the multitude, but the other apparent and known to all.
I mean, for instance, that the similar, so far as it is constituted
by difference, has a progression from thence difficult to be known;
but that so far as it proceeds from sameness, it exhibits a manifest
reason of cause. After the same manner, dissimilitude has difference
for the manifest principle of its proper hyparxis; but sameness, for
its principle difficult to be known. Hence also Parmenides beginning
from things unknown to the multitude, and which are alone apparent to
science and intellect, ends in things which are known to all men, and
are effable. For in the Gods themselves, the ineffable precedes the
effable. And the latent and unknown mode of their hypostasis, precedes
that which is known according to progression. And thus much concerning
these Gods from the Parmenides of Plato.




                              CHAPTER XV.


Making, however, another beginning, let us discuss the orders
that follow successively. Since the partial orders of the Gods,
therefore, are divided in a three-fold manner, according to the
all-perfect measure of the triad, proceeding supernally from the
first intelligibles, as far as to the last of things, measuring and
defining all things as the Oracles say,--the ruling Gods, indeed, are
allotted the first and highest rank [among the partial orders,] making
their progression proximately after the intellectual order, elevating
secondary natures and conjoining them with the demiurgus of wholes,
unfolding all impartible and united intellectual goods to things
subordinate, and connecting and containing exemptly, their essence and
perfection. But the Gods who give completion to the sensible world are
allotted the last order, and close the end of the divine progression.
These divide the universe, and obtain perpetual allotments and
receptacles in it, and through these weave one and the best polity of
the world. Between these mundane Gods, however, who are our rulers and
saviours, and the supermundane leaders, those Gods subsist who preside
over the separable and at the same time inseparable order of sensibles,
and define according to this their proper progression, being at one and
the same time exempt from the Gods in the universe, and co-arranged
with them. And they are expanded, indeed, above the allotment which
is adequate to the divided parts of the world, and supernally ascend
into many numbers of the mundane Gods; but they make a progression
subordinate to the government which extends to all things and to wholes.

For in short, being the media between the supermundane and mundane
Gods, they in a certain respect communicate with both, and have an
indissoluble communion with both, being mundane, and at the same time
supermundane according to order. And above indeed, they are united by
the ruling leaders, but beneath, they are produced into multitude by
the junior Gods, as Timæus says. For they ride on the mundane Gods,
and are in an undefiled manner established on their summits; but they
are suspended from the supermundane Gods, and subsist about them. They
are also more united than the former; but are more multiplied than the
latter. And they divide indeed, the whole monads of the supermundane
Gods, into perfect numbers; but they collect the multitudes and the
numbers of the mundane Gods into united bounds, converting these
Gods to their exempt principles, but calling forth the Gods that are
above the world into the generation and providential care of sensible
natures, and immutably preserving in themselves the middle form of
empire. For the middle bonds give completion to all the genera of the
Gods. Thus in intelligibles, between the intelligible and occult order,
and the paradigmatic triad, and all-perfect multitude, the intelligible
centre subsists, being parturient indeed, with multitude and the first
(forms,) but vanquished by the uniform comprehension of the first
order. Again, in intelligibles and intellectuals, the connective genus
extending from the middle to all the extremes, conjoins and binds all
their essences, powers and providential energies.

After the same manner therefore, in these orders also, viz. in the
kings exempt from, and in those that are co-arranged with the universe,
those Gods that emit in themselves uniformly the peculiarities of
both these kings, afford a communication to them with each other.
Whence also it belongs to them to transport first to second natures,
to convert second to first natures, to unite both by an indissoluble
connexion, and to guard the whole order in the world. The immutable,
therefore, the inflexible, the indissoluble in providential energies,
dominion over wholes, the administration of many partible allotments
of the Gods at once, and the elevating to supermundane perfection
many of their progressions and orders, pertain to these Gods. Hence,
we are accustomed to celebrate this genus of Gods as _liberated_, in
consequence of being freed from all division according to parts;[36]
as _supercelestial_, in consequence of proximately establishing
itself above the Gods in the heavens; as _undefiled_, in consequence
of not verging to subordinate natures, nor dissolving its exempt
transcendency by a providential attention to the world; as _elevating_,
in consequence of extending the mundane Gods to the intellectual and
intelligible place of survey; and as _perfect_, in consequence of
illuminating all the celestials with the measures of perfection. Since
therefore, this order is in continuity with the assimilative rulers,
but is arranged prior to the mundane Gods, it is indeed proper to
evince that the theology pertaining to it[37] is suspended from the
doctrine concerning the ruling Gods, and at the same time affords from
itself the principles of the conceptions about the sensible Gods.




                             CHAPTER XVI.


The intelligible king[38] therefore, of all intellectuals, luminously
emitting from himself the first causes, and which measure wholes,
according to the all-perfect triad in himself, defines all wholes as
far as to the last of things, and triples the progressions of the
Gods from himself, so as to generate indeed three orders, but refer
each of them to one monad, and an intelligible transcendency. On
this account he constitutes three collective, three connective, and
three perfective causes of all intellectuals; extending the triadic
light to all things, and imparting by illumination the perfect in the
progressions of its proper offspring, to the beginnings, middles, and
ends of all separated natures. But again, the demiurgus and father,
imitating his father and grandfather,[39] to the latter of whom he
extends his total intelligence, being the same in intellectuals, as
he is in intelligibles, and terminating the genus of the intellectual
fathers, in the same manner as his grandfather closes the paternal
profundity of intelligibles, produces from himself three orders of
Gods. And as the total progressions were divided from his grandfather
triadically, so the partial progressions are perfected on account of
him, according to the triad. Hence, there are also three orders from
the demiurgus; but they proceed according to the end adapted to each.
And one of them indeed, is supermundane alone; another is mundane; and
another is in a certain respect the middle of both. They are likewise
allotted the triple proximately from the paternal cause; but each
derives the peculiarity of hyparxis from definite principles, and a
diminution proceeding according to measures. For they have neither an
hypostasis of equal dignity, as mathematical monads have in the triad,
nor a disorderly difference of dignity, but they receive the difference
of a subordinate essence, and arrangement in their generation from
the first causes. And thus, the ruling Gods indeed, are allotted
the highest order in the partial progressions, and the exempt cause
of the proceeding natures. But the liberated Gods are allotted the
second order, being arranged indeed under the ruling, but riding on
the mundane Gods. And the mundane Gods are allotted the third order,
being elevated through the liberated, but united by the ruling, to the
intellectual Gods. In what manner however, the Gods in the world and
all the mundane genera participate of the ruling Gods, we have already
shown.

But each of the mundane genera enjoy the energy of the liberated
governors of the universe, according to a measure adapted to each, and
especially such as are able to follow the powers of these Gods. For in
the Gods themselves, we may perceive a twofold energy, the one indeed,
being co-arranged with the subjects of their providential care, but the
other being exempt and separate. According therefore, to the first of
these energies, the mundane Gods govern sensibles, and convolve, and
convert them to themselves; but according to the other, they follow the
liberated Gods, and together with them are elevated to an intelligible
nature. And on this account, the Elean guest, makes the periods of the
whole world, and of each of the Gods in it to be twofold. For, he says,
that the sun, and each of the heavenly bodies, subsist according to
both these circulations, viz. the intellectual and the mundane; or, if
you are willing so to speak, according to the power which is motive of
secondary natures, and the power which ascends in conjunction with the
liberated Gods.

Moreover, he says, that our souls, and all the natures that have a life
separate from bodies, at one time live according to that elevating
progression, and at another according to the mundane; and now indeed
we proceed from youth to old age, since we have departed from a
flourishing and undefiled life, and are borne to earth, and generation;
but then on the contrary, we proceeded from old age to youth. On
which account, we were led round to a flourishing, intellectual, and
liberated form of energy. Hence also, the corporeal-formed nature [with
which we are connected,] was gradually obliterated, and whatever causes
us to tend downward, and renders us inseparable from the universe. But
an incorporeal, and immaterial nature shone forth, and was filled with
the Gods who are the leaders of a life of this kind.

If also, you are willing, we may collect the same thing by a reasoning
process, from what is written in the Phædrus. Socrates, therefore,
says in that dialogue, that the soul which is perfect and winged,
revolves on high, and governs the whole world; and that this will be
the case with our soul, when it arrives at the summit of a happy life.
But this is in a much greater degree present with the genera superior
to us, and with the Gods themselves. For our souls obtain this end,
and this true blessedness, through the Gods. For whence do you think,
and from what other causes, is a disencumbered energy, and which has
dominion over wholes, imparted to us, and to the genera in the world
more excellent than us, but from the liberated Gods? For each of the
mundane Gods obtains the administration of its allotment, and of the
proper series over which it rules; and which it constitutes about
itself, according to the will of the father. For the demiurgus arranges
under the several mundane Gods, the herds of dæmons, and partial
souls, as Timæus says. But to energize through the whole world, is a
supernatural good, and the peculiarity of the exempt government of the
supercelestial Gods. Hence, from these this good is imparted to the
mundane Gods, and to our souls. Or how can that which is partial extend
its proper energy to the whole? And how departing from its own divided
peculiarity, can it change its life? For that which directs its energy
to the universe, withdraws itself from an energy which is arranged in a
part. We must not therefore say, that this divine good is by any means
present to mundane natures from any other source than these Gods, who
establish their kingdom proximately above the world. As, therefore,
the progression to all things through similitude, and the conversion
according to similitude to causes, are imparted from the assimilative
rulers to the celestial Gods, to the more excellent genera, and to
us, thus also, that which is liberated from partial natures, which is
disencumbered and which tends spontaneously to many energies, is an
impression derived from the liberated rulers. And thus much concerning
the providence of these rulers which pervades to all things, and the
goods which they impart to subordinate natures. But we shall add to
what has been before said, the peculiarity of their essence, according
to which they are allotted this order.




                             CHAPTER XVII.


From the intellectual[40] Gods, therefore, [i.e. from the assimilative
rulers] an immaterial and divine intellect is suspended. But a separate
and total intellect is an intellect of this kind. Hence also these Gods
are called intellectual. For according to their hyparxes, they are
beyond essence and multitude; but according to the participations of
them which receive the illumination of a progression of this kind, they
are called assimilative. For because they have intellectual hypostases,
and perfect powers, since intellect is the last of their participants,
and the intellectual peculiarity defines their whole essence,--hence
they are allotted this appellation. Of the mundane Gods, indeed,
an intellectual nature participates primarily, an undefiled soul
also participates of them, and that portion of the world together
with which they render the whole world, an intellectual and divine
animal, emitting the splendour of themselves as far as to bodies, and
imparting to these a vestige of their own peculiarity. It is necessary,
therefore, that the orders which are between both these, should
rejoice in certain additions, by which they are more multitudinous
than the intellectual Gods, and in progressions into participants; but
that they should be more singular and simple than the mundane Gods.
For the diminutions of the divine essences multiply the receptacles
that are suspended from them. Hence, together with the intellectual
peculiarity, these Gods assume the psychical power, in order that by
the incorporeal nature, they may have the supermundane [property,] but
by the psychical, they may be more manifold than the intellectual Gods.

For again, considering the affair in another way, since soul presents
itself to the view, and the one fountain of whole souls, in pure
[intellectuals,] and constitutes all things in conjunction with the
demiurgus, is it not necessary that the supermundane Gods should
participate of the psychical peculiarity? For the Gods that are divided
about the world, are not filled with the unical soul without a medium,
but through other more total media, which do not proceed out of the
monad, [i.e. out of Juno, or the crater,] and possess an eternal
life. From thence, therefore, that is, from the crater of souls, the
presence of soul is derived to the ruling and liberated Gods. For the
demiurgus Jupiter also, as Socrates says in the Philebus, possessing in
himself a royal soul, and a royal intellect, according to the reason
of cause, and generating according to the whole of himself those
Gods that are of a ruling characteristic among the supermundane and
mundane divinities, entirely likewise imparts the intellectual and
the psychical peculiarity. But the supermundane Gods indeed, being
primarily unfolded into light, participate more of an intellectual
essence. Hence also, the psychical peculiarity is in them occultly.
But the Gods who are allotted the middle order, cause the psychical
peculiarity, indeed, to shine forth, yet subsisting with a more
abundant separation (than in the supermundane Gods.) The mundane Gods,
however, perfectly unfold the psychical peculiarity into light; since
intellect also, was indeed occultly in the first intellectuals, but
exhibits a fore-running light in the middle, and shines forth in the
last intellectuals. And the supermundane Gods, indeed, being perfectly
[supermundane] derive the power of soul from the intellectual[41]
crater, or the royal soul in the demiurgus; but they pre-establish in
themselves another monad of the divided psychical genera. The liberated
however, now communicating in essence with the mundane Gods, have the
psychical peculiarity from a twofold source, i.e. from the fountain of
total animations, and from the assimilative principle. And in the last
place, the mundane Gods receive the illuminations of all the divinities
prior to them. Hence also, they rule over the universe, imitating the
liberated Gods, adorn sublunary natures with forms, and assimilate them
to intellectual paradigms, imitating the ruling Gods. They likewise
pour forth the whole of the life which is inseparable [from body,] from
the one fountain of souls, establishing it as an image [of the life
which is separate from a corporeal nature] and conjoin themselves to
this fountain.

In short, all the genera[42] being mingled by the demiurgus in the
fountain of souls, in order to the generation of the different ranks
of souls, some of these ranks have one thing, but others a different
thing at hand. And in some indeed, the essential has dominion over
the remaining genera; in others sameness; and in others difference.
But those souls that are connascent with the assimilative Gods,
have[43] their whole hypostasis according to essence. Hence they are
near to an intellectual hyparxis, and are allotted in the genera of
souls, an intelligible and occult transcendency. But those[44] that
are co-arranged with the liberated Gods, characterize their proper
progression, according to sameness. Hence also, they are consubsistent
with the Gods that bind together and congregate the supermundane and
mundane Gods. And those souls that are co-divided with the mundane
Gods, define the essence of themselves according to difference: and
on this account also, the demiurgus, in constituting the soul of the
universe, is said to co-adapt difference to other souls by force.

Moreover, the separation into parts in these, the union through
harmony, and the energy according to time are effected through the
illuminations of difference. But [in the souls] above these essence and
sameness subsist, with which there are eternal life, and a union of
powers. And thus much concerning these particulars.

From what has been said, however, we may collect by a reasoning
process, that intellect, essence, and intellectual life, are suspended
from the liberated Gods. In them also soul, and the nature of the
supercelestial souls shine with a fore-running light. For they are
established above the celestial Gods who ride in bodies, just as the
celestial Gods are exempt from the sublunary divinities, and from those
who are allotted the government of matter. If, however, the genus of
the liberated Gods is of this kind, they are very properly said to
belong to the partial orders, in the same manner as the Gods prior to
them. But they indeed are more total, because the psychical peculiarity
was in them occultly. But the liberated Gods have that which is partial
in providential energies more apparent because the psychical power also
in these is more manifest, just as the mundane Gods who now preside
over partial allotments, perfectly unfold into light the psychical
essence. The whole, however, and impartible genera of the Gods shine
forth as far as to the intellectual hypostasis. For intellect according
to its own nature is impartible.

The liberated leaders, therefore, being such as we have shown them to
be, let us survey the multiform orders of them adapted to this order.
Some of them, therefore, we call _transporters_, and these are such
as unfold to secondary natures, the progressions of the assimilative
genera. But others are _elevators_, who draw upward the mundane orders,
to a separate energy. Others are _colligators_, who administer equally
the communion of the extremes. Others are _undefiled_, and these are
such as entirely obliterate matter, and impart by illumination the
disencumbered to the providential energies of secondary natures.
Others are _perfective_, and these are such as are the suppliers of
perfection to mundane natures. And others are _prolific_, who multiply
the progressions of subordinate essences. For according to these, and
far more numerous powers, incomprehensible by our conceptions, they
preside over the Gods in the world, and give completion to the divine
genera which subsist between the Gods that are exempt, and those that
are co-arranged with the parts of the universe.

Moreover, we must assign to them energies in symphony with their
powers, viz. such energies as are disencumbered, every where apparent,
amputating every thing material, and corporeal-formed, emitting an
idea undefiled, without contact, and incorporeal, and converting all
secondary natures to themselves, and extending them to intellectual
light. And farther still, we must ascribe to them energies that unfold
the exempt principles of the universe, and also energies more excellent
than these, which draw upward to the intellectual Gods, and others
still more elevated which conjoin themselves with the intellectual
Gods, and exhibit an essence uncoloured, unfigured, and without
contact. Again, according to another mode, [we must admit] that some of
their energies operate about the secondary Gods, and are collectors of
their divine unities to a union prior to the world. But others operate
about the mundane intellects, and extend the intellections of them from
co-ordinate intelligibles to such as are first, and exempt from the
universe. Others again, are elevators of souls to the one fountain of
them. And some of their energies, indeed, are the leaders of divine
souls themselves; but others preside over the genera that are more
excellent than us. And others convolve the multitude of intelligible
[souls[45]] to an undefiled life. For being as it were certain leaders
of herds, they ascend supernally into all the natures in the world, and
as dæmon Gods, they proximately rule over Gods, and are the leaders of
the progression to the intelligible, to some in one, and to others in a
different way, according to the order which is adapted to the elevated
natures. For every thing [mundane] participates of the liberated Gods.
But the participation is different. For it is either according to
the divine, dæmoniacal, and partible, or according to the uniform,
intellectual, and psychical. For all things, as I may say, are
allotted a separate[46] life, a disencumbered energy, a supernatural
providence, and a common prefecture, from this order of Gods. Let the
common definition, therefore, of the liberated Gods, be such as this.




                            CHAPTER XVIII.


In the next place it follows that we should unfold the theory of
Plato, first, that which may be obtained in other dialogues, and
afterwards, the all-perfect doctrine concerning these Gods, which is
to be found in the Parmenides. In the Phædrus therefore, Socrates
energizing enthusiastically, and expanding his intellect to the whole
connexion of the divine orders, and not only mystically surveying the
mundane progressions of them, but also their indescribable and blessed
visions, and discursive energies above[47] the world, divides indeed,
in a three-fold manner, all the separate hypostases in the world, from
the subjects of their government. And he calls the first of these
hypostases divine; but the middle dæmoniacal; and he gives completion
to the last from our souls. He also suspends partial souls [such as
ours] from dæmons. Hence he denominates them co-attendants, and extends
them through dæmons as media, to the divine empire. But he suspends the
dæmoniacal orders from the mundane Gods. For dæmons are the attendants
of these. He refers however, these whole divine principalities, the
dæmoniacal herds, and choirs of partial souls, to the liberated order;
and he says that the triadic army of mundane souls is elevated under
this order, to the intellectual and intelligible Gods, together at the
same time with their first causes.

Here therefore, he defines according to the measure of the dodecad
(i.e. the number twelve) all the liberated Gods, though the multitude
of them is incomprehensible, and not to be numbered by human
conceptions; and though none of those theologists that have written
any thing concerning them, have been able to define their whole
number, in the same manner as they have the ruling multitude (i.e. the
multitude of supermundane Gods,) or the multitude of the intellectual,
or intelligible Gods. Plato however, apprehended that the number of
the dodecad is adapted to the liberated Gods, as being all-perfect,
composed from the first numbers, and completed from things perfect; and
he comprehends in this measure all the progressions[48] of these Gods.
For he refers all the genera and peculiarities of them to this dodecad,
and defines them according to it. But again dividing the dodecad into
two monads and one decad; he suspends all [mundane natures] from the
two monads, but delivers to us each of these energizing on the monad
posterior to itself, according to its own hyparxis. And one of these
monads indeed, he calls Jovian, but he denominates the other Vesta. He
likewise makes mention of other more partial principalities, and which
give completion to the aforesaid decad, such as those of Apollo, Mars,
and Venus. And he suspends indeed, the prophetic form of life from the
Apolloniacal principality; but the amatory from the principality of
Venus; and the divisive, from that of Mars; for hence the most total
and first genera of lives are derived; just as when he introduces into
the world souls recently fashioned, he says that some preside over one,
and others over another form of life. And it appears to me, that as
Timæus makes the division of souls, at one time supermundane, but at
another mundane, for he distributes souls equal in number to the stars,
and disseminates one into the moon, another into the earth, and others
into the other instruments of time; after the same manner also Socrates
prearranges twofold rulers and leaders of them; proximately indeed the
mundane Gods, but in a still higher rank than these, the liberated Gods.

As we have said however, the twelve Gods convolve every mundane genus,
whether it be divine, or dæmoniacal, to the vision of intelligibles,
and perfect their separate energy. They likewise comprehend in
themselves all the supercelestial genera, so that whether there be a
paternal genus of the liberated Gods, or a vivific, or an undefiled
and guardian genus, they are comprehended in this number. For this
number must not be surveyed as if it was such as twelve is in units;
for number in the Gods is not of this kind; but it must be beheld in
the peculiarity of hyparxis. For as the duad in the Gods presides over
prolific power,[49] and the triad, over the first perfection, thus also
the dodecad [in the Gods,] is a symbol of all-perfect progression. For
since these Gods close the end of the powers that are unapparent and
exempt from the world, and ride on the celestial Gods, according to
each of these, the dodecad pertains to them, viz. it belongs to them
as terminating the all-perfect in the progression of the supermundane,
and as presiding over the celestial Gods. For they impart to the latter
a distribution from themselves into the dodecad, and especially guard
them in this number. The ruling dodecad therefore, was all-perfectly
supermundane; but the celestial, is evidently mundane only; and the
dodecad of the liberated rulers contains the communion of the extremes,
and binds the order posterior, to that which is prior to itself. And on
this account indeed, the liberated Gods are perfective of the mundane
Gods, and lead them upward. But they are proximately suspended from the
ruling Gods, are emitted from them, and administer the indissoluble
connexion of both. [i.e. of the supermundane and mundane Gods.]




                             CHAPTER XIX.


That we may not however present the reader with our conceptions, but
may unfold to the utmost of our power the theory of Plato, to the
lovers of the contemplation of truth, let us consider by ourselves,
where those leaders must be arranged, which Socrates celebrates in the
Phædrus, and with whom it is fit to connumerate, and with what orders
of Gods, it is proper to co-arrange the great ruler of those leaders,
who drives a winged chariot. For it is necessary either to give to
him an intellectual, or an assimilative, or a liberated, or a mundane
order. For these are the decrements accompanying the progression of the
great God Jupiter. If however, he is the intellectual Jupiter, whom we
have denominated the demiurgus of the universe, and have made Plato
bear testimony to our assertion, how is he the leader of the above
mentioned dodecad? And how is he divided oppositely to the principality
of Vesta? For the demiurgic monad closes indeed, the intellectual
breadth, but is exempt from all other numbers, and unco-ordinated
with all [the monads of other numbers.] For it neither was, nor is
lawful for effects to have an hypostasis opposed in division to their
causes. It is not therefore proper to make twelve leaders of wholes,
but to make the number of causes to be one, as Timæus says. Moreover,
Jupiter the demiurgus is exempt[50] from the universe, as being himself
the author of the apparent order of things. But the first of the
twelve leaders, is said by Socrates to drive a winged chariot in the
heavens. How therefore, can he who is connected with the world, and who
approximates to the Gods in the heavens, be considered as the same with
him who is exempt from all [mundane natures,] and who abides, as Timæus
says, in his own accustomed manner?

Farther still, this Jupiter indeed, presides over a philosophic life,
and souls [that follow him] perpetually lead this life. But another God
presides over the prophetic, amatory, and poetic life. The demiurgus
of wholes, however, contains in himself the paradigms of all lives;
and as he uniformly comprehends the essence of souls, after the same
manner also, he comprehends all the different mutations of their
lives. He is not, therefore, divisibly the cause of the lives in the
soul, but pre-establishes according to one demiurgic cause, all the
periods of souls, all the variety, and all the measures of life. And
as the mundane sun is not the cause of some things, but the demiurgus
of others, but of whatever the sun is the author, the demiurgus is in
a greater degree the fabricator, and precedaneous cause,--thus also
in the lives of souls, it is not proper to refer the cause to the
demiurgus in a divided manner. For the demiurgic monad, presides as
the impartible, common, and one cause of all lives; but the divisions
according to lives, and the different paradigms of mundane natures,
pertain to the Gods posterior to him.

If, however, some one should think that we ought to abandon this
hypothesis, but that we should assert this Jupiter, and the other
leaders to be mundane, where must we arrange the Gods that follow him?
For Socrates says, “that the army of Gods and dæmons divided into
eleven parts, follows Jupiter.” For there are more comprehensive and
partial orders of Gods in the universe than these, and some of them
have the relation of leaders, but others of followers. The magnitude,
however, of the principality celebrated by Socrates, does not manifest
to us a transcendency co-arranged with, but exempt from mundane
natures. For in incorporeal causes, _the great_, imparts a peculiarity
of this kind to those to whom it is present. And as Love being not
simply called a dæmon by Diotima, but a _great_ dæmon, is demonstrated
to be expanded above all dæmons, and is a god, but is not arranged in
the genus of dæmons, thus also Jupiter, being celebrated as the _great_
leader, not as the mundane leader of mundane natures, but as exempt
from, and transcending the mundane order, is allotted this appellation.
But if Jupiter is exempt from the Gods in the world, it is necessary
that the other leaders also should have an essence antecedent to those
that follow Jupiter. For all of them are allotted a ruling dignity.
But if the other leaders are arranged as mundane, and Jupiter alone is
a leader beyond these, again we must transfer the whole principality
from the dodecad, to the Jovian monad. It is necessary, however, to
attribute a ruling power to all of them, and to preserve to Jupiter the
principal authority among them.

It remains, therefore, that a principality such as this of the Gods,
must either be that of the assimilative Gods, or of those that are
allotted a liberated dominion in the universe, as we say it must.
If, however, we should admit it to belong to the assimilative orders,
it will be the leader of a demiurgic triad, but not of the dodecad
which is now celebrated. The Jupiter, therefore, who is among the
assimilative Gods, and whom we have before unfolded, is the first of
the sons of Saturn. For these sons, as Socrates says in the Gorgias,
divide the whole kingdom of Saturn. And the first of them indeed is the
author of first, the second of middle, and the third of last natures.
The division, therefore, of mundane natures being three-fold, the first
of the sons of Saturn may be called the leader of the triadic division,
and the multitude proximately suspended from him will be the first of
the triadic division in the universe. But the leader of the twelve
Gods, presides over an army distributed into eleven parts. Hence[51]
the one defines his proper dominion in the thirds of wholes, but the
other in the twelfths. And according to the power of comprehension,
one of them defines his principality conformably to the triad, but the
other according to the endecad [or the number eleven.] By no means,
therefore, is each of these allotted the same order. The demiurgus,
therefore, and saviour Jupiter is uncoarranged with all these. But
the assimilative Jupiter is the leader of the division of wholes into
a triad. And the mundane Jupiter is among the number of leaders that
follow, and not of those that are exempt. The Jupiter, however, who is
celebrated by Socrates in the Phædrus, is co-arranged with the other
leaders, and presides over those that are disposed in an orderly manner
according to eleven parts, and not over those that receive a tripartite
division; and he is also exempt from all mundane natures on account of
the magnitude of his ruling transcendency. Hence he is different from
all the above-mentioned orders, and exhibits in no one of them the
peculiarity which is now presented to our view.

It remains, therefore, that we should connumerate him with the
liberated Gods, in order that he may be proximate to the mundane
Gods; and on this account he is said to be in the heavens, and to be
exempt from the mundane divinities. On this account, likewise, he is
celebrated as _great_. For frequently media present themselves to
our view, from the extremes being surveyed according to mixture. Since
therefore, Jupiter is said to drive a winged chariot in the heavens,
and is denominated great, he is in a certain respect co-arranged with
the celestial Gods, and is exempt from them. But he who is at one and
the same time co-arranged with the Gods in the universe, among whom the
celestial Jupiter is allotted the highest dignity, and is exempt from
them, ranks among the liberated Gods, if in what has been before said,
we have rightly determined. Hence, of the Gods, some are exempt from
the universe; but others give completion to it; and others are at one
and the same time allotted a co-arranged, and an exempt transcendency.
This great leader in the heavens therefore Jupiter, is liberated and
supercelestial, and the whole dodecad shines forth in this order of
Gods. For there is one all-perfect and divine number, to which the
twelve leaders give completion. So that it is necessary the whole
number should be placed in this order of Gods, but we must not call
in a divided manner some of the leading and ruling Gods mundane, and
others supermundane. But if the first of them is supermundane, the rest
also will after the same manner establish themselves above the Gods in
the world. Each also is the leader of an appropriate multitude, and
is surrounded with a great number[52] of Gods and dæmons. But partial
souls rank among the last of their followers. For they are co-divided
with dæmons, and divine natures, and participate of the liberated
principality of the Gods, as far as they are able. For, as Socrates
says, “that which is willing and able always follows the Gods.” Through
these things therefore, we have reminded the reader, that the twelve
leaders of wholes celebrated by Socrates in the Phædrus, belong to the
liberated Gods.




                              CHAPTER XX.


In the next place, let us show whence they derive the whole of this
number. It is necessary therefore, that they should have their
hypostasis from the Gods prior to them; since the progression to
the assimilative Gods was from the intellectual fathers, and to the
intellectual fathers supernally from the intelligible and at the same
time intellectual Gods, just as to these the progression was from
the first intelligibles. For since the order of the assimilative
rulers is prior to that of the liberated Gods; as is also the triad
of the intellectual kings; or rather the demiurgic monad establishing
in itself the all-perfect measure of the division of wholes into
the triad,--this being the case we must survey the causes of the
generation[53] of the liberated Gods according to both these, viz.
according to the demiurgic measure, and the genera of the assimilative
Gods. For the different orders of them are imparted from these two.

Moreover, if we remember what has been before observed, we gave a
fourfold division to the middle progressions of the assimilative Gods.
And we said, that some of them are paternal, others prolific, others
of an elevating, and others of a guardian nature. Since therefore, the
demiurgic monad divides progressions into first, middle, and last, in
the same manner as the intelligible father prior to it, but the Gods
posterior to this monad, emit the rivers of themselves tetradically
to secondary natures,--this being the case, the dodecad of liberated
Gods presents itself to our view, above indeed proceeding according
to the triad, but beneath being quadruply multiplied. Hence, of the
genera which give completion to it; some indeed, are allotted the
demiurgic and paternal triadically; others, the generative and vivific
triadically; others, the elevating peculiarity triadically; and others
after the same manner the undefiled and guardian characteristic.
For all their peculiarities are derived from the multitude of the
assimilative Gods. But the division of them into first, middle and
last, proceeds from the demiurgic cause. And thus much concerning the
number of the liberated Gods, whence, and how it is generated.




                             CHAPTER XXI.


Since therefore, as we have before observed, there are twelve leaders
of all the mundane Gods, of all dæmons, and farther still, of such
partial souls as are able to be extended to the intelligible, again
in this dodecad, the mighty Jupiter and Vesta are allotted the more
ruling order. But the principality of the rest is co-arranged with
these, and has a secondary dignity. And Jupiter indeed, being neither
the intellect of the universe, as some say he is, nor the intellect
in the sun, nor in short, any one of mundane intellects or souls, but
being expanded above all these, and pre-existing among the liberated
Gods, elevates the choir of Gods, and of the genera superior to us that
follow him, and imparts paternal goodness to the multitude converted to
him. But he is the leader of all the other numbers that terminate under
the twelve Gods. Again however, Vesta indeed governs an appropriate
multitude, but she neither has the order of the first soul, nor is that
which is called the earth in the universe. But prior to these, she is
allotted a ruling power among the supercelestial Gods. She imparts
however, her own peculiarity to the numbers of the other leaders, in
the same manner as Jupiter. For the leaders that are suspended from the
decad, participate also of these two monads.

Jupiter however, being indeed the cause of motion is the leader to all
things of a progression to the intelligible. But Vesta illuminates
all things with stable[54] and inflexible power; though Jupiter also
abiding in himself, is thus elevated to the intelligible place of
survey; and Vesta on account of an inflexible and undefiled permanency
in herself, is conjoined to the first causes. The emission however of
a different peculiarity, affords the difference of dominion. For since
there are twofold conversions in the Gods (for all things are converted
to themselves and to their principles) each form of conversion indeed,
was impartibly in king Saturn. For according to Parmenides he is
demonstrated to be in himself, and in another. And the latter indeed,
pertains to a conversion to a more excellent nature, but the former
implies a conversion to himself. In the secondary however, and more
partial Gods, both these forms shine forth in a divided manner. And
Vesta indeed, imparts to the mundane Gods an undefiled establishment
in themselves; but Jupiter imparts to them an elevating motion to
first natures. For Vesta belongs to the undefiled, but Jupiter to
the paternal series; but they are divided by a subsistence in self,
and a subsistence in another, as we have before observed. It must
be said therefore, that every thing stable and immutable, and which
possesses an invariable sameness of subsistence, arrives to all mundane
natures from the supercelestial Vesta, and that on this account all
the poles are immoveable, and the axes about which the circulations
of the spheres convolve themselves. It must also be said, that the
wholenesses of the circulations are firmly established, that the earth
abides immoveably in the middle, and that the centres have an unshaken
permanency [from this supercelestial Vesta.]

Again therefore, it must be admitted that all motions, separate
energies, and the conversions of secondary to first natures, are
derived to wholes from Jupiter. For the intellectual orders are not
only united to co-ordinate intelligibles, but also to such as are
exempt, on account of the elevating progression of Jupiter. And divine
souls following the mighty Jupiter are extended as far as to the first
causes. The attendants of these also are collected together with the
Gods, in consequence of being suspended from the paternal government
of Jupiter. But again, with respect to all the remaining leaders,
each presides over his proper series and imparts from himself his
peculiarity to the whole multitude [suspended from him.] And one of
them indeed, imparts as far as to the last of things an unfolding,
another, a prolific, and another, an immutable peculiarity, being
themselves allotted a supercelestial order, and drawing upward a
numerous army of partible Gods. Hence Socrates also at one and the same
time denominates them rulers, says that they have an arrangement, and
that their energy is directed to secondary natures, according to the
order in which they are placed. Each, however, of the other ruling Gods
who are ranked in the number of the twelve, is a leader according to
the order in which he is arranged. The ruling and leading peculiarity,
therefore, alone, pertains to the supermundane Gods. But to be
arranged, and that which is arranged itself by itself, pertain to the
mundane Gods. For these are they who participate of order, and who are
allotted order according to participation. Both these peculiarities,
however, pertain to the liberated Gods. For they are rulers and
leaders, as being in continuity with the ruling [supermundane] Gods,
and they are arranged and participate of order, as being proximate
to the mundane Gods. But being the middle of both, they connect the
whole progressions of them according to one intellectual bond. Farther
still, as presiding indeed over the ruling order in the heavens, they
come into contact with the mundane Gods, and as being in themselves,
and extended to the intelligible, they are allotted a transcendency
separate from the universe, and exempt from their participants. Thus
much, therefore, may suffice concerning the first division of these
Gods. Since, however, we have before observed that their progression is
tetradic and triadic, we shall concisely define[55] the peculiarities
of the arranged triads.




                             CHAPTER XXII.


These, therefore, being arranged according to triads, as we have
said, of the demiurgic triad, indeed, Jupiter is allotted the highest
order, supernally from intellect governing souls and bodies, and as
Socrates says, taking care of all things. But Neptune here also gives
completion to the middle of the demiurgic [triad], and especially
governs the psychical order. For this God is the cause of motion, and
of all generation. But soul is the first of generated natures, and
is essentially motion. And Vulcan inspires the nature of bodies, and
fabricates all the mundane seats of the Gods. Again, of the guardian
and immutable triad, the first indeed is Vesta, because she preserves
the very being of things, and an undefiled essence. For Socrates in
the Cratylus gives to her the highest order, as connectedly containing
the summits of wholes. But Minerva preserves middle lives inflexible,
through intellection, and a self-energizing life, sustaining them from
[the incursions of] matter. And Mars illuminates corporeal-formed
natures with power, and an infrangible[56] strength, as Socrates says
in the Cratylus. Hence he is perfected by Minerva, and participates of
a more intellectual inspiration, as the poetry [of Orpheus] says, and
of a life separate from generated natures.

Moreover, of the vivific triad, Ceres is the chief, entirely generating
all mundane life, viz. the intellectual, the psychical, and that which
is inseparable from body. But Juno contains the middle of the triad,
and imparts the generation of soul. For the intellectual goddess emits
from herself all the progressions of the other psychical genera. And
Diana is allotted the end of the triad, moving all natural reasons
into energy, and perfecting the imperfection[57] of matter. Hence
theologists, and Socrates in the Theætetus, call her _Lochia_, (or
the power that presides over births) as being the inspective guardian
of psychical progression and generation. Of the remaining triad,
therefore, the anagogic, or elevating, Hermes indeed is the supplier
of philosophy, and through this elevates souls, and by the dialectic
powers, sends upward both total and partial souls to the good itself.
But Venus is the first-effective cause of the amatory inspiration which
pervades through wholes, and familiarizes to the beautiful the lives
that are elevated by her. And Apollo perfects and converts all things
through music, convolving, as Socrates says [in the Cratylus], and
through harmony and rhythm attracting to intellectual truth, and the
light which is there.

We say, however, in common respecting all of them, that establishing
themselves above the mundane Gods, they contain all the choir of
the liberated Gods. And souls indeed are suspended from them, but
intellectual souls, and such as are as it were powers generative of
souls. Hence Socrates also gives to them chariots. For Jupiter is said
to drive a winged chariot, and the other Gods after the same manner
as Jupiter use secondary vehicles. But what else can we say these are
than supermundane souls, on which they ride, and which are intellectual
indeed, but the sources of partibility and division, from which mundane
souls are allotted their hypostasis; a more abundant separation, and
a greater number of parts appearing in them, in consequence of their
being adapted to be bound through analogy? In the liberated Gods,
therefore, the psychical peculiarity unites itself to intellect. Hence
also, Jupiter is said to drive a winged chariot, without division,
in consequence of this chariot being intellectual, and not departing
from an immaterial and divine intellect. But in the mundane Gods,
divisions of horses and charioteers are delivered. [For Socrates says
in the Phædrus], “All the horses, therefore, and chariots of the Gods
are good, and consist of such things as are good.” Hence an energy
according to time first shines forth in the mundane Gods, where there
is a more abundant separation of powers. But in the liberated Gods,
time is always with eternity, and partibility with union. For they are
the principles of souls, and the causes of mundane natures, and are as
it were intellectual seeds abiding in the intellectual comprehensions
of themselves. And thus much concerning these things.




                            CHAPTER XXIII.


I wish, however, to show from other writings of Plato what the
peculiarity is which he exhibits to us of the liberated order. In
the Republic, therefore, teaching us the order of the universe which
pervades through the mundane wholes, supernally from the inerratic
sphere, and which governs the elections of human life that are
different at different times, this life also varying the measure of
justice adapted to it, he refers the first-effective cause of this
order to a monad and triad exempt from [the mundane] wholes. And to the
monad indeed, he gives the power of dominion, extending the authority
of it to all heaven, its empire being at one and the same time
impartibly present to all things, governing all things indivisibly,
and according to one energy, and moving wholes by the lowest powers
of itself. Giving also to the triad a progression from the monad, he
distributes from it into the universe a partible energy and production.
For that which is simple and united in exempt providence, is educed
into multitude through secondary inspection. Thus, therefore, the one
cause of multitude possesses a greater authority, but the distributed
cause appears to be more proximate to its effects. For all the variety
of powers in the world, the infinity of motions, and the multiform
difference of reasons, [i.e. of productive principles] are convolved
under the triad of the Fates. But again this triad is extended to
the one monad which is prior to the three Fates, and which Socrates
denominates Necessity, not as ruling over wholes by violence, nor as
obliterating the self-motive nature of our life, nor as deprived of
intellect and the most excellent knowledge, but as comprehending all
things intellectually, and introducing bound to things indefinite, and
order to things inordinate. And farther still, he thus denominates it,
as causing all things to be obedient to itself, and extending them
to good, as subjecting them to demiurgic sacred laws, as guarding
all things within the world, and as comprehending all things in the
universe in a circle, and leaving nothing deprived of the justice
pertaining to it, nor suffering it, besides this, to fly from the
divine law.

Since, therefore, we give a twofold division to the causes of the order
of the world, and we admit one of the causes to be monadic, but the
other triadic, and we acknowledge that the monad is productive of the
triad, being persuaded by Plato, and since we have shown that the triad
is the offspring of the monad, let us see in what order it is possible
to arrange each of these. For wishing to learn this, we have undertaken
the present discussion concerning them. The monad, therefore, which,
as we have said, Socrates calls Necessity, is perfectly exempt from
mundane natures, and by the last of her powers imparts motion to all
heaven, neither being converted to it, nor energizing about it, but
imparting an orderly circulation to the world, by her very essence, and
by being firmly established. For [Socrates says] that the spindle is
moved on the knees of Necessity; but that she herself having royally
established herself on a throne near to the universe, governs the
heavens in a silent path. But the triad is now in a certain respect
co-arranged with the circulations of the heavens, convolves them with
hands, and energizes about them, and no longer causes them to revolve
by its very being alone [in the same manner as the monad]. For the
triad is the cause of the order and circulations of the universe, by
producing and performing a certain thing; though in this also there is
a different energy. For Lachesis indeed moves with both her hands; but
each of the remaining Parcæ, with one hand only. This however we shall
again discuss. But it is obvious to every one, that of this production
which subsists according to the monad, and the triad proceeding from
it, it must be granted that the monad is established in a more ancient
order of Gods, but the triad in an inferior order.

We say, therefore, that Necessity who is called the mother of the
Parcæ, first subsists in the intellectual Gods, analogous to the
intelligible and intellectual monad of Adrastia; and that thence
being unfolded into light in the ruling orders, she generates this
triad of the Parcæ. For that which is total in providence, energy,
and the convolution of wholes by the very being itself of that which
convolves them, are indications of intellectual transcendency. To
extend, likewise, impartibly production to all things, is coequalized
with demiurgic dominion. And this Goddess appears to me to illuminate
all the progeny of the demiurgus with an ineffable guard. As likewise
he is the generator of wholes impartibly, thus too Necessity guards
inflexibly all things in herself, and comprehends them monadically,
preserving indissoluble the order which proceeds from the demiurgus
into the world. Necessity, therefore, being allotted such an authority
and kingdom in wholes, the triad of the Parcæ rules over the universe
in a liberated manner. For it comes into contact with the heavens, and
for a time relinquishes the contact, as Socrates says. And through
contact indeed, it is co-arranged with the bodies that are moved, and
is connascent with them; but through a retention of energies, it is
without contact, is separate from the things governed, and is exempt
from them. Being, however, at one and the same time allotted both these
peculiarities, it exists in the liberated Gods. For to touch, and
not to touch, to move and not to move, as the fable relates, are not
according to a part in the Gods, but are coexistent, and subsist with
each other at once. For divine natures do not change their energies
according to time, nor like partial souls, do they at one time energize
separately, and at another providentially attend to secondary natures;
but abiding in them selves they are every where present, and being
present to all things, they do not depart from the watch-tower of
themselves. At one and the same time, therefore, the being without
contact, and the coming into contact with the celestial periods, are
present with the Parcæ, and they also comprehend that which is exempt
and liberated from sensibles, according to one peculiarity, and that
which is co-arranged with, and allied to them. And on this account,
they possess a liberated order with reference to the whole heaven.

If, however, there is also a mundane triad of the Parcæ, and a
providence proximate to the subjects of their government, it is not
wonderful. For of Jupiter, and Juno, Apollo and Minerva, there are
common progressions and co-arrangements, after the supercelestial
allotment, and together with the mundane Gods. For powers which give
completion to the last order of the Gods, approximate to the universe
from all the liberated Gods. But Socrates, celebrating the liberated
and supermundane kingdoms of the Parcæ, has represented them to us
as touching and not touching the whole circulations, dividing the
limitation[58] of their peculiarities, by mutation according to time.
For to relinquish [the contact] for a time, affords a representation
of a temporal mutation of energies. This, however, pertains to the
concealment which is adapted to divine fables. For fables introducing
generations of things unbegotten, compositions of things simple, and
distributions of things impartible, obumbrate under many veils the
truth of things. If, however, as fables call the transition from
cause to existence, generation, denominate the causal comprehension
of composite in simple natures, composition itself, and say that the
division of secondary about first natures, is the distribution of the
latter into parts,--thus also, if we do not apprehend according to
time, the alternately coming into contact with, and being separated
from things that are moved, conformably to the apparent meaning of the
fable, but according to the different peculiarities of the Parcæ,[59]
and an hypostasis mingled from the extremes, we shall be most near to
the conception of Plato. Here, therefore, let us terminate this, which
does not require much discussion at present.

But let us consider the order of the Parcæ by itself. For of these,
some think that Lachesis should be arranged as the first, but others
as the last of the three. And of the remaining two, some give a prior
arrangement to Atropos, and place her in the order of a monad, but
others to Clotho. Since, however, Plato in the Laws clearly says,
that Lachesis is the first, Clotho the second, and Atropos the third,
I think that what is said in the Republic should be referred to this
definite order in them, and that we should not make any innovation by
following the mutable opinions of interpreters. Socrates, therefore,
says, that Lachesis sings the past, but Clotho the present, and
Atropos the future; here also in a similar manner using an order of
division conformably to their energies. And to Lachesis indeed he
gives predominance, and a uniform dominion over the rest. But he
gives to Clotho a dominion subordinate to that of Lachesis, but
more comprehensive than the kingdom of Atropos. And to Atropos he
attributes the third kingdom, which is comprehended by both the others,
and is arranged under them. The multitude, therefore, are ignorant
that Socrates uses the parts of time as symbols of the comprehension
according to cause. For the past was once the future, and the present,
but the future[60] is not yet the past, but has the whole of its
essence in existing in some after time. We must assume, therefore,
the triple causes analogous to these three parts of time; and say
that the cause which is the most perfect, and the most comprehensive
of the others, sings the past, as the cause of the others, and the
source of their energy. For the past is comprehensive of the future
and the present. But the second cause is the present,[61] which
partly comprehends, and is partly comprehended. For this prior to its
being the present was the future. And the third cause, and which is
comprehended by both the others, is the future. For this requires the
present and the past, the one unfolding it, but the other bounding
its progression. Lachesis, therefore, is the first-effective cause,
comprehending the other causes in herself; but each of the remaining
Parcæ is comprehended by her. And Clotho indeed is allotted a superior,
but Atropos an inferior order. And on this account, Lachesis indeed
moves with both her hands, as giving completion in a greater and more
total manner to those things which are effected by them more partially.
But Clotho turns the spindle with her right, and Atropos with her
left hand, so far as the former indeed is the primary leader of the
energies, but the latter follows, and governs all things in conjunction
with the former. For in mortal animals, the right hand is the principle
of motion; and in wholes, the motion to the right is comprehensive of
the motion to the left hand. On this account, therefore, the triad
of the Fates, in the Laws and in the Republic, is divided by Plato
according to the same order, into first, middle, and last.

And not only in the before mentioned passages, but also at the end
of the fable, in which he leads the soul to the mortal place, and to
a polity the work of generation under the dæmon allotted to it as a
ruler, supernally from the heavens, and the summit of the universe,
he arranges souls under Lachesis as the first, under Clotho as the
second, and under Atropos as the third. And after these, when they
become perfectly situated under the throne of Necessity, he leads them
to the plain of Oblivion, and the river of Negligence. It is necessary,
therefore, either to disturb the descent of souls, and subvert the
continuity of remission, which the prefecture of the governing dæmon
affords to souls, or to assign to Lachesis a rank more elevated than
that of the other Parcæ; but to give to Clotho the second, and to
Atropos after the same manner the third rank. For the progression into
generation beginning from more perfect natures, and subsiding according
to a tendency to an earthly nature, originates indeed from Lachesis,
but ends in Atropos.

Farther still, the lots, and the paradigms of lives, are extended to
souls from the knees of Lachesis, through the prophet as a medium. And
as the fable before said that the whole spindle is turned on the knees
of Necessity, thus also it suspends the providence about partial souls
from the knees of Lachesis, who moves the universe perpetually with
her hands, as with more elevated powers, but in her knees possesses
subordinately the causes of the psychical periods. Hence the prophet
in a remarkable manner celebrates this daughter of the Goddess: “This
is the speech of the virgin Lachesis, the daughter of Necessity.” But
again, Clotho is said to weave things consequent to the elections made
by souls, and to distribute to each of them an appropriate destiny. And
after her, Atropos imparts to the webs the immutable and the definite,
giving completion to the end of the canons of the Fates, and to the
order which extends from the universe to us. If, therefore, Lachesis
energizes in souls prior to their election, and after their choice is
made, defines all the periods of them in the realms of generation, by
the most beautiful boundaries; but the other Parcæ after the election
made by souls, allot them what is convenient, and connect their lives
with the order of the universe, does it not appear that Lachesis
precedes Clotho and Atropos, and that they follow her, and together
with her give completion to their appropriate providence? Lachesis,
therefore, appears to possess the second dignity of a mother with
respect to the other Parcæ, and to be a certain monad co-arranged with
them, just as Necessity in an exempt manner comprehends the powers of
all of them. But the other Parcæ are proximately indeed perfected under
Lachesis, but still higher than her, under Necessity. Such, therefore,
is the order of them according to the narration of Plato.

The symbols, however, which the fable attributes to them, magnificently
celebrate their kingdoms. For their walking on the [celestial]
circles, signifies their exempt and separate dominion. But their
sitting on thrones, and not on the circles themselves, as the Sirens
do, indicates that the receptacles which are primarily illuminated
by them, are established above the celestial bodies. For a throne is
the vehicle and receptacle of those that are seated on it. And all
the participants of the participable Gods, are placed under them like
vehicles, and the [participable] Gods are eternally established in,
ride on, and energize through them. But the Fates being seated at equal
distances from each other, manifest the orderly separation of them,
their remission proceeding according to analogy, and the distribution
supernally derived to them from their mother. For from thence, that
which is arranged in progression, and that which is according to desert
in energies, are imparted to the Fates.

Moreover, the having a crown on their heads, signifies that their
summits are surrounded with a divine light, and that they are adorned
by prolific and undefiled causes, through which also they fill the
heavens with generative power, and immutable purity. But their being
invested with white garments evinces that all their externally
emitted reasons, and the lives which they propose to themselves, are
intellectual and luciform, and full of divine splendour. And the
garments indeed appear to indicate the essences which participate of
the Fates; but the thrones, the receptacles in the first firmaments.
For with us also, garments are proximately connected with our bodies;
but vehicles are apprehended to be more remote from us. This, however,
is assumed from another theology, from which we are instructed in the
orders that are above the inerratic sphere. But the assertion that
one of the Fates sings the past, another the present, and the third
the future, evinces that all their externally proceeding energies are
elegant and intellectual, and full of harmony. For the Fates perfect
the songs of the Sirens, and the very orderly and elegant motions of
the heavens, and fill all things with their hymns; calling forth indeed
the production of their mother into the universe, through intellectual
hymns, but converting all things to themselves through the harmonious
motion of wholes. All these particulars, however, sufficiently
demonstrate to us the perfect, undefiled, and supercelestial order of
the Fates.




                             CHAPTER XXIV.


It remains, therefore, for us to adduce the Parmenides as a witness of
the doctrine concerning these gods. For Plato in that dialogue most
clearly delivers the one peculiarity of them. For after the progression
of the assimilative orders, in which the similar and dissimilar
shine forth to the view from intellectual sameness and difference,
at one time indeed according to analogy, but at another according to
a generation which is different [from that of the other orders], and
difficult to be surveyed, he demonstrates that _the one_ touches
and does not touch,[62] both itself and other things. For all the
divine genera after the demiurgic monad double their energies or
they are naturally adapted to energize both towards themselves, and
other things, posterior to themselves, rejoicing in progressions,
being subservient to the providence of secondary natures, through the
will of their father, and calling forth his supernatural, impartible,
and all-perfect production, and communicating the streams of it to
secondary natures. Does not, therefore, this contact and division
with things subordinate, represent to us the liberated peculiarity?
For to touch, is an indication of alliance with us, and of a
co-arranged providence. But again, not to touch, is an indication of
a transcendency exempt and separate from mundane natures. In what has
been before said, therefore, we have demonstrated that a thing of this
kind pertains to the genus of the liberated Gods, who at one and the
same time come into contact with celestial natures, and are expanded
above them, and proceed to all things with an unrestrained energy,
and free from all habitude. On this account also, we have placed the
Fates in the supercelestial order. For Socrates says that they touch
the [celestial] circulations; and in the Cratylus he asserts that the
mundane Core (or Proserpine) who associates with Pluto, and administers
the whole of generation, comes into contact with a mutable essence, and
that through this contact she is called Pherephatta.

Farther still, in the Phædo, teaching us what the mode of the cathartic
life of souls is, he says “that the soul when it does not associate
with the body, comes into contact with [true] being.” Through all these
particulars, therefore, he indicates that contact is the work of an
inseparable providence, and of a co-arranged administration; but that
the negation of contact is the business of a prefecture, separate,
unrestrained, and exempt from the subjects of government. _The
one_, therefore, which touches and does not touch other things, is
conjoined with other things, and established above them. Hence, at one
and the same time it is allotted the power of things established above
the world, and of mundane natures. For being in the middle of both,
it comprehends in one the divided peculiarities of the extremes. And
moreover, it touches, and does not touch itself prior to other things;
because there are in it multitude, a separation of wholeness, and the
parts of wholeness, and a union collective of all the multitude. For
if it has proceeded from its principles, and if it energizes partibly,
it is various and multiform. For every progression diminishes indeed,
the powers of the proceeding natures, but increases the multitude
which is in them, and if it has not entirely proceeded, the uniform
nature of its essence shines forth to the view, at one and the same
time, with the multitude it contains. This genus of Gods, therefore, is
co-arranged with the mundane Gods, and transcends the subjects of its
government. It is also liberated, being separated from things which are
perfectly divided. Hence, if it is one and multitude, producing indeed
into secondary natures the many rivers of the fountains, but surpassing
partible allotments, it will at one and the same time touch and not
touch itself. On account of its separate union indeed, it is not in
want of contact; but on account of its progression into multitude, it
touches itself. “For it comprehends many things in itself, and touches
itself, so far as it is in itself,” says Parmenides.[1] In short, so
far as it is without contact, it is separate; but so far as it proceeds
from itself, and is again established in itself, it touches itself.
And so far indeed, as it is in other things, it comes into contact
with other things; but so far as it is uncoarranged with others, and
so far as it has not a co-ordinate number in them, it is separated
from them. At one and the same time therefore, this genus of Gods
is uniform and multiplied, and is uniformly varied. It also abides
and proceeds, and is participated by more imperfect natures, and is
imparticipable, existing prior to them. All these particulars, however,
are the elements of the supercelestial order, presenting to our view an
hypostasis mingled from perfectly divided peculiarities. And thus much
concerning the essence and hyparxis of these Gods, which Parmenides
exhibits to us in the above citation.

It is necessary, however, to assume from the things placed before us,
the causes of the generation of these Gods. Since it is demonstrated,
therefore, that these divinities are according to union itself
beyond all partible separation, and contact, they will have their
progression from _the one_. For union is thence derived to all things,
from the first unity, which is exempt from all multitude, and all
division. But in consequence of their having pre-assumed the power
of touching themselves, according to a subsistence in self they
derive their existence from the unpolluted Gods. For the subsistence
in self in the first of the intellectual fathers, was the symbol
of a cause inflexible, and which immutably sustains multitude from
secondary natures. If, therefore, this one touches itself, on account
of a subsistence in self, it establishes multitude in _the one_,
and contains parts in wholeness, on account of undefiled power in
progression. And in the intellectual fathers, indeed, a subsistence
in self primarily shines forth to the view, and comprehends contact
causally, as was demonstrated to us through the first hypothesis.
But in the liberated Gods, a subsistence in self is according to
participation. Contact, however, is in this one according to essence,
and is consubsistent with the multitude it contains.

Farther still, [_the one_] being in other things touches other things;
but not being co-arranged with them according to any common number, it
is separated from them. By this, therefore, Parmenides appears indeed
to form his reasoning from a subsistence in another; since that _the
one_ touches itself, was before demonstrated, through a subsistence in
itself. It is, however, wonderful that a subsistence in another is, in
the first progression,[64] superior to a subsistence in self, but in
the participation of the liberated Gods is subordinate to a subsistence
in self. For we say, that for a thing to come into contact, and be
co-arranged with other things, is in every respect more imperfect
than for it to convert multitude to itself. We must, therefore, say
that the liberated Gods have their progression from the demiurgic
and the assimilative order. Hence Parmenides does not say that _the
one_ is in another thing, but in other things. But other things are
primarily suspended from the [demiurgic] monad; but secondarily from
the assimilative Gods. The liberated Gods, therefore, from thence
receive their subsistence in others. For the demiurgic one being same
and different, imparts to them sameness and union exemptly. But the
assimilative one illuminates them with a separate similitude. But _the
one_ of the liberated Gods subsists now with others, so far as it is
co-arranged with them, and proximately presides over them. Again,
however, because it differs from the mundane unities, it is allotted
the whole of its appropriate number exempt from others. And thus other
things participating of no number which is common with this one, cannot
proximately participate of it. Hence the progression to the liberated
Gods, is from the first causes, and from causes that are arranged near
to them. For their progression is from _the one_; since as _the one_
is exempt from intelligibles, thus also the liberated Gods are exempt
from sensibles. And their progression is likewise from the undefiled
order. For they have not the disencumbered from any other source than
that of immutable power, and the demiurgic cause. Being likewise
generated from the assimilative Gods, they receive a communion with
other things, and from themselves they are established above others.
For they establish their appropriate number above the subsistence of
other things. And thus much concerning these Gods may be assumed from
the Parmenides. But we have elsewhere accurately explained the several
particulars relating to them, and there is no occasion to write the
same things in the present treatise [as we have there written].




                               BOOK VII.




                              CHAPTER I.


The mundane Gods, or those divinities who give completion to the
sensible world, are assigned the last order of deific progression, as
we are informed by Proclus in the preceding book. They also divide
the universe, and obtain perpetual allotments and receptacles in it,
and through these weave one and the best polity of the universe. Each
of the mundane genera likewise enjoy the energy of the liberated
governors of the universe, according to a measure adapted to each,
and especially such as are able to follow the powers of these Gods.
For in the Gods themselves we may perceive a twofold energy, the one
indeed being co-arranged with the subjects of their providential care,
but the other being exempt and separate. According, therefore, to
the first of these energies, the mundane Gods govern sensibles, and
convolve and convert them to themselves; but according to the other,
they follow the liberated Gods, and together with them are elevated
to an intelligible nature. The mundane Gods also perfectly unfold the
psychical peculiarity into light; and receive the illuminations of all
the divinities prior to them. Hence too, they rule over the universe
imitating the liberated Gods, adorn sublunary natures with forms, and
assimilate them to intellectual paradigms, imitating the ruling Gods.
They likewise pour forth the whole of the life which is inseparable
from body, from the one fountain of souls, establishing it as an image
of the life which is separate from a corporeal nature, and unite
themselves to this fountain.

Again, the world is said by Plato in the Timæus to be the image of the
eternal, i.e. of the intelligible Gods. For it is filled from them
with deity, and the progressions into it of the mundane Gods, are as
it were certain rivers and illuminations of the intelligible Gods.
These progressions also the world receives, not only according to the
celestial part of it, but according to the whole of itself. For in the
air, the earth and sea, there are advents of terrestrial, aquatic,
and aerial Gods. Hence the world is throughout filled with deity; and
on this account is according to the whole of itself the image of the
intelligible Gods. Not that it receives indeed these Gods themselves;
for images do not receive the exempt essences of the total Gods; but
illuminations poured from thence on the secondary orders, to the
reception of which they are commensurate.

Farther still, of the mundane Gods, some are the causes of the
existence of the world; others animate it; others again harmonize
it thus composed of different natures; and others, lastly, guard
and preserve it when harmonically arranged. And since these orders
are four, and each consists of things first, middle and last, it is
necessary that the disposers of these should be twelve. Hence Jupiter,
Neptune, and Vulcan, fabricate the world; Ceres, Juno and Diana animate
it; Mercury, Venus, and Apollo harmonize it; and lastly, Vesta,
Minerva, and Mars, preside over it with a guardian power. But the truth
of this may be seen in statues as in enigmas. For Apollo harmonizes the
lyre; Pallas is invested with arms; and Venus is naked; since harmony
generates beauty, and beauty is not concealed in objects of sensible
inspection. Since, however, these Gods primarily possess the world, it
is necessary to consider the other mundane Gods as subsisting in these;
as Bacchus in Jupiter, Esculapius in Apollo, and the Graces in Venus.
We may likewise, behold the spheres with which they are connected; viz.
Vesta with earth, Neptune with water, Juno with air, and Vulcan with
fire. But the six superior Gods we denominate from general custom. For
Apollo and Diana are assumed for the sun and moon; but the orb of
Saturn is attributed to Ceres; æther to Pallas; and heaven is common
to them all. And thus much concerning the mundane Gods in general, the
sources of their progression, their orders, powers, and spheres.[65]




                              CHAPTER II.


The division, however, of the mundane Gods is into the celestial and
sublunary. And of the celestial, the divinity of the inerratic sphere
has the relation of a monad to the divinities of the planets. But
the triad under this monad consists of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars; of
which the first is the cause of connected comprehension, the second of
symmetry, and the third of division and separation. And again, with
respect to the sublunary deities, the moon ranks as a monad, being
the cause of all generation and corruption. But the triad under it,
consists of the divinities who preside over the elements of air, water
and earth. Between these are the planets that revolve with an equal
velocity. And of these, the sun indeed unfolds truth into light, Venus
beauty, and Mercury the symmetry of reasons or productive principles,
conformably to the analogy of the three monads mentioned by Plato in
the Philebus, as subsisting in the vestibule of _the good_. It may
also be said that the moon is the cause of nature to the mortal genera,
being the visible image of the fontal nature existing in the goddess
Rhea. But the sun is the fabricator of all the senses, because he is
the author of seeing and of being seen. Mercury is the cause of the
motions of the phantasy; for the sun gives subsistence to the essence
of the phantasy, so far as it is the same with sense. But Venus is
the cause of the appetites of that irrational part of the soul which
is called desire; and Mars, of those irascible motions which are
conformable to nature. Jupiter also, is the common cause of all vital,
and Saturn of all gnostic powers. For all the irrational forms may be
divided into these. The causes, therefore, of these, are antecedently
comprehended in the celestial Gods, and in the spheres with which they
are connected.

The allotments also of the mundane Gods are conformable to the
divisions of the universe. But the universe is divided by demiurgic
numbers, viz. by the duad, triad, tetrad, pentad, hebdomad, and
dodecad. For after the one fabrication of things by the demiurgus,
the division of the universe into two parts, heaven and generation
(or the sublunary region), gives subsistence to twofold allotments,
the celestial and the sublunary. After this, the triad divides
the universe, to which Homer alludes when he says that Neptune is
allotted the hoary deep, Jupiter, the extended heavens, and Pluto, the
subterranean darkness. But after the triple distribution, the tetradic
follows, which gives a fourfold arrangement to the elements in the
universe, as the Pythagoreans say, viz. the celestial and the ethereal,
above the earth and under the earth. The universe also receives a
division into five parts. For the world is one and quintuple, and
is appropriately divided by celestial, empyreal, aerial, aquatic
and terrestrial figures and presiding Gods. After this follows its
division into seven parts. For the heptad beginning supernally from the
inerratic sphere, pervades through all the elements. And in the last
place is the division of the universe by the dodecad, viz. into the
sphere of the fixed stars, the spheres of the seven planets, and the
spheres of the four elements.

Moreover, the allotment of angels and dæmons is co-suspended from
the divine allotments, but has a more various distribution. For one
divine allotment comprehends in itself many angelic, and a still
greater number of dæmoniacal allotments; since every angel rules over
many dæmons, and every angelic allotment is surrounded with numerous
dæmoniacal allotments. For what a monad is in the Gods, that a tribe
is among dæmons. Here, therefore, instead of the triad we must assume
three compositions, and instead of the tetrad or dodecad, four or
twelve choirs following their respective leaders. And thus we shall
always preserve the higher allotments. For as in essences, powers and
energies, progressions generate multitude; thus also in allotments,
such as are first, have a precedency in power, but are diminished in
multitude, as being nearer to the one father of the universe, and the
whole and one providence which extends to all things. But secondary
allotments, have a diminution of power, but an increase of multitude.
And thus much concerning allotments in general.

Since, however, according to a division of the universe into two parts,
we have distributed allotments into the celestial and sublunary,
there can be no doubt what the former are, and whether they possess
an invariable sameness of subsistence. But the sublunary allotments
are deservedly a subject of admiration, whether they are said to be
perpetual or not. For since all things in generation are continually
changing and flowing, how can the allotments of the providential
rulers of them be said to be perpetual? For things in generation are
not perpetual. But if their allotments are not perpetual, how is it
possible to suppose that divine government can subsist differently at
different times? For an allotment is neither a certain separate energy
of the Gods, so that sublunary natures changing, we might say that
it is exempt and remains immutable, nor is it that which is governed
alone, so that no absurdity would follow from admitting that an
allotment is in a flowing condition, and is conversant with all-various
mutations; but it is a providential inspection, and unrestrained
government of divinity over sublunary concerns. Such being the doubts
with which this subject is attended, the following appears to be the
only solution of the difficulty.

We must say then, that it is not proper to consider all the natures
that are in generation and generation itself, as alone consisting of
things mutable and flowing, but that there is also something immutable
in these, and which is naturally adapted to remain perpetually the
same. For the interval which receives and comprehends in itself all the
parts of the world, and which has an arrangement through all bodies,
is immoveable, lest being moved it should require another place, and
thus should proceed from one receptacle to another ad infinitum. The
etherial vehicles also of divine souls with which they are circularly
invested, and which imitate the lives in the heavens, have a
perpetual essence, and are eternally suspended from these divine souls
themselves, being full of prolific powers, and performing a circular
motion, according to a certain secondary revolution of the celestial
orbs. And in the third place the wholeness (ολοτης) of the elements
has a permanent subsistence, though the parts are all-variously
corrupted. For it is necessary that every form in the universe should
be never failing, in order that the universe may be perfect, and that
being generated from an immoveable cause, it may be immoveable in its
essence. But every wholeness is a form; or rather it is that which it
is said to be through the participation of one all-perfect form.

And here we may see the orderly progression of the nature of bodies.
For the interval of the universe is immoveable according to every kind
of motion. But the vehicles of divine souls alone receive a mutation
according to place; for such a motion as this, is most remote from
essential mutation. And the wholeness of the elements admits in its
parts the other motions of bodies, but the whole remains perfectly
immutable. The celestial allotments also which proximately divide
the interval of the universe, co-distribute likewise the heavens
themselves. But those in the sublunary region, are primarily indeed
allotted the parts which are in the interval of the universe, but
afterwards they make a distribution according to the definite vehicles
of souls. And in the third place, they remain perpetually the same
according to the total parts of generation. The allotments of the Gods
therefore do not change, nor do they subsist differently at different
times; for they have not their subsistence proximately in that which
may be changed.

How therefore do the illuminations of the Gods accede to these? How
are the dissolutions of sacred rites effected? And how is the same
place at different times under the influence of different spirits?
May it not be said, that since the Gods have perpetual allotments,
and divide the earth according to divine numbers, similarly to the
sections of the heavens, the parts of the earth also are illuminated,
so far as they participate of aptitude. But the circulation of the
heavenly bodies, through the figures which they possess produce this
aptitude; divine illumination at the same time imparting a power more
excellent than the nature which is present to these parts of the earth.
This aptitude is also effected by nature herself as a whole inserting
divine impressions in each of the illuminated parts, through which they
spontaneously participate of the Gods. For as these parts depend on
the Gods, nature inserts in such of them as are different, different
images of the divinities. Times too co-operate in producing this
aptitude, according to which other things also are governed; the proper
temperature of the air; and in short, every thing by which we are
surrounded contributes to the increase and diminution of this aptitude.
When therefore conformably to a concurrence of these many causes, an
aptitude to the participation of the Gods is ingenerated in some one of
the natures which are disposed to be changed, then a certain divinity
is unfolded into light, which prior to this was concealed through
the inaptitude of the recipients; possessing indeed his appropriate
allotment eternally, and always extending the participation of
himself, similarly to illuminations from the sun, but not being always
participated by sublunary natures, in consequence of their inaptitude
to such participation. For as with respect to partial souls such as
ours, which at different times embrace different lives, some of them
indeed, choose lives accommodated to their appropriate Gods, but others
foreign lives, through oblivion of the divinities to whom they belong;
thus also with respect to sacred places, some are adapted to the power
which there receives its allotment, but others are suspended from a
different order. And on this account, as the Athenian guest in Plato
says, some places are more fortunate, but others more unfortunate.

The divine Iamblichus however, doubts how the Gods are said to be
allotted certain places according to definite times, as by Plato in the
Timæus, Minerva is said to have been first allotted the guardianship of
Athens, and afterwards of Sais. For if their allotment commenced from
a certain time, it will also at a certain time cease. For every thing
which is measured by time is of this kind. And farther still was the
place which at a certain time they are allotted, without a presiding
deity prior to this allotment, or was it under the government of other
Gods? For if it was without a presiding deity, how is it to be admitted
that a certain part of the universe was once entirely destitute of
divinity? How can any place remain without the guardianship of superior
beings? And, if any place is sufficient to the preservation of itself,
how does it afterwards become the allotment of some one of the Gods?
But if it should be said that it is afterwards under the government of
another God, of whom it becomes the allotment, this also is absurd.
For the second God does not divulse the government and allotment of
the former, nor do the Gods alternately occupy the places of each
other, nor dæmons change their allotments. Such being the doubts on
this subject, he solves them by saying that the allotments of the Gods
remain perpetually unchanged, but that the participants of them, at one
time indeed enjoy the beneficent influence of the presiding powers, but
at another are deprived of it. He adds that these are the mutations
measured by time, which sacred institutes frequently call the birth-day
of the Gods.[66]




                             CHAPTER III.


In the next place, it is necessary to observe of the mundane Gods
that they do not obtain the rank which they hold in the universe from
any habitude or arrangement towards bodies; for they are all of them
essentially liberated from body, unrestrained in their energies, and
have no proximity or alliance to a corporeal nature. For bodies are
ministrant to them, and are subservient to the generation of mutable
essences. Hence they are not in bodies, but rule over them externally;
so that they are not changed together with them. Farther still, they
impart from themselves to bodies, every good which they are capable
of receiving, but do not in return receive any thing from bodies; and
consequently they do not receive certain peculiarities from them.
For if indeed they had a subsistence like the habits of bodies, or
like material forms, or were corporeal after any other manner, it
might perhaps be possible for them to be transmuted together with
the differences of bodies. But if they antecedently subsist separate
from bodies, and are essentially unmingled with them, what reasonable
distinction can they derive from a corporeal nature? To which may be
added, that such an hypothesis makes bodies to be better than the
divine genera, if they afford a seat to more excellent causes, and
essentially insert in them characteristic peculiarities. He therefore,
who co-arranges the allotments and distributions of the governors with
the governed, will evidently ascribe authority and dominion to better
natures. For because the presiding powers possess such peculiarities,
on this account they chuse such an allotment, and give it essentially
a specific distinction; but the allotment itself is not assimilated to
the nature of the recipient.

With respect indeed to partial souls such as ours it is requisite to
admit that such as is the life which it emitted before it was inserted
in a human body, such also will be the organic body with which it is
connected, and such will be the nature consequent to it, and which
receives from the soul a more perfect life. But with respect to the
natures superior to man, and which have dominion as wholes, it must be
admitted, that inferior are produced in more excellent natures, bodies
in incorporeal essences, and fabrications in the fabricators of them,
and that being circularly comprehended in them, they are governed
according to invariable rectitude. The circulations therefore of the
celestial orbs are primarily inserted in the celestial circulations
of the etherial soul, in which they are perpetually inherent. And
the souls of the spheres being extended to the intellect which they
participate, are perfectly comprehended by, and are primarily generated
in it. Intellect also, both that which is partial, and that which
is universal, are comprehended in the more excellent genera. Since
therefore secondary natures are always converted to such as are first,
and superior natures as paradigms are the leaders of those that are
subordinate, both essence and form are derived from more excellent
beings to those of an inferior rank, and the latter are primarily
produced in the former, so as to derive from them order and measure,
and the properties by which they are characterized; while on the
contrary such properties do not flow from subordinate natures to such
as have a precedency and a greater dignity of essence.

In short, neither are the Gods held in subjection by certain parts
of the world, nor are terrestrial natures destitute of their
all-preserving influence; but superior powers at the same time that
they comprehend all things in themselves, are not comprehended
by any thing. And terrestrial natures having their very being in
the plenitudes of the Gods, when they become adapted to divine
participation, immediately prior to their own proper essence manifestly
possess the Gods which latently pre-subsisted in it.[67]

Farther still, divinity whether it is allotted certain portions of
the universe, such as the heavens or the earth, or sacred cities and
regions, or certain groves and sacred statues, illuminates all these
externally, viz. without any alliance to the things themselves, in
the same manner as the sun externally enlightens all things with its
rays; except that in the latter instance, the illuminating cause is
locally, but in the former is impassively, unextendedly, and in short
incorporeally external. As therefore, the solar light comprehends
in itself the illuminated objects, thus also the power of the Gods,
externally comprehends its participants. And as light is present with
the air, without being essentially mingled with it; which is evident
from no light remaining in the air, when once the illuminating source
has departed, though heat is present with it when that which heated
is entirely withdrawn; thus also the light of the Gods illuminates in
a separate manner, and being firmly established in itself, pervades
totally through all things. Indeed, this visible light of the sun, is
one, continued, and is every where the same whole, so that it is not
possible for any part of it to be separated and cut off from the rest,
nor to inclose it on all sides, nor divulge it from its source. After
the same manner therefore, the whole world being partible, is divided
about the one impartible light of the Gods. But this light is one
and every where the same whole, and is impartibly present to all the
natures that are able to partake of it. It likewise fills all things
through an all-perfect power, and bounds in itself wholes, by a certain
infinite causal transcendency; is every where united to itself, and
conjoins the terminations with the beginnings of things. But all heaven
and the world imitating this light, is circularly convolved, is united
to itself, conducts the elements in their circular motion, causes all
things to be in, and tend to each other, and ends to have juxtaposition
with their principles, and produces one connexion and consent of wholes
with wholes.

He therefore who surveys this visible image of the Gods (the world)
thus united in itself, will be ashamed to have a different opinion
of the Gods the causes of it, and to introduce in them divisions,
obstructions, and corporeal circumscriptions. For if there is no ratio,
no habitude of symmetry, no communion of essence, no connexion either
according to power or energy, between the adorning cause and adorned
effect; if this be the case, in the former there is neither a certain
extension according to interval, nor any local comprehension, or any
partible interception, nor any other similar innate equalization in
the manner in which the Gods are present. For in things which are of
a kindred nature either according to essence or power, or which are
in a certain respect similar in species, or homogeneous, a certain
mutual comprehension or retention may be perceived; but what coercion,
or transition through the universe, or partible circumscription, or
local comprehension, or any thing else of the like kind can there be in
natures perfectly exempt from the whole of things? For the participants
indeed of the divinities are such, that some of them participate
etherially, others aerially, and others aquatically of a divine
nature. And this the ancients perceiving, employed in their divine
operations, adaptations and invocations, conformably to a division of
this kind. And thus much concerning the distribution of the Gods in the
world.[68]




                              CHAPTER IV.


If, however, the mundane as well as the supermundane Gods are
incorporeal, it may be asked how the visible celestial orbs can be
Gods? To this we reply, that the celestial Gods are not comprehended
by bodies, but that they contain bodies in their divine lives and
energies; that they are not converted to body, but that the body
which is suspended from their essence is converted to a divine cause;
and that body is no impediment to their intellectual and incorporeal
perfection, and is not the cause of any molestation to them by its
intervention. Hence it does not require an abundant care and attention,
but spontaneously and after a certain manner self-motively follows
the divinities with which it is connected, not being in want of any
manuduction, but by its elevation to the one of the Gods, is also
itself uniformly raised by itself.

Indeed, a celestial body is allied in the most eminent degree to the
incorporeal essence of the Gods. For as the latter is characterized
by unity, so the former is simple. As that is impartible, this is
indivisible. And as that is immutable, this after a similar manner is
unchanged in quality. If also it is admitted that the energies of the
Gods are uniform, this body likewise has one circulation. Besides this,
it imitates the sameness of the Gods, by its perpetual and invariable
motion according to, and towards the same things, conformably to one
reason and order. It likewise imitates the divine life of the Gods by
the life which is connascent with the ethereal bodies. Hence, neither
is a celestial body so constituted as if composed of contrary and
different natures, as is the case with our bodies; nor does the soul
of the celestial Gods so coalesce with the body suspended from it, as
to form one animal from the two; but the animals of these divinities
are perfectly similar and united to the Gods from whom they depend;
and are throughout whole, uniform, and free from all composition. For
more excellent natures always subsisting with invariable sameness in
themselves, but inferior being suspended from the dominion of superior
beings, yet so as never to draw down this dominion to themselves,
wholes likewise being collected into one order and one perfection,
and after a certain manner all things in the celestial Gods being
incorporeal and throughout divine, because the divine form universally
predominates in them,--this being the case, one total essence in the
nature of these divinities every where prevails. And thus the visible
celestial orbs are all of them Gods, and are after a certain manner
incorporeal.[69]

If, therefore, these divinities as being incorporeal, intellectual,
and united, ride as it were in the celestial spheres, they have their
origin in the intelligible world, and there intellectually perceiving
the divine forms of themselves, they govern the whole of heaven
according to one infinite energy. And if being present to the heavens
in a separate manner, they lead its perpetual circulations by their
will alone, they are themselves unmingled with a sensible nature, and
are consubsistent with the intelligible Gods. Indeed, the celestial
orbs, those visible statues as it were of the Gods, are generated from,
and subsist about, the intelligible Gods, and being thus generated
are established in them, and have the image elevated to them which
from them also receives its perfection. The divine intellectual forms
also which are present to the visible bodies of the Gods, have a
subsistence prior to them in a separate manner; but the unmingled and
supercelestial intelligible paradigms of them, abide in themselves,
containing all things simultaneously in one, according to the eternal
transcendency of their nature.

Hence there is one common indivisible bond of them according to
intellectual energies. There is also the same bond between them
according to the common participations of forms, since there is
nothing to intercept them, nor any intervening medium. Indeed, an
immaterial and incorporeal essence, being neither separated by places
nor subjects, nor defined by any divisible circumscriptions of parts,
immediately coalesces in sameness; and the elevation of wholes to _the
one_, and the universal dominion of _the one_, collects the communion
of the mundane Gods with the divinities that presubsist in the
intelligible world.

Farther still, the intellectual conversion of secondary to first
natures, and the gift of the same essence and power from the primary to
the secondary Gods connects their congress into an indissoluble one.
In things of different essences indeed, such as soul and body, and in
things of different species, such as material forms, and those natures
which in any other way are separated from each other, the connascent
union is adventitious, being derived from supernal causes, and lost
in certain definite periods of time. But the higher we ascend, to the
sameness of first causes, both according to form and according to
essence, and the more we raise ourselves from parts to wholes, by so
much the more shall we discover and survey that union which is eternal,
precedaneous and more principal, and which contains about and in itself
difference and multitude.

Since, however, the order of all the Gods consists in union, and the
first and second genera of them, and the multitude which germinates
about them coexist in unity; since also every thing in them is
characterized by _the one_; hence the beginning, middle, and end
of their essence consubsists according to _the one_. It is not
proper, therefore, to enquire whence unity extends to all things in
them; for their very being, whatever it may be, consists in _the
one_. And secondary genera indeed remain with invariable sameness
in _the one_ of the first genera. But the latter impart from
themselves union to the former; while all of them possess in each other
the communion of an indissoluble connexion.

From this cause, therefore, the perfectly incorporeal Gods, are united
to the sensible Gods who are connected with bodies. For the visible
Gods themselves are external to bodies, and on this account are in
the intelligible world. And the intelligible Gods on account of their
infinite union comprehend in themselves the apparent divinities; while
in the mean time both these are established according to a common union
and one energy. In a similar manner, this likewise is the illustrious
prerogative of a deific cause and orderly distribution, that the same
union of all things pervades from on high as far as to the end of the
divine order. And thus much concerning the contact of the sensible with
the intelligible Gods.[70]




                              CHAPTER V.


What has been above delivered concerning the mundane Gods is perfectly
conformable to the doctrine of Plato, as delivered by him in the
Timæus, in the speech[71] of the demiurgus to the junior Gods. For it
is there said, “When, therefore, all such Gods as visibly revolve,
and all such as become apparent when they please, were generated, he
who fabricated this universe thus addressed them: Gods of Gods, of
whom I am the demiurgus and father, whatever is generated by me is
indissoluble, such being my will in its fabrication. Indeed every thing
which is bound is dissoluble; but to be willing to dissolve that which
is beautifully harmonized and well composed is the property of an evil
nature. Hence, so far as you are generated, you are not immortal, nor
in every respect indissoluble, yet you shall never be dissolved, nor
become subject to the fatality of death; my will being a much greater
and more excellent bond than the vital connectives with which you were
bound at the commencement of your generation. Learn now, therefore,
what I say to you indicating my desire. Three genera of mortals yet
remain to be produced. Without the generation of these, therefore,
the universe will be imperfect; for it will not contain every kind of
animal in its spacious extent. But it ought to contain them, that it
may be sufficiently perfect. Yet if these are generated and participate
of life through me they will become equal to the Gods. That mortal
natures, therefore, may subsist, and that the universe may be truly
all, convert yourselves according to your nature to the fabrication
of animals, imitating the power which I employed in your generation.
And whatever among these is of such a nature as to deserve the same
appellation with immortals, which is called divine, obtains sovereignty
in them, and willingly pursues justice and reverences you,--of this
I myself will deliver the seed and beginning. It is your business
to accomplish the rest; to weave together the mortal and immortal
nature; by this mean fabricating and generating animals, causing them
to increase by supplying them with nutriment, and receiving them back
again when dissolved by corruption.”

As the commentary of Proclus on this speech most admirably unfolds
its recondite meaning, and is at the same time replete with the most
interesting information respecting the mundane Gods, I shall give the
following extracts from it, in which the most magnificent exuberance of
diction is combined with the greatest fecundity and scientific accuracy
of conception.

“The scope of this speech (says Proclus) is to insert demiurgic power
and providence in the mundane genera of Gods, to lead them forth to
the generation of the remaining kinds of animals, and to place them
over mortals, analogously to the father of wholes over the one orderly
distribution of the universe. For it is necessary that some things
should be primarily generated by the demiurgic monad, and others
through other media; the Demiurgus, indeed, producing all things from
himself, at once and eternally, but the things produced in order, and
first proceeding from him, producing together with him the natures
posterior to themselves. Thus, for instance, the celestial produce
sublunary Gods, and these generate mortal animals; the Demiurgus at
the same time fabricating these in conjunction with the celestial and
sublunary divinities. For in speaking he understands all things, and by
understanding all things he also makes the mortal genera of animals;
these requiring another proximate generating cause, so far as they
are mortal, and through this receiving a progression into being. But
the character of the words is enthusiastic, shining with intellectual
intuitions, pure and venerable as being perfected by the father of the
Gods, differing from and transcending human conceptions, delicate and
at the same time terrific, full of grace and beauty--at once concise
and perfectly accurate. Plato, therefore, particularly studies these
things in the imitations of divine speeches; as he also evinces in the
Republic, when he represents the Muses speaking sublimely, and the
prophet ascending to a lofty seat. He also adorns both these speeches
with conciseness and venerableness, employing the accurate powers of
colons, directly shadowing forth divine intellections through such a
form of words. But in the words before us he omits no transcendency
either of the grand and robust in the sentences and the names
adapted to these devices, or of magnitude in the conceptions and the
figures which give completion to this idea. Besides this, also, much
distinction and purity, the unfolding of truth, and the illustrious
prerogatives of beauty, are mingled with the idea of magnitude, this
being especially adapted to the subject things, to the speaker, and to
the hearers. For the objects of this speech are, the perfection of the
universe, an assimilation to all-perfect animal [i.e. to its paradigm],
and the generation of all mortal animals; the maker of all things, at
the same time, presubsisting and adorning all things through exempt
transcendency; but the secondary fabricators adding what was wanting
to the formation of the universe. All, therefore, being great and
divine, as well the persons as the things, and shining with beauty and
a distinction from each other, Plato has employed words adapted to the
form of the speech.

“Homer, also, when energizing enthusiastically, represents Jupiter
speaking, converting to himself the two-fold co-ordinations of Gods;
becoming himself, as it were, the centre of all the divine genera in
the world, and making all things obedient to his intellection. But
at one time he conjoins the multitude of Gods with himself without a
medium, and at another through Themis as the medium.

    But Jove to Themis gives command to call
    The Gods to council.

“This Goddess pervading everywhere collects the divine number, and
converts it to the demiurgic monad. For the Gods are both separate
from mundane affairs, and eternally provide for all things, being at
the same time exempt from them through the highest transcendency, and
extending their providence everywhere. For their unmingled nature
is not without providential energy, nor is their providence mingled
with matter. Through transcendency of power they are not filled
with the subjects of their government, and through beneficent will,
they make all things similar to themselves; in permanently abiding,
proceeding, and in being separated from all things, being similarly
present to all things. Since, therefore, the Gods that govern the
world, and the dæmons the attendants of these, receive after this
manner unmingled purity, and providential administration from their
father; at one time he converts them to himself without a medium, and
illuminates them with a separate, unmingled, and pure form of life.
Whence also I think he orders them to be separated from all things,
to remain exempt in Olympus, and neither convert themselves to Greeks
nor Barbarians; which is just the same as to say, that they must
transcend the two-fold orders of mundane natures, and abide immutably
in undefiled intellection. But at another time he converts them to a
providential attention to secondary natures, through Themis, and calls
upon them to direct the mundane battle, and excites different Gods
to different works. These divinities, therefore, especially require
the assistance of Themis, who contains in herself the divine laws,
according to which providence is intimately connected with wholes.
Homer, therefore, divinely delivers two-fold speeches, accompanying
the two-fold energies of Jupiter; but Plato, through this one speech,
comprehends those two-fold modes of discourse. For the Demiurgus
renders the Gods unmingled with secondary natures, and causes them to
provide for, and give existence to, mortals. But he orders them to
fabricate in imitation of himself: and in an injunction of this kind,
both these are comprehended, viz. the unmingled through the imitation
of the father, for he is separate, being exempt from mundane wholes;
but providential energy, through the command to fabricate, nourish, and
increase mortal natures. Or rather, we may survey both in each; for
in imitating the demiurgus, they provide for secondary natures, as he
does for the immortals; and in fabricating they are separate from the
things fabricated. For every demiurgic cause is exempt from the things
generated by it; but that which is mingled with and filled from them is
imbecil and inefficacious, and is unable to adorn and fabricate them.
And thus much in common respecting the whole of the speech.

“Let us then, in the first place, consider what we are to understand by
“Gods of Gods,” and what power it possesses: for that this invocation
is collective and convertive of multitude to its monad, that it calls
upwards the natures which have proceeded to the one fabrication of
them, and inserts a boundary and divine measure in them, is clear to
those who are not entirely unacquainted with such-like discourses. But
how those that are allotted the world by their father are called Gods
of Gods, and according to what conception, cannot easily be indicated
to the many; for there is an unfolding of one divine intelligence in
these names.” Proclus then proceeds to relate the explanations given
by others of these words; which having rejected as erroneous, he very
properly, in my opinion, adopts the following, which is that of his
preceptor, the great Syrianus. “All the mundane Gods are not simply
Gods, but they are wholly Gods which participate: for there is in them
that which is separate, unapparent, and supermundane, and also that
which is the apparent image of them, and has an orderly establishment
in the world. And that, indeed, which is unapparent in them is
primarily a God, this being undistributed and one: but this vehicle
which is suspended from their unapparent essence is secondarily a God.
For if, with respect to us, man is two-fold, one inward, according to
the soul, the other apparent, which we see, much more must both these
be asserted of the mundane Gods; since divinity also is two-fold, one
unapparent and the other apparent. This being the case, we must say,
that “Gods of Gods” is addressed to all the mundane divinities, in whom
there is a connection of unapparent with apparent Gods: for they are
Gods that participate. In short, since two-fold orders are produced
by the Demiurgus, some being supermundane, and others mundane, and
some being without, and others with participation [of body], if the
Demiurgus now addressed the supermundane orders, he would have alone
said to them, “Gods:” for they are without participation [i.e. without
the participation of body], are separate and unapparent:--but since the
speech is to the mundane Gods, he calls them Gods of Gods, as being
participated by other apparent divinities. In these also dæmons are
comprehended; for they also are Gods, as to their order with respect
to the Gods, whose peculiarity they indivisibly participate. Thus also
Plato, in the Phædrus, when he calls the twelve Gods the leaders
of dæmons, at the same time denominates all the attendants of the
divinities Gods, adding, ‘and this is the life of the Gods.’ All these,
therefore, are Gods of Gods, as possessing the apparent connected with
the unapparent, and the mundane with the supermundane.




                              CHAPTER VI.


And thus much concerning the whole conception of the speech. It is
necessary, however, since we have said the words are demiurgic or
fabricative, that they should be received in a manner adapted to
demiurgic providence. But if these words are intellectual conceptions,
and the intellectual conceptions themselves are productions, what shall
we say the demiurgus effects in the multitude of mundane Gods by the
first words of his speech? Is it not evident we must say that this
energy of his is deific? For this one divine intellectual conception
which is the first and most simple proceeding from the demiurgus,
deifies all the recipients of it, and makes them demiurgic Gods,
participated Gods, and Gods unapparent, and at the same time apparent.
For this, as has been said, is the meaning of “Gods of Gods.” For
the term Gods is not alone adapted to them; since they are not alone
unapparent; nor the word Gods twice enunciated, as if some one should
say Gods and Gods; for every bond of this kind is artificial, and
foreign from divine union.

It is also necessary to observe that every mundane God has an animal
suspended from him, according to which he is denominated mundane. He
has likewise a divine soul, which rules over its depending vehicle; and
an immaterial and separate intellect, according to which he is united
to the intelligible, in order that he may imitate the world in which
all these are contained. And by the animal suspended from him, he is
indeed a part of the sensible universe; but by intellect he belongs to
an intelligible essence; and by soul he conjoins the impartible life
which is in him, with the life that is divisible about body. Such a
composition, however, being triple in each mundane God, neither does
Plato here deliver the demiurgus speaking to intellects; for intellects
subsist in unproceeding union with the divine intellect, and are
entirely unbegotten; but soul is the first of generated natures, and
a little after the demiurgus addresses these when he says, “since ye
are generated.” Nor does he represent the demiurgus as speaking only
to the animals which are suspended from the souls of these Gods; for
they pertain to corporeal natures, and are not adapted to enjoy the one
demiurgic intelligence, without a medium. Nor yet does he represent him
as speaking to souls by themselves; for they are entirely immortal;
but the Gods whom he now addresses are said by him not[72] to be in
every respect immortal. If therefore it be requisite for me to say
what appears to me to be the truth, the words of the demiurgus are
addressed to the composite from soul and animal, viz. to the animal
which is divine, and partakes of a soul. For intellect does not know
the demiurgic will through reason, but through intelligence, or in
other words, through intellectual vision; nor through conversion, but
through a union with that intellect which ranks as a whole, as being
itself intellect, and as it were of the same colour with it. But soul
as being reason, and not intellect itself, requires appropriately
to its essence the energy of reason, and a rational conversion to
the intelligible.[73] To these, therefore, as being essentially
rational, and as being essentialized in reasons, the demiurgic speech
proceeds. And it is adapted to them in a twofold respect; first, as
being participated by bodies; for they are Gods of those Gods; and
secondly, as participating of intellects; for they are Gods of [viz.
derived from] intellects which are also Gods. And they participate of
intellects, and are participable by bodies. Hence the assertions that
they are generated, and that they are not entirely immortal, and every
thing else in the speech, are appropriately adapted to them, so far as
they have a certain co-ordination and connexion with mundane natures,
and so far as they are participated by them. But the mandates “learn
and generate,” and every thing else of this kind which is more divine
than generated natures, are adapted to them as intellectual essences.

Let us in the next place attend to the meaning of the words, “Of
whom I am the demiurgus and father, whatever is generated by me is
indissoluble, such being my will in its fabrication.” Plato then
appears to give a triple division to the energy of the one demiurgus
in his production of the junior Gods, viz. a division into the deific,
into that which imparts connexion and into that which supplies a
similitude to animal itself. For the address of the demiurgus evinces
those to be Gods that proceed from him. But the assertions respecting
the indissoluble and dissoluble, by defining the measure of a medium
between these, impart a distribution and connexion commensurate to
the order of the mundane Gods. And the words calling on them to
the fabrication of mortal natures, cause them to be the sources of
perfection to the universe, and the fabricators of secondary animals,
conformably to the imitation of the paradigm. But through these three
energies the demiurgus elevates his offspring to all the intelligible
Gods, and establishes them in the intelligible triads. In the one being
indeed, [or the summit of these triads] through the first of these
energies; for that is primarily deified, in which _the one_ is deity,
but _being_ is the first participant of it. For _the one itself_ is
alone deity, without habitude to any thing, and is not participable;
but _the one being_ in which there is the first participation is God
of God. And being is deity as the summit of all things; but _the
one_ of it is deity as proceeding from _the one_ itself, which is
primarily God. But through the second of these energies the demiurgus
establishes his offspring in the second of the intelligible triads,
i.e. in eternity itself. For eternity is the cause of this indissoluble
permanency to every thing which continues perpetually undissolved.
Hence all mundane natures are bound according to the demiurgic will,
and have something of the indissoluble through the participation of
him; the natures which are primarily indissoluble being different from
these, and those that are truly immortal subsisting for his sake.
And he establishes them in all-perfect animal [or the third of the
intelligible triads] through the third of these energies. For to this
the vivific assimilates the mundane Gods, and inserts in them the
paradigms of animals which they generate. And this, indeed, will be
one scope of generation, the converting and perfecting the proceeding
multitude of the Gods. But after the one there will be a triple design,
which establishes them in the three intelligible orders.

This second demiurgic intelligence, therefore, after the first which
is deific, illuminates the mundane Gods with a firm establishment, an
immutable power, and an eternal essence, through which the whole world,
and all the divine allotments subsist always the same, participating
through the father of an immutable nature and undecaying power.
For every thing which is generated from an immoveable cause, is
indissoluble and immutable; but all the progeny of a moveable cause
are moveable. Hence among mundane natures, such as proceed from the
demiurgic cause alone, in consequence of being generated according to
an invariable sameness are permanent, and are exempt from every mutable
and variable essence. But such as proceed both from this cause, and
from other moveable principles, are indeed immutable so far as they
proceed from the demiurgus, but mutable so far as they proceed from
the latter. For those natures which the demiurgus alone generates,
these he fabricates immutable and indissoluble, both according to their
own nature, and according to his power and will. For he imparts to
them a guardian and preserving power, and he connects their essence
in a manner transcendent and exempt. For all things are preserved in
a twofold respect, from the power which he contains, and from his
providential goodness, which is truly able and willing to preserve
every thing which may be lawfully perpetually saved. The most divine of
visible natures therefore, are, as we have said, from their own nature
indissoluble; but they are likewise so from the demiurgic power which
pervades through all things, and eternally connects them. For this
power is the guard and the divine law which connectedly contains all
things. But a still greater and more principal cause than these is the
demiurgic will which employs this power in its productions. For what
is superior to goodness, or what bond is more perfect than this, which
imparts by illumination union, connects an eternal essence, and is
the bound and measure of all things; to which also the demiurgus now
refers the cause of immutable power, saying, “such being my will in its
fabrication.” For he established his own will as a guard over his own
proper works, as that which gives union, connexion and measure to the
whole of things.

Who the demiurgus, however, is, and who father is, has been unfolded by
us before, and will be now also concisely shown. There are then these
four; father alone; maker alone; father and maker; maker and father.
And father indeed is æther [or bound] being the first procession from
_the one_. Father and maker is the divinity who subsists according
to the intelligible paradigm [at the extremity of the intelligible
order,] and whom Orpheus says, the blessed Gods call Phanes Protogonus.
But maker and father is Jupiter, who is now called by himself the
demiurgus, but whom the Orphic writers would call the father of works.
And maker alone, is the cause of partible fabrication,[74] as the
same writers would say. To father alone, therefore, all intelligible,
intellectual, supermundane and mundane natures are in subjection. To
father and maker, all intellectual, supermundane, and mundane natures
are subordinate. To maker and father who is an intellectual deity,
supermundane and mundane natures are subservient. But to maker alone,
mundane natures alone are in subjection. And all these particulars we
learn from the narration of Orpheus; for according to each peculiarity
of the four there is a subject multitude of Gods.




                             CHAPTER VII.


In the next place, the demiurgus says: “Every thing, therefore, which
is bound is dissoluble, but to be willing to dissolve that which is
beautifully harmonized and well composed, is the province of an evil
nature.” It is requisite then to consider how the dissoluble and
indissoluble are asserted of the Gods, and to conjoin proper modes of
solution with appropriate bonds. For every thing is not bound after
a similar manner, nor is that which is bound in one way, dissolved
in different ways. But that which is in a certain respect bound, has
also its dissolution according to this mode. That which is in every
respect bound, is likewise in every respect dissolved. And that which
is bound by itself is also by itself dissolved. But that which is bound
by something different from itself, has also on that its dissolution
depending. That likewise which is bound in time, is also dissolved
according to time. But that which is allotted a perpetual bond, must
also be said to be perpetually dissolved. For in short, dissolution
is conjoined with every bond. For a bond is not union without
multitude; since _the one_ does not require a bond. Nor is it an
assemblage of many and different things, no longer preserving their
characteristic peculiarities. For a thing of this kind is confusion;
and that which results from them is one thing, consisting of things
corrupted together, but does not become bound. For it is necessary
that things that are bound should remain as they are, but not be bound
when corrupted. Hence a bond then alone takes place, when there are
many things, and which are preserved, having one power connective and
collective of them, whether this power be corporeal or incorporeal. If
this, however, be the case, things that are bound are united through
the bond, and separated, because each preserves its own proper nature.

Every where, therefore, as we have said, a bond has also dissolution
connected with it. Bonds, however, and their dissolutions differ in
subsisting in a certain respect, and simply, from themselves, and
from others, according to time, and perpetually. For in these their
differences consist. We must not, therefore, wonder if the same thing
is both dissoluble and indissoluble; and if it is in a certain respect
indissoluble, and in a certain respect dissoluble. So that the works
of the father, if they are indeed indissoluble, are so, as not to
be dissolved according to time. But they are dissoluble, as having
together with a bond, a separation of the simple things of which they
consist, according to the definite causes of things that are bound,
existing in him that binds. For as that which is self-subsistent is
said to be so in a twofold respect, one, as supplying all things from
itself alone, but another, as subsisting indeed from itself, and also
from another which is the cause of it, thus also the indissoluble is
so, from another,[75] and from itself; just as that which is moved is
twofold, and subsists in a similar manner.

To these two modes, however, two modes of dissolution are also opposed;
viz. that which is dissoluble from another and from itself is opposed
to that which is indissoluble from another and from itself. And this,
indeed, is dissoluble in itself, as consisting of things that are
separate. But in consequence of having in something else prior to
itself the causes of its subsistence, by this cause, and according to
this mode alone it becomes dissoluble. Again, that which is simply
dissoluble in a twofold respect, and which contains in itself the cause
of its dissolution, and also receives it from another, is opposed to
that which is simply indissoluble in a twofold respect, from itself and
from another. These, therefore, are four in number, viz. that which
is simply indissoluble from another and from itself. And again, that
which is indissoluble after a certain manner in a twofold respect; that
which is dissoluble after a certain manner in a twofold respect; and
that which is dissoluble simply from itself, and from another.[76] Of
these four, however, the first pertains to intelligibles; for they are
indissoluble, as being entirely simple, and receiving no composition
or dissolution whatever. But the fourth belongs to mortal natures,
which are dissoluble from themselves and from others, as consisting of
many things, and being composed by their causes in such a way, as to
be at a certain time dissolved. And the middles pertain to the mundane
Gods; for the second and the third of these four concur with them.
For after a certain manner, these as being the works of the father
are indissoluble; and they are saved from themselves and through his
will. And again, they are in a certain respect dissoluble, because they
are bound by him; and he contains the productive principle of those
simple natures from which they are composed. Every thing, therefore,
which is bound is dissoluble; and this is also the case with the works
of the father. For these are, all bodies, the composition of animals,
and the number of participated souls. But intellects which ride as
it were in souls as in a vehicle, cannot be called the works of the
father; for they were not generated, but were unfolded into light in
an unbegotten manner, as if fashioned within the adyta of his essence,
and not proceeding out of them. For there are no paradigms of these,
but of middle and last natures; since soul is the first of images. But
the wholes such as animals, the participants of soul and intellect,
and generated natures, derive their subsistence from intellectual
paradigms, of which animal itself is the comprehending cause.

Bodies, therefore, are bound through analogy; for this is the most
beautiful bond of them. But animals are bound with animated bonds.
And souls which contain something of a partible nature are bound by
media, [viz. by geometrical, arithmetical and harmonical ratios;] for
Plato calls these and all the productive principles of which the soul
consists, bonds. Hence the indissoluble in the mundane Gods subsists
according to nature; for each of them is generated indissoluble; such
being the works of the father through the power, which he contains.
They are also indissoluble from the demiurgic will, since they are of a
composite nature, and possess the indissoluble with a bond. But there
is likewise in a certain respect a dissolution of them, so far as they
consist of things of a simple nature, of which the father contains in
himself the definite causes. At one and the same time, therefore, they
are indissoluble and dissoluble. They are not, however, so indissoluble
as the intelligible; for that is indissoluble through transcendency
of simplicity. But these are at the same time indissoluble and
dissoluble, as consisting of simple natures, and as being perpetually
bound. For all the natures that are bound being dissoluble, such as
are perpetual, possessing through the whole of time, beauty from the
intelligible, divine union, and demiurgic harmony, are indissoluble.
But mortal natures are dissoluble alone, because they are connected
with the deformity and inaptitude of matter. And the former indeed are
beautifully harmonized through the union inserted in them by their
harmonizing cause; but this is not the case with the latter, on account
of the multitude of causes which no longer insert in them a similar
union;[77] for their union is dissipated through the multitude which is
mingled in their composition: so that they are very properly allotted a
remitted[78] harmony.

Hence, every thing which is bound is dissoluble. But one thing is
thus dissoluble and indissoluble, and another is dissoluble only,
just as the intelligible is alone indissoluble. Why, therefore, is
that which is primarily bound at one and the same time dissoluble
and indissoluble? Because it is _beautifully_ harmonized, and is
_well_ composed. For from being _well_ composed it obtains union;
since _goodness_ is unific. But from the intelligible it obtains the
_beautifully_; for from thence beauty is derived. And from fabricating
power it obtains _harmony_; for this is the cause of the Muses, and
is the source of harmonical arrangement to mundane natures. Hence
we again have the three causes, the final through the _well_, the
paradigmatic through the _beautifully_; and the demiurgic through the
_harmonized_.[79] But it is necessary that a composition of this kind,
harmonized by the one fabricating power, filled with divine beauty, and
obtaining a boniform union, should be indissoluble; for the demiurgus
says, that to dissolve it is the province of an evil nature.

Moreover, prior to this Plato had said, that the universe is
indissoluble except by him by whom it was bound. If, however, it is
entirely impossible for the universe to be dissolved by any other,
but the father alone is able to dissolve it, and it is impossible for
him to effect this, for it is the province of an evil nature,--it
is impossible for the universe to be dissolved. For either he must
dissolve it, or some other. But if some other, who is it that is
able to offer violence to the demiurgus? For it is impossible that
a dissolution of it should be effected, except by him that bound it.
But if he dissolves it, how being good, can he dissolve that which is
beautifully harmonized and well composed. For that which is subversive
of these, is productive of evil; just as that which is subversive
of evil is allotted a beneficent nature. Hence, there is an equal
necessity that the demiurgus should be depraved, if it be lawful so
to speak, or that this world should be dissolved, [viz. each of these
is equally impossible.] Such, therefore, is the necessity which Plato
assigns to the incorruptibility of the universe. Hence, that Plato
gives the indissoluble to the composition of the mundane Gods, he
clearly manifests when he orders them to bind mortal natures, not with
those indissoluble bonds with which they are connected. For if the
connective bonds of these Gods are indissoluble, they themselves must
be essentially indissoluble. Here, however, he says that they are not
in every respect indissoluble. It is evident, therefore, from both
these assertions, that they are indissoluble, and at the same time
dissoluble,[80] and that they are not in every respect indissoluble,
in consequence of their being appropriately bound. But if these things
are true, there is every necessity that the dissolution of them
should be very different from that which we call corruption. For that
which is dissoluble after such a manner as the corruptible, not being
indissoluble, is so far from being not in every respect indissoluble,
that it is in every respect dissoluble. Hence it is not proper to
say that the mundane Gods are of themselves corruptible, but remain
incorruptible through the will of the father; but we ought to say that
they are in their own nature[81] incorruptible.




                             CHAPTER VIII.


In the next place let us attend to the meaning of the following part
of the speech of the demiurgus to the mundane Gods, as beautifully
unfolded by Proclus: “Hence so far as you are generated, you are not
immortal, nor in every respect indissoluble, yet you shall never be
dissolved, nor become subject to the fatality of death; my will being
a much greater and more excellent bond than the vital connectives
with which you were bound at the commencement of your generation.”
Since all the mundane Gods to whom these words are addressed consist
of divine souls, and animals suspended from them, or in other words,
since they are participated souls, and since the demiurgus denominates
them indissoluble and at the same time dissoluble, in the way above
explained, he now wishes to collect in one point of view, and into one
truth, all that he had said separately about them. For at one and the
same time he takes away from them the immortal and the indissoluble,
and again confers these on them through a subversion of their
opposites. For media are allotted this nature, not receiving the nature
of the extremes, and appearing to comprehend the whole of both. Just
as if some one should call the soul impartible and at the same time
partible, as consisting of both, and neither impartible, nor partible,
as being different from the extremes. For see how a middle of this kind
may be surveyed in the mundane Gods.

That is principally and primarily called immortal, which supplies
itself with immortality; since that also is primarily being which
is being from itself; intellect which is intellect from itself; and
one which is from itself one. For every where that which primarily
possesses any thing is such from itself; since if it were not so
from itself but from another, that other would be primarily, either
intellect, or life, or _the one_, or something else; and either
this would be primarily so, or if there is nothing primarily, the
ascent will be to infinity. Thus therefore, that is truly immortal,
which is immortal from itself, and which imparts to itself immortality.
But that which is neither vital according to the whole of itself,
nor self-subsistent, nor possesses immortality from itself, is not
primarily immortal. Hence as that which is secondarily being is not
being, so that which is secondarily immortal is not immortal, yet it
is not mortal; for this is entirely a defection or departure from the
immortal, neither possessing a connascent life, nor infinite power. For
these three are in a successive order: That which possesses from itself
infinite life; that which receives infinite life from another; and that
which neither from itself nor another exhibits the infinity of life.
And the first indeed, is immortal; the second is not immortal; the
third is mortal; and the mean is adapted to the mundane Gods. For they
neither have the immortal from themselves, so far as they derive it
from that which is truly and primarily immortal, and so far as bodies
are suspended from them; nor have they a finite life; but they are
filled indeed from the eternal Gods, and produce mortal natures. For
the second fabrication is connected with the first, proceeds about it,
is governed by it, and refers to it the production of the mortal genera.

Again, with respect to the indissoluble, that which is principally and
primarily so is simple and free from all composition. For where there
is no composition what representation can there be of dissolution? But
that is secondarily indissoluble, which is indissoluble with a bond;
which is at the same time dissoluble in consequence of proceeding
from divided causes. For it is not simply dissoluble, but dissoluble
by its cause. For that which is bound prior to all time, is alone
bound according to cause; but that which is alone causally bound, is
alone causally dissolved. And the third from that which is properly
indissoluble, is that which was indissoluble for a certain time;
because the first indeed, is properly indissoluble in conjunction
with simplicity; but the second is subordinately so, together with
composition: and the third, falling off from both, is in its own nature
dissoluble.

Neither therefore, are the mundane Gods entirely indissoluble; for this
pertains to the most simple natures. Nor are they dissoluble according
to time; for the composition of them proceeds from the demiurgic
union. As therefore in the cause union precedes things of a simple
nature, after the same manner here also, a bond precedes dissolution;
for it is more excellent, and the resemblance of a more divine power.
And this is seen in souls; for there were bonds and media in them,
as has been before observed in the generation of the soul. It is
also seen in bodies; for analogy is a bond. And likewise in animals;
for being bound with animated bonds they became animals. Hence, the
immortal and the indissoluble, do not entirely pertain to the mundane
Gods; yet at the same time they do pertain to them. And because they
are not in every respect present with them nor in such a manner as
in intelligibles, immortality must be taken from them. For in the
Banquet also, Plato does not think fit to call Love immortal, yet he
does not denominate it mortal; but asserts it to be something between
both these. For there is a great extent of the mortal and immortal,
and they are bound together by many media. It appears likewise, with
respect to the immortal, that one kind of it is common to all the
beings that differ from a mortal nature,[82] and which consists in not
being deprived of the life which it possesses. According to this sense
of the word, Plato says that the demiurgus is the cause of immortal
natures, but the junior Gods, of such as are mortal. But another kind
of the immortal is the peculiarity of intelligibles, being eternally
so. And another belongs to the mundane Gods, which is an immortality
perpetually rising into existence, and having its subsistence in always
becoming to be. Hence, it may be said that the immortal and mortal are
oppositely divided without a medium, if the common signification of
the immortal is assumed; and that they are not opposed to each other
without a medium, if that which is primarily immortal is considered;
and this is that which _is_ always immortal. For the medium between
this and the mortal, is that which is always _becoming to be_ immortal.
But that which is properly immortal possesses the whole of its life in
eternity. That however which has its life evolved through the whole
of time, and has not always one and the same indivisible life, this
possesses an immortality co-extended with the flux of generation, but
is not immortal according to the stability of being. And again, the
medium between the immortality of the mundane Gods and that of partial
souls, is that which has a life always rising into existence, and
which ascends and descends in intellectual energy, so as to be nearer
to mortal natures, leaving indeed a more excellent intellection, but
transferring itself into one that is subordinate, and again recurring
to its pristine condition without oblivion. And of these, the former
indeed, is the peculiarity of the mundane Gods; but the latter, of
dæmons the attendants on these Gods. But if the nature which remains
is filled with oblivion in descending, becomes most proximate to
mortals, entirely destroys the true life which it contains, and alone
possesses the essential life,--such an immortality as this belongs to
partial souls. Hence, the demiurgus in his speech calls the immortality
in these homonymous to that of the immortals. If however, there is
any nature after these which casts aside its essential life, this is
alone[83] mortal. Hence, the primarily immortal and the mortal are the
extremes. But the immortality of the mundane Gods, and that of partial
souls, are the sub-extremes. And the immortality which is truly the
medium between these, is that of dæmons. Hence too, dæmons are in
reality entirely of a middle nature.




                              CHAPTER IX.


After this, the demiurgus sublimely addresses the mundane Gods in the
following words: “Learn now therefore what I say to you indicating
my desire.” The first address to the mundane Gods, says Proclus, was
deific of or deified the auditors; for it evinced all of them to be
Gods, and to be participated by the bodies in which they ride. For
these very bodies also are Gods, as being the statues [as it were]
of Gods; since Plato likewise calls the earth the first and most
ancient of the Gods within the heavens. But these deified bodies
are participants of the Gods truly so called, from which they are
suspended, and which are prior to generation. For these bodies have,
as we have observed, generation. But the second address to the mundane
Gods, inserted in them an eternal power, through the participation of
an indissoluble connexion. And the present words fill them with divine,
and demiurgic conceptions, proceeding supernally from intelligible
animal [the paradigm of the universe.] For the being instructed in
the fabrication of animals, so far as it is mathesis or learning,
is adapted to soul. But these words fill the multitude of Gods with
the demiurgic intelligence of all the forms that are contained in
intelligible animal. And through the word _now_ indeed, the _eternal_
is after a manner indicated; through the word _what_ the united, and
convolved; through _I say_, that which proceeds into multitude, and is
disseminated about the many Gods; and through _indication_ a plenitude
derived from intelligible and unapparent causes is signified. For we
only _indicate_ in things unapparent to the multitude. But through all
the words together it is evident that the demiurgus establishes himself
analogous to intelligible intellect, and fills the mundane number
of Gods with intellectual conceptions. Farther still, these words
convert this multitude to the one demiurgic intelligence, and prior
to a providential attention to secondary natures, illuminate it with
unmingled purity, and stable intellection. For as the demiurgus makes
by energizing intellectually, and generates from inward, externally
proceeding energy, thus also he wishes the mundane Gods first to learn
and understand the will of their father, and thus afterwards to imitate
his power.

In the next place, the demiurgus says, “Three genera of mortals yet
remain to be produced. Without the generation of these therefore, the
universe will be imperfect; for it will not contain every kind of
animal in its spacious extent. But it ought to contain them that it may
be sufficiently perfect. Yet if these are generated and participate of
life through me they will become equal to the Gods.” On these words
Proclus observes: The most total, first, and most divine of ideas,
not only give subsistence to such mundane natures as are perpetual,
in an exempt manner, but likewise to all mortal natures, according to
one united cause. For the idea of winged natures which is there is the
paradigm of all winged animals whatever; the idea of the aquatic, of
all aquatic; and the idea of the pedestrial, of all pedestrial animals.
But the progressions of intelligibles into the intellectual orders,
become the sources of division to united ideas, produce into multitude
total causes, and unfold the definite principles of multiform natures.
For there is no longer in intelligibles one intellectual cause of all
aerial animals; since there is not a separate intellection of perpetual
animals of this kind; nor one intellectual cause of aquatic, nor in
a similar manner of terrestrial animals; but the power of difference
[in the intellectual order] minutely distributes the whole into parts,
and monads into numbers. Hence the causes of divine animals, according
to which the demiurgus gives subsistence to the orders of Gods and
dæmons that produce generation, exist in him separate from the causes
of mortal natures, according to which he calls on the junior Gods to
generate mortal animals. For the demiurgus precedes the generative
energy of these Gods, and makes by merely saying that a thing is to
be made. For the words of the father are demiurgic intellections, and
his intellections are creations; but a proximate making is adapted to
the multitude of Gods. And again you see how the order of effective
and generative causes is unfolded into light. For the choir of mundane
Gods produces indeed mortal animals, but in conjunction with motion and
mutation.[84] And the demiurgus also produces them but by speaking,
viz. by intellection. For he speaks indeed, intellectually perceiving,
and immoveably and intellectually. Animal itself also produces them;
for it contains the one cause of all winged, of all aquatic, and of all
terrestrial animals. But it produces them with silence, by its very
essence and intelligibly. For the demiurgic speech receives indeed the
paternal silence, but the intellectual production, the intelligible
cause, and the generation which subsists according to energizing, the
providence according to existence. Motion also receives the demiurgic
words, but the orderly distribution which is mingled with a sensible
nature, receives the intellectual energy. For the fabrications which
exist at the extremity of things require a producing cause of this
kind. Every thing therefore which is mutable, which is changed in
quality, which is generated and corruptible, is generated from a cause,
immoveable indeed according to essence, but moved according to energy.
For the motion which is there separated from essence, here produces an
essence which is moved. Hence, because that which makes, makes both
according to essence and according to energy, both which are as it were
woven together, mutation of essence thence derives its progression.
Mortal natures therefore require moveable causes, and those that
are very mutable, many such causes. For it is impossible that they
should remain only begotten; since the mortal genera would not have an
existence.

It is necessary however, that the mortal nature should exist, in the
first place, in order that every thing may have a subsistence which
is capable of being generated, viz. both perpetual beings, and those
which at a certain time cease to exist. For beyond these is that which
in no respect whatever is. In the next place this is necessary, in
order that divine natures and being may not be the last of things;
since that which is generative of any thing is more excellent and
more divine than the thing which it generates. And in the third place
it is necessary in order that the world may not be imperfect, not
comprehending every thing the causes of which are contained in animal
itself. For the ideas which are there, are the causes of every thing
whether divine or mortal. Hence Orpheus says that the vivific cause[85]
of partible natures, while she remained on high weaving the order of
celestials, was a nymph, as being undefiled, and in consequence of
this connected with Jupiter, and abiding in her appropriate manners;
but that proceeding from her proper habitation, she left her webs
unfinished, was ravished, having been ravished was married, and being
married generated, in order that she might animate things which have
an adventitious life. For the unfinished state of her webs indicates,
I think, that the universe is imperfect or unfinished as far as to
perpetual animals. Hence Plato says, that the one demiurgus calls on
the many demiurgi to weave together the mortal and immortal natures,
after a manner reminding us that the addition of the mortal genera
is the perfection of the textorial life of the universe, and also
exciting our recollection of the divine Orphic fable, and affording us
interpretative causes of the unfinished webs [of Proserpine].

The divine number therefore, has its proper boundary and end, and is
perfect. But it is also necessary that the mortal nature should exist,
and have an appropriate limit; and this triply, aerially, aquatically
and terrestrially. For celestially, is impossible, because the summit,
and the first genus of every order is undefiled and perpetual, in
consequence of being assimilated to the cause which is prior to it. As
therefore, the first of intellectuals is intelligible, and the first
of angels is a God, thus also the first of sensibles is perpetual and
divine.

When however the demiurgus says, “Yet if these are generated and
participate of life through me they will become equal to the Gods,”
he confirms what has been before asserted, that every thing which
is produced by an immoveable cause is unbegotten and immutable; but
that every thing which is produced indeed by an immoveable cause, yet
through the medium of a cause that is moved, is partly unbegotten, and
partly mutable. For from the immoveable cause indeed it receives unity,
but from the moveable cause multitude. And from the former it derives
being and form, but from the latter individuality, and a flowing
existence; through which the form or species is preserved, but the
individual is destroyed.




                              CHAPTER X.


After this, the demiurgus says, “That mortal natures therefore may
subsist, and that the universe may be truly all, convert yourselves
according to nature to the fabrication of animals, imitating the power
which I employed in your generation.” A twofold scope of fabrication,
says Proclus, is here delivered, one indeed providential, but the
other assimilative; the one being more proximate, but the other more
total. For to fabricate for the sake of giving subsistence to mortal
natures, indicates providence, and the perfection[86] of power. For
all super-plenitude of power is prolific of other things subordinate
to itself. But to fabricate for the sake of giving completion to the
universe, indicates an energy according to assimilative power, in order
that this universe may be rendered similar to all-perfect animal,
in consequence of being adorned with all the numbers of divine and
mortal animals. For if all things were immortal, the most divine[87]
of sensible natures would be unprolific. And if the universe was
not filled with all the forms of life, it would not be perfect, nor
sufficiently similar to all-perfect animal. That neither of these
defects therefore might happen, the first demiurgus excites the second
fabrication supernally from his own exalted place of survey. He also
pours on the mundane Gods vivific and demiurgic power, through which
they generate from themselves secondary essences, fill them with life,
and give them a specific distinction. For the peculiarity of vivific
deity is to vivify, but of demiurgic deity to be productive of form.
The expression therefore “_convert yourselves_” is of an exciting
nature, and is similar to the mandate of Jupiter to the Gods in Homer,

    Haste, to the Greek and Trojan hosts descend.[88]

For as that calls them to the war of generation, so this in Plato
excites them to the fabrication of mortals, which they effect through
motion. And this indeed is accomplished by all the mundane Gods, but
especially by the governors of the world [or the planets], and in the
most eminent degree by the sovereign sun. For the demiurgus gave him
dominion over wholes, fabricated him as a guardian, and ordered him, as
Orpheus says,

    ----O’er all to rule.

The words likewise, “according to nature,” bound their fabrication
according to measure and the good: and besides this, spread under
them all physical production as an instrument to their energies. This
therefore which is subservient to their will they move and govern. And
in the third place, these words define their subsistence as media;
for it pertains to the middle to fabricate the extremes according to
nature. For things which sometimes have an existence are suspended
from those that are perpetual according to time; and the latter are
suspended from eternal entities. And primary natures indeed are
generative of media; but these are productive of such beings as are
last in the series of things. The word “_yourselves_” also which
denotes manual operation, excites the divine lives themselves to
fabrication. Nor ought we to wonder whence demiurgic power is derived
to divine souls, this being the peculiarity of the superessential
Gods. For as Orpheus, placing an intellectual essence in Jupiter,
renders it demiurgic, thus also Plato producing words from the father,
evinces that the souls which rank as wholes are divine and demiurgic.
Nor must we doubt why of mundane natures[89] some are immortal,
but others mortal, since all of them are generated according to
intelligible causes; for some of them proceed from one, but others
from another proximate producing cause. And it is necessary to look
to these, and not to paradigms alone. Nor must we investigate ideas
of Socrates, Plato, or of any thing that ranks as a particular. For
the demiurgus divides mortal animals according to genera, and stops
at total intellections; and through these comprehends every thing of
a partial nature. For as the demiurgus makes that which is material
immaterially, and that which is generated ingenerably, thus also he
produces mortal natures immortally.[90] For he makes these indeed,
but through the junior Gods; since prior to their making, he made by
intellection alone. Nor must we deny that mortal natures subsist also
divinely, and not mortally only. For the things which the demiurgus
now extends in his speech are hypostases or subsisting natures about
the junior or mundane Gods, which the heavens primarily receive; and
according to which the Gods fabricate the mortal genera. For the
monads of every mortal-formed life proceed into the heavens from the
intelligible forms. But from these monads which are divine, all the
multitude of material animals is generated. For if we adopt these
conceptions, we shall accord with Plato, and shall not wander from the
nature of things.

Again, when the demiurgus says, “_Imitating the power which I
employed about your generation_,” we must understand by this that an
assimilation to the one exempt fabrication of things, and a conversion
to it, is the highest end of the second fabrication. For it is
necessary that self-motive should follow immoveable natures, and such
as are very mutable, such as are always moved, and that there should
be perpetually a series of secondary beings assimilated to those that
are prior to them. Since however there was a divine will and a divine
power in the demiurgus, he unfolds his will to the mundane Gods through
_learning_; and through this perfects their demiurgic will. But he
unfolds his power to them through this _imitation_, according to which
he orders them to imitate the power of the one demiurgus, conformably
to which they were generated by him. For by saying that which he wills,
he imparts to them will; and by saying that which he is able to effect,
he supplies them with power. And in the last place he demonstrates
them to be secondary fabricators imitators of their father. Whether,
therefore, there is a mundane power, or an efficacious energy of
dæmons, or a fortitude and supernatural strength of heroes, to all
this the demiurgus gives subsistence, and imparts it to those that
give completion to the whole of the second fabrication. For the first
power is in him, and the monad of demiurgic powers. Since, however, he
is also intellect and father, all things will be in him, viz. father,
the power of the father, and the paternal intellect. Hence Plato was
not ignorant of this division; and on this account the demiurgus as
being father, calls power his power. This also he manifests by adding,
“_which I employed about your generation_.” For the father is the cause
of this in conjunction with power; just as father here in conjunction
with the female is the cause of the propagation of the human species.
[For power is of a feminine characteristic.]




                              CHAPTER XI.


And thus much for the developement of such particulars in the speech of
the demiurgus as relate to the junior or mundane Gods. Others, however,
no less important respecting the fabrication of these Gods remain to
be collected from another part of the Timæus; and which accompanied
with the admirable elucidations of Proclus are as follow: After the
demiurgus had instructed souls in all that was necessary to their well
being, and had disseminated some of them into the earth, others into
the moon, and others into the remaining different instruments of time,
Plato adds: “But after this semination he delivered to the junior Gods
the province of fabricating mortal bodies, and generating whatever
else remained necessary to the human soul; and gave them dominion
over every thing consequent to their fabrications.” Who the junior
Gods are, says Proclus, must now be shown; for that the mundane Gods
are thus denominated is evident. But it seems they are thus called
by Plato, either from a comparison with the more ancient dignity of
the unapparent [i.e. the intellectual] fabrication, and with the
transcendency of the power in it, and the perfection of intellectual
vision. For that which is more intellectual is with the Gods more
ancient.

“But Jove was born the first, and more he knows,” says Homer. Or they
are thus denominated, because they always make generation to be new;
and when it becomes old and imbecil through its subject nature, again
recall it to a subsistence according to nature by their motions,
sending into it effluxions of all-various productive principles
and powers, and thus render it perpetually new. Or, they are thus
called, because having intellectual essences suspended from them,
they eternally energize with the acme of intellectual vigor. For as
the poets say, Hebe pours out their wine, and they drink nectar, and
survey the whole sensible world. Employing, therefore, immutable and
undeviating intellections, they fill all things with their demiurgic
providence. Or they have this appellation, because Curetic deity is
present with them, [or deity belonging to the order of the Curetes,]
illuminating their intellectual conceptions with purity, their motion
with inflexibility, and supplying the whole of them with rigid power,
through which they govern all things without departing from the
characteristics of their nature. Or, which is the truest reason of all
the preceding, they are thus denominated, because the monad of them
is called the _recent_ God. For theologists give this appellation to
Bacchus, who is the monad of all the second fabrication. For Jupiter
established him the king of all the mundane Gods, and distributed to
him the first honours. On this account also, theologists are accustomed
to call the sun _a recent God_, and Heraclitus says, that the sun is _a
diurnal youth_, as participating of Dionysiacal power. Or, for a reason
most appropriate to Platonic principles, they are thus denominated,
because bodies which have generation are suspended from them; and the
essence of these is not allotted a subsistence in eternity, but in the
whole of time. They are junior, therefore, not as once beginning to
exist, but as being always generated, and as we have before observed,
subsisting in becoming to be, or perpetually rising into existence. For
every thing which is generated has not the whole of what it possesses
present at once, nor a simultaneous infinity, but an infinity which is
perpetually supplying. Thus, therefore, they are called junior, as
having a subsistence co-extended with time, and always advancing into
existence, and as possessing a renovated immortality.

Again, the delivery of the first fabrication is a communication and
generation of demiurgic powers, exempt from every thing which the
second fabrication produces proximately, a progression of production
from the unapparent into the apparent, and a division of uniform power
into the multiplied government of the world. But the formation of
bodies assimilates the junior Gods to the unapparent fabrication. For
that was the cause of bodies that rank as wholes, just as they are the
causes of partial bodies, at the same time exhibiting a diminution
of power. For of the body of which they are the makers and formers,
the demiurgus also is the cause; but they are the formers of partial
bodies, which are bodies endued with certain qualities. Hence body
indeed is simply unbegotten as from time, and incorruptible as was also
the opinion of Aristotle. “For,” says he, “there would be a vacuum if
body could be generated, external[91] to the body of the universe.
But this _particular_ body is corruptible, as being of a partial
nature; for the _wholes_ of the elements derived their subsistence
from _total_ fabrication. The accession, however, of the human soul
which remained[92] to be generated, assimilates the mundane Gods to the
paternal power. For it is the province of a father to generate life;
since the first father, and every father is the cause of life; the
intelligible father, indeed, of intelligible, but the intellectual of
intellectual, and the supermundane of supermundane life. And hence, the
mundane Gods who generate corporeal life are fathers. The fabrication,
however, adapted to these Gods, produces the nature of partial animals.
For this partial animal which is suspended from the immortal soul,
consists of soul and body. But the _dominion_ which the demiurgus
gave the junior Gods, excites their providential inspection, their
connective power, and their guardian comprehensions. For without these,
the bodies that are fashioned, and the mortal form of life, would
rapidly vanish into non-entity. Prior, therefore, to the generation
of these, the demiurgus made their ruling Gods to be the guardians and
saviours of them. In the junior Gods, therefore, there are demiurgic
powers, according to which they invest generated natures with forms;
vivific powers, according to which they give subsistence to a secondary
life; and perfective powers, through which they give completion to what
is deficient in generation. There are also many other powers in them
besides these, which are inexplicable by our conceptions.




                             CHAPTER XII.


After this, Plato adds, “He likewise commanded them to govern as much
as possible in the best and most beautiful manner the mortal animal,
that it might not become the cause of evil to itself.” On these words
Proclus observes: Of all that the one demiurgus delivers to the
junior Gods, it must be admitted that there are three most beautiful
boundaries, the boniform will of him that delivers, the perfect power
of the recipients, and the symmetry of both these with each other. Of
the demiurgic production, however, of the junior Gods themselves, three
elements and these the greatest must be again surveyed, a reduction to
the good, a conversion to intelligible beauty, and a liberated power
sufficient to rule over all the subjects of its government. For as
Phanes,[93] himself the demiurgus of wholes, rendered the whole world
as much as possible the most beautiful and the best, thus also he was
willing that the second fabricators should govern the mortal animal
in a way the most beautiful and the best; pouring on them indeed from
intelligibles, beauty, but filling them with that boniform power and
will, which he himself possessing fabricated the whole world. For thus
generation also will participate of beauty and goodness, as far as it
is naturally adapted to such participation, if the Gods by whom it is
connected and contained, adorn it, who are themselves transcendently
decorated with beauty and good.

If, however, the second demiurgi have such a nature as this, nothing
evil or preternatural is generated from the celestial Gods; nor is
it proper to divide the Gods in the heavens after this manner, as
many do, viz. into the beneficent and malignant; for being Gods this
is impossible. But the mortal animal is the cause of evil to itself.
For neither disease, nor poverty,[94] nor any thing else of this kind
is evil; but the depravity of the soul, intemperance, timidity, and
every vice. Of these things, however, we are the causes to ourselves.
For though being impelled by others to these vices we are badly
affected, yet again it is through ourselves; since we have the power
of associating with the good, and separating ourselves from the bad.
According to Plato, therefore, we must not think that of the Gods some
are malignant and others beneficent, but we must admit that all of
them are the sources to mortals of all the good which they are able to
receive; and that things which are truly evils are not produced, but
are only signified by them, as we have before observed. For they extend
terrific appearances and signs to those who are able to see and read
the letters in the universe, which the framers of mortal natures during
their revolutions write by their configurations. And though some one
should derive a certain evil from the motions of the celestial Gods,
so as to become timid or intemperate, yet they operate in one way, and
their influences are participated by souls in another. For the efflux
of intellect, says Plotinus, becomes craft in him who receives the
efflux badly; the gift of an elegant life becomes intemperance through
a similar cause; and in short, while they produce beneficently, their
gifts are participated by terrestrial natures, after a contrary manner.
Hence the givers who bestow beneficently are not to be accused as the
authors of evil, but the recipients who pervert their gifts by their
own inaptitudes. Thus also Jupiter in Homer blames souls as in vain
accusing the Gods, while they themselves are the causes of evils. For
the Gods are the sources of good, and the suppliers of intellect and
life, but are not the causes of any evil; since even a partial nature
is not the cause of evil to its offspring. What, therefore, ought we
to think concerning the Gods themselves? Is it not, that they are much
more the causes of good to their productions; since with them there
is power, with them there is a self-perfect nature, with them there
is universal goodness, to all which evil is contrary. For in its own
nature it is powerless, imperfect, and without measure.

In the next place Plato says, “At the same time he who orderly disposed
all these particulars, remained in his own accustomed manner.” And
Proclus observes, that Plato every where after having employed many
words, summarily comprehends the multitude of them in the conclusion.
For he knew that in the Demiurgus, one intellectual perception
comprehends the multitude of intellectual conceptions; that one power
connects many powers; and that a uniform cause collects into one union
divided causes. Hence the words [prior to these], “Having, therefore,
instructed souls in all these particulars,” and the words before us,
“He who orderly disposed all these particulars,” lead the distinct
energy of the Demiurgus to an united cause. Farther still, the word
_all_ manifests that which is consummated from all its appropriate
boundaries. But the words _orderly disposed_, indicate the order
pervading through all beings, which the Demiurgus introduced to the
mundane Gods, and to partial souls; demonstrating the former to be
demiurgi, but inscribing in the latter the laws of Fate. Moreover,
the word _remained_, does not manifest station, and inflexible
intellection, but an _establishment[95] in the one_. For according to
this, he is exempt from wholes, and is separated from the beings that
intellectually perceive him. But this establishment itself is eternal,
and always invariably permanent. These things, therefore, are also
indicated by the words _accustomed_ and _manner_; the one exhibiting
sameness of permanency; but the other the peculiarity of the demiurgic
stability. For _manner_ is indicative of peculiarity; since connective
is different from immutable, and both these from demiurgic permanency.




                             CHAPTER XIII.


“But in consequence of his abiding, says Plato, as soon as his children
understood the order of their father, they became obedient to it.”
When the Demiurgus speaks, says Proclus, then the junior Gods have the
order of hearers. When he intellectually perceives, then they learn;
for learning is dianoetic. When he abides according to union itself,
then his children intellectually perceive. For they always receive from
him an inferior order. And as filled indeed from him, they preserve
the analogy of hearers with reference to him; but as evolving his one
power, they are analogous to learners. For he who learns evolves the
intellect of his preceptor. As being deified, however, by him, they
have the analogy of those that perceive intellectually. For intellect
becomes deific, by its contact[96] with _the one_. The father,
therefore, abiding, his children very properly intellectually perceive.
For they are intellects participated by divine souls, that ride in
the vehicles of undefiled bodies. But they intellectually perceive
the order of the father presubsisting in him prior to the arranged
effects, according to which order he became all things. Mortal natures,
therefore, were fashioned and animated by the demiurgic intellection
alone. But the junior Gods unfold his total production, through their
own manifest fabrication; being filled from the demiurgic monad.

In the last place, Plato adds, “And receiving the immortal principle
of mortal animal, in imitation of their artificer, they borrowed from
the world the parts of fire and earth, water and air, as things which
they should restore back again; and conglutinated the received parts
together, but not with the same indissoluble bonds by which they were
connected.” On-these words Proclus admirably comments as follows:
Plato indicates to us, the separation of the second from the first
fabrication, through many words and steps.[97] For if the Demiurgus
orderly disposes, but the junior Gods are obedient to his mandates,
the former by merely commanding is the cause of generated natures, but
the latter being excited by the Demiurgus, receive from thence the
boundary of the whole of their fabrication. And if, indeed, he abides
in himself, but they are moved about him, it is evident that he is
eternally the cause of things which subsist in time, but that they
being filled from him energize according to the whole of time. And if
he perfectly establishes himself in his own accustomed manner, but
they proceeding from him, unfold into light this united and ineffable
disposition of himself, they derive from him secondary measures of
fabrication.

Moreover, he is said to have a paternal dignity, but they are
denominated his children, as expressing his prolific power, and his
single goodness. And he indeed, is celebrated as delivering from his
exalted abode the principles of fabrication; but they are celebrated
as receiving the immortal principle contributing to the orderly
distribution of mortals. He is said to have the fountain of the
vivification of perpetual natures; but they are the causes of the
subsistence of mortal-formed animals. And he indeed extends himself as
a paradigm to the many Gods; but they are said to imitate the demiurgic
intellect. He is said to produce the whole world, and the plenitudes
of it; but they are said to borrow parts from the fabrications of
their father, in order to the completion of their proper works. And he
indeed employs all incorporeal powers; but they also employ such as
are corporeal. He gives subsistence to indissoluble bonds; but they
to such as are dissoluble. And he, indeed, is said to insert a union
more ancient than the natures which it unites; but they are said to
introduce an adventitious union, and which is of an origin posterior
to this, to the beings that consist of many contrary natures. And he
is said to produce all things impartibly; but they with division,
minutely distributing the subsistence of mortal natures into small and
invisible nails. From these things, therefore the separation of the two
fabrications may be assumed; but the union and contact of them may be
surveyed from the words before us. For here a contact is effected of
the second with the first fabrication; of apparent with unapparent, and
of divided with monadic production.

Hence it is necessary that the lowest part of the first and unapparent
fabrication, should coalesce with the summit of the second. For thus
also the heavens are conjoined with generation [or the sublunary
region] the lowest of the celestial bodies exhibiting the principle
of mutation; but the summit of the essence of sublunary natures,
being moved in conjunction with the heavens. Hence too, here also the
rational soul is conjoined with the mortal form of life; viz. the
lowest and most partial of the productions of the father, with the
highest of the natures generated by the junior Gods. For they, indeed,
as being certain fathers produce lives; but as fabricators, bodies. And
they imitate indeed Vulcan by the fabrication of bodies; but Juno by
vivification. But through both these they imitate the whole Demiurgus.
For he is maker and father; but they fashion bodies by borrowing
parts from wholes. For every where parts derive their composition
from wholes. When, however, the wholes are incorporeal, they remain
undiminished by the subsistence of the parts; but when they are
corporeal, the parts that are generated from them diminish the wholes.
Hence an ablation always taking place, but the parts always remaining,
the wholes perish. And thus generation will no longer exist, and the
works of the first fabrication will all vanish through the second,
which it is not lawful to assert. That nothing of this kind, therefore,
may take place in the universe, the composite parts are again
dissolved, in order to fill up their wholes. And the generation of one
thing is the corruption of another; but the corruption of one thing
is the generation of another; in order that generation and corruption
may always remain. For if generation existed only once, it would at a
certain time stop, in consequence of consisting of finite things, and
these being consumed. But these perishing corruption also would stop,
all things being destroyed. Hence if it is necessary that one of these
should exist, the other also will exist. Every thing, therefore, which
is generated from the second fabrication is a composite and dissoluble,
and deriving its composition from time, will also in time be again
dissolved. The junior Gods, therefore, are very properly said to
borrow parts which are again to be restored to their wholes. But they
borrow them from the universe.[98] For that which they borrow is fire,
earth, water and air; and they again restore them to the universe.[99]
The father, therefore, wishes the wholes to remain which he generated
and arranged. And thus much concerning all the fabrication of the
junior Gods.




                             CHAPTER XIV.


Having, therefore, thus largely presented to the reader what pertains
to the mundane Gods in general, it is now requisite to descend to
particulars, and to discuss separately the peculiarities of the
celestial, and those of the sublunary Gods. The order of the celestial
Gods then consisting of the fixed stars and the planets, the sphere in
which the former are placed has the relation of a monad, as we have
before observed, to the starry deities which that sphere contains.
For the first of the four ideas in the paradigm of the universe being
an exempt monad, the multitude of the stars proceeding from it is
comprehended by a co-ordinate monad, which is the inerratic sphere.
This sphere is called by Plato in the Timæus a true world, because
it is more properly a world than the sublunary region, which always
requires a foreign arrangement, and is conversant with unceasing
mutation. It is also a world thus variegated with stars, as expressing
intellectual variety, and receiving from thence as it were in the whole
of itself the uniform flowers with which the intellectual world is
surrounded, and which imitate the beauty of the celestial paradigms.
But Plato very accurately says, that the Demiurgus gave this sphere
a circular _distribution_ about the whole of the heavens. For to
_distribute_ and _to distribute in a circle_, is adapted to this
sphere; since the former signifies intellectual distribution, but the
latter demiurgic order. Hence theologists[100] establish Eunomia in
the inerratic sphere, who separates the multitude it contains, and
always preserves each of the stars in its proper order. Hence also
celebrating Vulcan as the maker of the heavens, they conjoin with him
Aglaia, as causing all heaven to be splendid through the variety of the
stars. And again, of the Seasons, they place Dice or Justice over the
planetary region, as bringing in a circular order the inequability of
the motions of the planets to an equability according to reason; but of
the Graces, Thalia, as causing their lives to be ever-flourishing. And
in the sublunary region, they establish Irene or peace, as conciliating
the war of the elements; but of the Graces Euphrosune, as conferring on
every thing a facility of natural energy.

But the planets are called the Governors of the world, (κοσμοκρατορες)
and are allotted a total power. As the inerratic sphere too, has a
number of starry animals, so each of the planets is the leader of
a multitude of animals, or of certain other things of this kind.
Hence the doubt may be solved, why the one sphere of the fixed stars
comprehends a multitude of stars, but each of the planetary spheres
convolves only one star. For it must be said, that in the former case
the sphere indeed is a monad, comprehending in itself an appropriate
multitude, and is sufficient to the comprehension of a mundane
multitude which ranks as the first. But in the latter case, the
governing power is twofold, viz. the sphere, and each of the governors
of the world, who is a monad co-arranged with multitude. The sphere
itself, however, is a leader, a co-arranged monad and a wholeness;
(ολοτης) but each of the governors of the world is a leader and a
monad, but is not a wholeness. Indeed, subordinate natures require
a greater number of leaders, and a multitude in each of the spheres
unapparent on account of diminution. But in the sublunary region, the
orders which are the leaders of the genera in each of the elements are
still more numerous than those of the planets, as we learn from the
Grecian theogony.

In each of the planetary spheres, therefore, there is a number of
satellites analogous to the choir of the fixed stars, subsisting
with proper circulations of their own. The revolution also of these
satellites is similar to that of the planets which they follow;
and this according to Plato is a spiral revolution. With respect,
likewise, to these satellites, the first in order about every planet
are Gods; after these dæmons revolve in lucid orbicular bodies; and
these are followed by partial souls such as ours. That in each of
the planetary spheres, however, there is a multitude co-ordinate to
each may be inferred from the extremes. For if the inerratic sphere
has a multitude co-ordinate to itself, and earth is with respect
to terrestrial animals what the inerratic sphere is to such as are
celestial, it is necessary that every _wholeness_ should entirely
possess certain partial animals co-ordinate to itself, through which
also the spheres derive the appellation of _wholenesses_.[101] But the
natures situated in the middle are concealed from our sense, while in
the mean time those contained in the extremes are apparent,---one kind
through their transcendently luminous essence, and the other through
their alliance to ourselves. If also partial souls are disseminated
about these spheres, some indeed about the sun, but others about the
moon, and others about each of the remaining spheres; and if prior to
souls, there are dæmons giving completion to the herds of which they
are the leaders; it is evident that it is beautifully said, that _each
of the spheres is a world_. And this is conformable to the doctrines
of theologists,[102] when they teach us that there are Gods in every
sphere prior to dæmons, the government of some receiving its perfection
under that of others. As for instance, with respect to our queen the
moon, that she contains the Goddess Hecate, and Diana; and with respect
to the sovereign sun, and the Gods which he contains, theologists
celebrate Bacchus as subsisting there.

    The sun’s assessor, who with watchful eye
    Inspects the sacred pole.

They also celebrate Jupiter as seated there, Osiris, and a solar Pan,
as likewise other divinities, of which the books of theologists and
theurgists are full. From all which it is evident how true it is that
each of the planets is the prefect of many Gods, who give completion to
its proper circulation.[103]




                              CHAPTER XV.


Owing to the loss of a seventh book On the Theology of Plato, written
by Proclus, copious information respecting the peculiarities of all
the celestial Gods is unfortunately not to be obtained. All that can
be procured, however, on this subject, and which I have diligently
collected from Platonic writings, I shall now present to the
philosophic reader, beginning in the first place with the moon. This
divinity then has the relation of nature and of a mother with respect
to generation, or the sublunary region. For all things are convolved
and co-increased by her when she increases; but are diminished when
she diminishes. This Goddess, too, benevolently leads into light
the unapparent productive principles of nature. She likewise gives
perfection to souls through a life according to virtue; but imparts to
mortal animals a restitution to form.

Next to the moon is Mercury, who is the cause of symmetry to
all mundane natures, having the relation of reason to things in
generation. For all symmetry proceeds according to one ratio, and
according to number of which this God is the giver. This deity,
too, is the inspective guardian of _gymnastic_ exercises; and hence
_hermæ_, or carved statues of Mercury were placed in the Palæstræ; of
_music_, and hence he is honoured as the lyrist (λυραιος) among the
celestial constellations; and of _disciplines_, because the invention
of geometry, reasoning and discourse is referred to this God. He
presides, therefore, over every species of discipline, leading us to an
intelligible essence from this mortal abode, governing the different
herds of souls, and dispersing the sleep and oblivion with which they
are oppressed. He is likewise the supplier of recollection, the end of
which is a genuine intellectual apprehension of divine natures. Hence,
among the Athenians, certain images of these things were preserved;
grammar having a reference to dialectic discipline; playing on the harp
pertaining to music; and wrestling to gymnastic, in which those youths
that were well born were instructed.

In the next place follows Venus, who is the cause of beauty to
generated natures, which is an imitation of intelligible beauty. This
goddess also is the source of the union of form with matter; connecting
and comprehending the powers of all the elements; and her principal
employment consists in beautifully illuminating the order, harmony,
and communion of all mundane concerns. She likewise governs all the
co-ordinations in the celestial world and the earth, binds them to each
other, and perfects their generative progressions through a kindred
conjunction. And she unites and leads into communion the Hermaic
production which has a remitted subsistence, and is in subjection to
the solar fabrication.

The next celestial divinity in order after Venus is the sovereign Sun,
whose essence and dignity are so great, according to the theology of
Plato, as to possess a supermundane prerogative among mundane natures.
This Plato indicates in the Timæus, when speaking of the sun he says:
“In order that these circles might possess a certain manifest measure
of slowness and swiftness with reference to each other, and that the
motion of the eight circulations might be conspicuous, the divinity
enkindled a light which we now denominate the sun, in the second
revolution from the earth; that the heavens might become eminently
apparent to all things, and that such animals might participate of
number as are adapted to its participation, receiving numerical
information from the revolution of a nature similar and the same.”
On these words Proclus admirably comments as follows:[104] Plato
here delivers the one ruling cause of the generation of apparent
time. For as the Demiurgus gives subsistence to unapparent time, thus
also the sun to the time which is apparent, and which measures the
motion of bodies. For through light he leads into visibility every
temporal interval, gives bound to all periods, and exhibits measures
of restoration to a pristine state. Deservedly, therefore, is the sun
a manifest measure, as especially unfolding the progression[105] of
time according to number, into the universe. For it has a more accurate
period than that of the five planets, its motions being less anomalous
than theirs; and also than that of the moon, by always terminating at
the same point, its progressions to the north and the south. But if it
has a more accurate period, it is deservedly a measure of measures, and
from itself bounds[106] the periodic measures of the other planets,
and the swiftness of their motions with reference to each other. It
also in a greater degree imitates the perpetual permanency of eternity,
by always revolving after the same manner. In this way, therefore, it
differs from the planets.

After another manner, likewise, the sun is a more manifest measure
than the measure of the inerratic sphere. For though this sphere has
a certain appropriate measure, a proper interval, and one immutable
number of its peculiar motion, yet the solar light causes this measure
and all the evolution of apparent time to be manifest and known. Hence
Plato says, “In order that there might be a certain manifest measure.”
For though there is a certain measure in the other planets, yet it
is not clear and manifest. But the sun unfolds into light both other
intelligibles and time. You must not however on this account say that
the solar light was generated for the sake of measurement. For how is
it possible that wholes should subsist for the sake of parts; governing
natures for the sake of the governed; and perpetual for the sake of
corruptible natures? But we should rather say that light possessing an
evolving power unfolds total time, and calls forth its supermundane
monad, and one measure into the measurement of the periods of bodies.
And this makes time to be, as it were, sensible. Hence, it is the
light of the sun which causes every thing that is moved to have a
clear and manifest measure. And this indeed is its whole good. After
wholes, however, it likewise benefits parts in a secondary degree. For
it imparts the generation of number, and measure to the natures which
are adapted to participate of these. For irrational beings indeed are
destitute of these; but the genera of dæmons who follow the periods
of the Gods, and men become partakers of them. The supply of good,
therefore, through the solar light, beginning supernally from wholes,
descends as far as to parts. And if beginning from visible natures,
you are willing to speak of such as are invisible, the light of the
sun gives splendor to the whole world, causes a corporeal-formed
nature to be divine, and wholly filled through the whole of itself
with life. But it leads souls through undefiled light, imparts to them
a pure and elevating power, and governs the world by its rays. And it
likewise fills souls with empyrean fruits. For the order of the sun is
supernally derived from supermundane natures. Hence Plato does not here
fabricate the solar light, but says that the Demiurgus enkindled it, as
giving subsistence from his own essence to this sphere, and emitting
from the solar fountain a life extended into interval and continually
renewed. _And this also is asserted by theologists concerning the
supermundane firmaments._

On this account, it appears to me that Plato delivers a two-fold
generation of the sun; one indeed in conjunction with the seven
governors of the world, when he fashions the bodies of them, and
inserts them in their circulations; but the other according to the
enkindling of light, through which he imparts to the sun supermundane
power. For it is one thing to generate the bulk of the sun itself
by itself, and another in conjunction with a ruling characteristic,
through which the sun is called the king of every visible nature, and
is established analogous to the one fountain of good. For as this
fountain being better than the intelligible essence, illuminates
both intellect and the intelligible, thus also the sun being better
than a visible nature, illuminates both that which is visible and
sight. But if the sun is beyond a visible essence, it will have a
supermundane nature. For the world is visible and tangible, and has a
body. Hence, we must survey the sun in a twofold respect; viz. as one
of the sever planets, and as the leader of wholes; and as mundane and
supermundane, according to the latter of which he splendidly emits a
divine light. For in the same manner as _the good_ luminously
emits truth which deifies the intelligible and intellectual orders;
as Phanes in Orpheus sends forth intelligible light which fills with
intelligence all the intellectual Gods; and as Jupiter enkindles an
intellectual and demiurgic light in all the supermundane Gods; thus
also the sun illuminates every thing visible through this undefiled
light. The illuminating cause too is always in an order superior to the
illuminated natures. For neither is _the good_ intelligible, nor
Phanes intellectual, nor Jupiter supermundane. In consequence of this
reasoning, therefore, the sun being supermundane emits the fountains of
light. And according to the most mystic doctrines, the wholeness of the
sun is in the supermundane orders; for in them there is a solar world,
and a total light, as the Chaldæan oracles[107] assert, and which I am
persuaded is true.

That the stars, however, and the whole of the heavens receive their
light from the sun may easily be perceived. For that which is common
in many things derives its subsistence from one cause; and in one way
indeed from an exempt, but in another from a co-arranged cause. But
this cause is that which primarily participates of that form. The
primary participant, however, is that in which either primarily or
especially this form exists. If, therefore, light especially subsists
in the sun, this will be the first light; and from this that which is
in other things will be derived.




                             CHAPTER XVI.


Conformably, also, to this doctrine of Plato concerning the sun, the
emperor Julian sublimely theologizes about this divinity in his very
elegant oration to him, from which the following is an extract. The
apparent and splendid orbicular sun is the cause of well-being to
sensible natures. And whatever we have asserted as flowing from the
mighty intellectual sun among the intellectual Gods,[108] the same
perfections the apparent sun communicates to apparent forms; the
truth of which will be clearly evinced by contemplating invisible
natures from the objects of sensible inspection. And in the first
place, is not light the incorporeal and divine form of that which
is diaphanous in energy? But whatever that which is diaphanous may
be, which is subjected to all the elements, and is their proximate
form, it is certain that it is neither corporeal nor mixed, nor does
it display any of the peculiar qualities of body. Hence, you cannot
affirm that heat is one of its properties, nor its contrary cold;
you can neither ascribe to it hardness nor softness, nor any other
tangible difference; nor attribute taste or smell as peculiarities of
its essence. For a nature of this kind, which is called forth into
energy by the interposition of light, is alone subject to the power of
sight. But light is the form of a diaphanous essence which resembles
that common matter the subject of bodies, through which it is every
where diffused; and rays are the summit, and as it were flower of
light, which is an incorporeal nature. According to the opinion of the
Phœnicians, however, who are skilled in divine science and wisdom, the
universally-diffused splendour of light is the unmingled energy of an
intellect perfectly pure. And this doctrine will be found agreeable to
reason, when we consider that since light is incorporeal, its fountain
cannot be body, but the pure energy of intellect, illuminating in its
proper habitation the middle region of the heavens: and from this
exalted situation scattering its light, it fills all the celestial orbs
with powerful vigour, and illuminates the universe with divine and
incorruptible light.

Whatever, likewise, we first perceive by the sight, is nothing but
a mere name of honourable labour, unless it receives the ruling
assistance of light. For how can any thing be visible, unless,
like matter, it is moved to the artificer that it may receive the
supervening investments of form? Just as gold in a state of simple
fusion is indeed gold, but is not a statue or an image till the
artificer invests it with form. In a similar manner all naturally
visible objects cease to be apparent, unless light is present with
the perceiver. Hence, since it confers vision on the perceiver, and
visibility on the objects of perception, it perfects two natures in
energy, sight and that which is visible. Perfections, however, are form
and essence; though perhaps an assertion of this kind is more subtle
than is suited to our present purpose.

Of this, however, all men are persuaded, both the scientific and the
illiterate, philosophers and the learned, that day and night are
fabricated by the power of this rising and setting divinity; and that
he manifestly changes and convolves the world. But to which of the
other stars does a province of this kind belong? Do we not, therefore,
derive conviction from hence, that the unapparent and divine race of
intellectual Gods,[109] above the heavens, are replenished from the sun
with boniform powers; to whose authority the whole choir of the stars
submits; and whose nod generation, which he governs by his providence,
attentively obeys? For the planets, indeed, dancing round him as their
king, harmoniously revolve in a circle, with definite intervals, about
his orb; producing certain stable energies, and advancing backwards and
forwards; terms by which the skilful in the spheric theory signify such
like phænomena of the stars. To which we may add, as manifest to every
one, that the light of the moon is augmented or diminished according to
her distance from the sun.

Is it not then highly probable that the orderly disposition of the
intellectual Gods, which is more ancient than that of bodies, is
analogous to the mundane arrangement? Hence we infer his _perfective_
power from the whole phænomena, because he gives vision to visive
natures; for he perfects these by his light. But we collect his
_demiurgic_ and _prolific_ power from the mutation of the universe;
and his _capacity of collecting all things into one_, from the
properties of motion conspiring into union and consent; and _middle
position_, from his own central situation. Lastly, we infer his _royal
establishment among the intellectual Gods_, from his middle order
between the planets. For if we perceived these, or as many other
properties, belonging to any other of the apparent Gods, we should not
ascribe the principality among them to the sun.

Again, that we may consider this affair in a different mode, since
there is one demiurgus of the universe, but many demiurgic Gods, who
revolve round the heavens, it is proper to place in the midst of these
the mundane administration of the sun. Besides, the fertile power of
life is copious and redundant in intelligibles, and the world is full
of the same prolific life. Hence it is evident that the fertile life of
the sovereign sun is a medium between the two, as the mundane phænomena
perpetually evince. For with respect to forms, some he perfects, and
others he fabricates; some he adorns, and others he excites; nor is
any thing capable of advancing into light and generation without
the demiurgic power of the sun. Add too, that if we attend to the
unmingled, pure and immaterial essence of intelligibles, to which
nothing extrinsical flows, and nothing foreign adheres, but which is
full of its own appropriate simplicity, and afterwards consider the
defecated nature of that pure and divine body which is conversant
with mundane bodies revolving in an orb, and which is free from all
elementary mixture, we shall find that the splendid and incorruptible
essence of the royal sun, is a medium between the immaterial purity of
intelligibles and that which in sensibles is unmingled and remote from
generation and corruption.

The greatest argument, however, for the truth of this is derived from
hence, that the light which flows from the sun upon the earth will not
suffer itself to be mingled with any thing; nor is it polluted by any
sordid nature, or by any contagion; but it abides every where pure,
undefiled, and impassive. Again, if we consider not only immaterial and
intelligible forms, but such as are sensible, subsisting in matter,
the middle intellectual situation of forms about the mighty sun will
be no less certain and clear. For these afford continual assistance to
forms merged in matter: so that they could neither exist, nor preserve
themselves in existence, unless this beneficent deity co-operated with
their essence. In short, is he not the cause of the separation of forms
and the concretion of matter? From whom we not only possess the power
of understanding his nature, but from whom our eyes are endued with the
faculty of sight? For the distribution of rays throughout the world,
and union of light, exhibit the demiurgic separation of the artificer.

Again, the solar orb is moved in the starless, which is far higher than
the inerratic sphere. Hence, he is not the middle of the planets, but
of the three worlds, according to the mystic hypotheses;[110] if it
be proper to call them hypotheses, and not rather dogmas; confining
the appellation of hypotheses to the doctrine of the sphere. For the
truth of the former is testified by men who audibly received this
information from Gods, or mighty dæmons; but the latter is founded
on the probability arising from the agreement of the phænomena. But
besides those which I have mentioned, there is an innumerable multitude
of celestial Gods, perceived by such as do not contemplate the heavens
indolently and after the manner of brutes. As the sun quadruply divides
these three worlds, on account of the communion of the zodiac with
each, so he again divides the zodiac into twelve powers of Gods, and
each of these into three others, so that thirty-six are produced in
the whole. Hence, as it appears to me, a triple benefit of the Graces
proceeds to us from the heavens, I mean from those circles which the
God quadruply dividing produces in consequence of this, a quadripartite
beauty and elegance of seasons and times. But the Graces also imitate
a circle in their resemblances on the earth. Add too, that Bacchus
is the source of joy, who is said to obtain a common kingdom with
the sun. But why should I here mention the epithet Horus, or other
names of the Gods, all of which correspond with the divinity of the
sun? Mankind, indeed, may conceive the excellence of the God from his
operations; since he perfects the heavens with intellectual goods, and
renders them partakers of intelligible beauty. For as he originates
from this beauty, he applies himself both wholly and by parts, to the
distribution of good.

In the last place, as the sun is the source of our existence, so
likewise of the aliment by which that existence is supported. And,
indeed, he confers on us more divine advantages peculiar to souls; for
he loosens these from the bands of a corporeal nature, reduces them
to the kindred essence of divinity, and assigns them the subtile and
firm texture of divine splendor, as a vehicle in which they may safely
descend to the realms of generation. And these benefits of the God have
been celebrated by others according to their desert, and require the
assistance of faith more than the evidence of demonstration.




                             CHAPTER XVII.


From the MS. Scholia likewise of Proclus on the Cratylus of Plato, we
derive the following very important information concerning Apollo; in
which the principal powers of the God are unfolded by him with his
usual magnificence of diction, and divine fecundity of conception.
Socrates, therefore, in the Cratylus says, “that there is no other name
[than that of Apollo] which can more harmonize with the four powers of
this God, because it touches upon them all, and evinces in a certain
respect his _harmonic_, _prophetic_, _medicinal_, and _arrow-darting
skill_.” And shortly after he adds, “that the name is so composed that
it touches upon all the powers of the God, viz. his _simplicity_,
_perpetual jaculation_, _purifying_, and _joint-revolving nature_.” On
these words Proclus observes, that very rationally after Proserpine,
Plato analyzes Apollo. For there is a great communion between the Coric
and the Apolloniacal series; since the former is the unity of the
middle triad of the supermundane Gods, and emits from herself vivific
powers; but the latter converts the solar principles to one union;
and the solar principles are allotted a subsistence immediately after
the vivific. Hence, according to Orpheus, when Ceres delivered up the
government to Proserpine, she thus admonished her:

    Αυταρ Απολλωνος θαλερον λεχος εισαναβασα,
    Τεξεται αγλαα τεκνα πυριφλεγεθοντα προσωποις.[111]

That is,

    But next Apollo’s florid bed ascend;
    For thus the God fam’d offspring shall beget,
    Refulgent with the beams of glowing fire.

But how could this be the case, unless there was a considerable degree
of communion between these divinities?

It is necessary however, to know thus much concerning Apollo, that
according to the first and most natural conception, his name signifies
the cause of union, and that power which collects multitude into one;
and this mode of speculation concerning his name harmonizes with all
the orders of the God. But Socrates alone considers his more partial
powers: for the multitude of the powers of Apollo are not to be
comprehended, nor described by us. For when will man who is merely
rational, be able to comprehend not only all the peculiarities of
Apollo, but all those of any other God? Theologists indeed deliver
to us a great multitude of Apolloniacal peculiarities; but Socrates
now only mentions four of them. For the world is as it were a decad,
being filled from all productive principles, receiving all things in
itself, and being converted to the proper principle of the decad,
of which the tetrad proximately contains the cause, but in an exempt
manner the monad. And the former without separation and occultly, but
the latter with separation; just as Apollo proximately unites the
multitude of mundane natures, but the demiurgic intellect exemptly. Why
then does Socrates use an order of this kind? For beginning from the
_medicinal_ power of the god, and proceeding through his _prophetic_
and _arrow-darting_ powers, he ends in his _harmonic_ power. We
reply, that all the energies of this god, are in all the orders of
beings, beginning from on high and proceeding as far as to the last of
things; but different energies appear to have more or less dominion in
different orders. Thus for instance the _medicinal_ power of Apollo is
most apparent in the sublunary region, for

    There slaughter, rage, and countless ills beside,
    Disease, decay, and rottenness reside.[112]

And as these are moved in an inordinate manner, they require to be
restored from a condition contrary, into one agreeable to nature, and
from incommensuration and manifold division, into symmetry and union.

But the _prophetic_ energy of the god is most apparent in the
heavens; for there his enunciative power shines forth, unfolding
intelligible good to celestial natures, and on this account he revolves
together with the sun, with whom he participates the same intellect
in common; since the sun also illuminates whatever the heavens
contain, and extends a unifying power to all their parts. But his
_arrow-darting_ energy mostly prevails among the _liberated_
gods; for there ruling over the wholes which the universe contains,
he excites their motions by his rays, which are always assimilated to
arrows, extirpates every thing inordinate, and fills all things with
demiurgic gifts. And though he has a separate and exempt subsistence,
he reaches all things by his energies.

Again, his _harmonic_ power is more predominant in the _ruling
supermundane_ order; for it is this divinity who harmonizing the
universe, establishes about himself according to one union the choir
of the Muses, and produces by this mean as a certain Theurgist says
“_the harmony of exulting light_.” Apollo therefore as we have shown
is _harmonic_, and this is likewise the case with the other Apollos
which are contained in the earth and the other spheres; but this
power appears in some places more, and in others less. These powers
too subsist in the god himself in an united manner, and exempt from
other natures, but in those attendants of the Gods who are superior to
us, divisibly, and according to participation; for there is a great
multitude of medicinal, prophetic, harmonic, and arrow-darting angels,
dæmons, and heroes, suspended from Apollo, who distribute in a partial
manner the uniform powers of the god.

But it is necessary to consider each of these powers according to
one definite characteristic; as for instance, his _harmonic_ power,
according to its binding together separated multitude; his _prophetic_
power according to the enunciative; his _arrow-darting_ power,
according to its being subvertive of an inordinate nature; and his
_medicinal_ power, according to its perfective energy. We should
likewise speculate these characteristics differently in Gods, angels,
dæmons, heroes, men, animals, and plants; for the powers of the Gods
extend from on high to the last of things, and at the same time appear
in an accommodated manner in each; and the telestic (i.e. mystic) art
endeavours through sympathy to conjoin these ultimate participants with
the Gods. But in all these orders we must carefully observe, that this
God is the cause of union to multiplied natures: for his _medicinal_
power, which takes away the _multiform_ nature of disease, imparts
_uniform_ health; since health is symmetry and a subsistence according
to nature, but that which is contrary to nature is multifarious. Thus
too, his _prophetic_ power, which unfolds the simplicity of truth,
takes away the variety of that which is false; but his _arrow-darting_
power, which exterminates every thing furious and wild, but prepares
that which is orderly and gentle to exercise dominion, vindicates
to itself unity, and exterminates a disordered nature tending to
multitude; and his _musical_ power, through rhythm and harmony, places
a bond, friendship and union in _wholes_, and subdues the contraries to
these.

And all these powers indeed, subsist primarily, in an exempt manner,
and uniformly in Jupiter the demiurgus of wholes, but secondarily
and separately in Apollo. Hence Apollo is not the same with the
demiurgic intellect; for this comprehends these powers totally and
paternally, but Apollo with subjection, imitating his father; since
all the energies and powers of secondary Gods, are comprehended in the
demiurgus according to cause. And the demiurgus fabricates and adorns
the universe according to all these powers, and in a collected manner;
but the other deities which proceed from him, co-operate with their
father according to different powers.

Purification however being seen not only in the medicinal, but also
in the prophetic art evinces, that the cathartic power of Apollo
comprehends the two powers: for it illustrates the world with the
glittering splendors of light, and purifies all material immoderation
by Pæonian energies; which physicians and prophets among us imitating,
the former purify bodies, and the latter through sulphureous
preparations render themselves and their associates pure. For, as
Timæus says, the Gods purify the universe, either by fire or water;
and prophets also in this respect imitate the Gods. In the most sacred
of the mysteries too, purifications are employed prior to initiation
into them, in order to take away every thing foreign from the proposed
sacred mystery. We may likewise add, that the referring multiform
purifications to the one cathartic power of the Gods, is adapted to
him. For Apollo every where unites and elevates multitude to _the
one_, and uniformly comprehends all the modes of purification;
purifying all heaven, generation, and all mundane lives, and separating
partial souls from the grossness of matter. Hence the theurgist who is
the leader of the mysteries of this God begins from purifications and
sprinklings:

    Αυτος δ’ εν πρωτοις ιερευς πυρος εργα κυβερνων,
    Κυματι ραινεσθω παγερῳ βαρυηχετος αλμης.

i.e. “The priest in the first place governing the works of fire,
must sprinkle with the cold water of the loud-sounding sea,” as the
Oracle says concerning him. But the assertion that the God presides
over simplicity according to knowledge, and unfolds truth into
light, presents him to our view as analogous to _the good_, which
Socrates celebrates in the Republic; in which place he calls the sun
the progeny of _the good_, and says that the former is analogous to
the latter. Apollo therefore being the source of union, and this to
the mundane Gods, is arranged analogous to _the good_; and through
_truth_, he unfolds to us his similitude to it, if it be lawful so to
speak. For _the simple_ is a manifestation of _the one_, and the truth
which subsists according to knowledge is a luminous representation of
superessential truth, which first proceeds from _the good_. But _the
perpetually prevailing might of the God in the jaculation of arrows_,
evinces his dominion which vanquishes every thing in the world. For on
high from the supercelestial order, he scatters the rivers of Jupiter,
and pours his rays on the whole world: for his arrows obscurely signify
his rays. Again, the assertion that he presides over music, represents
to us that this God is the cause of all harmony, both unapparent and
apparent, through his ruling supermundane powers, according to which
he generates together with Mnemosyne and Jupiter, the Muses. But he
orderly disposes every thing sensible by his _demiurgic powers_, which
the sons of _theurgists_ denominate _hands_; since the energy of
the harmony of sounds is suspended from the motion of the hands. He
likewise orderly disposes souls and bodies through harmonic reasons,
using their different powers as if they were sounds; and he moves all
things harmoniously and rythmically by his demiurgic motions. The
whole of the celestial order too, and motion, exhibit the harmonious
work of the God; on which account also, partial souls are no otherwise
perfected than through an harmonic similitude to the universe, and
abandoning the dissonance arising from generation; for then they obtain
the most excellent life, which is proposed to them by the God.




                            CHAPTER XVIII.


As the Muses derive their subsistence from Apollo, and are perpetually
united to him, it is necessary to consider the nature of these
divinities in the next place, and the good which they confer on the
universe in conjunction with their leader Apollo. Plato therefore in
the Cratylus says “That the name of the Muses, and universally that of
music, was derived, as it seems, from μωσθαι, _to inquire_, and from
investigation and philosophy.” On which Proclus in his MS. Scholia on
that dialogue observes as follows:

“From discoursing about king Apollo, Plato proceeds to the Muses, and
the name of music; for Apollo is celebrated as Musagetes, or the leader
of the Muses. And he indeed is a monad with respect to the harmony
in the world; but the choir of the Muses is the monad of all the
number of the ennead (i.e. nine): From both likewise the whole world
is bound in indissoluble bonds, and is one and all-perfect, through
the communications of these divinities; possessing the former through
the Apolloniacal monad, but its all-perfect subsistence through the
number of the Muses. For the number nine which is generated from the
first perfect number (that is 3) is, through similitude and sameness,
accommodated to the multiform causes of the mundane order and harmony;
all these causes at the same time being collected into one summit for
the purpose of producing one consummate perfection. For the Muses
generate the variety of reasons with which the world is replete; but
Apollo comprehends in union all the multitude of these. And the Muses
give subsistence to the harmony of soul; but Apollo is the leader of
intellectual and impartible harmony. The Muses distribute the phænomena
according to harmonical reasons; but Apollo comprehends unapparent and
separate harmony. And though both give subsistence to the same things,
yet the Muses effect this according to number, but Apollo according
to union. And the Muses indeed distribute the unity of Apollo;
but Apollo unites harmonic multitude, which he also converts and
comprehends. For the multitude of the Muses proceeds from the essence
of _Musagetes_, which is both separate, and subsists according
to the nature of _the one_; and their number evolves the one and
primary cause of the harmony of the universe.

That such being the etymology of the name of the Muses, since Plato
calls philosophy the greatest music, as causing our psychical powers
to be moved harmoniously, in symphony with real beings, and in
conformity to the orderly motions of the celestial orbs; and since the
investigation of our own essence and that of the universe leads us to
this harmony, through a conversion to ourselves and more excellent
natures,--hence also we denominate the Muses from investigation. For
Musagetes himself unfolds truth to souls, according to one intellectual
simplicity; but the Muses perfect our various energies elevating them
to an intellectual unity. For investigations have the relation of
matter, with reference to the end from invention; just as multitude
with respect to _the one_, and variety with respect to simplicity.
We know therefore, that the Muses impart to souls the investigation of
truth, to bodies the multitude of powers, and that they are every where
the sources of the variety of harmonies.

In the fable likewise in the Phædrus about the grasshoppers Plato
speaks of the four Muses, Terpsichore, Erato, Calliope, and Urania,
as follows: “It is said the race of the grasshoppers received this
gift from the Muses, that they should never want nutriment, but should
continue singing without meat or drink till they died; and that after
death they should depart to the Muses, and inform them what Muse was
honoured by some particular person among us. Hence that by acquainting
Terpsichore with those who reverence her in the dance, they render her
propitious to such. By informing Erato of her votaries, they render
her favourable in amatory concerns; and the rest in a similar manner,
according to the species of veneration belonging to each. But that
they announce to the most ancient Calliope, and after her to Urania,
those who have lived in the exercise of philosophy, and have cultivated
the music over which they preside; these Muses more than all the rest
being conversant with the heavens, and with both divine and human
discourse; and sending forth the most beautiful voice.”

On what Plato here says of these Muses, Hermeas in his MS. Commentary
On the Phædrus, makes the following beautiful remarks: “Dancing here
must not be understood literally, as if Terpsichore was propitious
to those who engage in that kind of dancing which is the object of
sense; for this would be ridiculous. We must say therefore, that there
are divine dances; in the first place, the dance of the Gods; and
in the second place, that of divine souls. In the third place, the
revolution of the celestial divinities, viz. of the seven planets, and
the inerratic sphere, is called a dance. In the fourth place, those
who are initiated in the mysteries perform a certain dance. And in the
last place, the whole life of a philosopher is a dance. Who then are
those that honour the Goddess in the dance? Not those who dance well,
but those who live well through the whole of the present existence,
elegantly arranging their life, and dancing in symphony with the
universe. Again, Erato is denominated from Love, and from making the
works of Love, lovely; for she co-operates with Love. But Calliope
is denominated from the eye; and Urania presides over astronomy.
Through these two Goddesses we preserve our rational part from being
in subjection to the irrational nature. For through sight surveying
the order of the celestial Gods, we properly arrange our irrational
part. And farther still, through rythms, philosophy, and hearing, we
elegantly dispose that which we contain of the disorderly and void of
rythm.”




                             CHAPTER XIX.


The triad of celestial Gods immediately above the sun consists of
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, of which the first who is the source of
division and motion, perpetually separates, nourishes and excites the
contrarieties of the universe, that the world may exist perfect and
entire from all its parts. He requires, however, the assistance of
Venus, that he may insert order and harmony into things contrary and
discordant. But Jupiter is the cause of a royal and political life,
and is the supplier of a ruling prudence and a practical and adorning
intellect. And Saturn is the source of intellect, in consequence of
being an intellectual deity, and ascending as far as to the first
cause. Hence, as there is nothing disordered and novel in intellect,
Saturn is represented as an old man, and as slow in his motion: and on
this account, astrologers say, that such as have Saturn well situated
in their nativity are endued with intellect.

Plato in the Timæus delivers to us the manner in which each of these
seven divinities becomes an animal, and is suspended from a more
divine soul, and what kind of perfection it affords to the universe.
For he says, “When therefore, each of the natures necessary to a
joint fabrication of time had arrived at a local motion adapted to
its condition, and their bodies became animals through the connecting
power of vital bonds, they then learned their prescribed order.” For
each of them, says Proclus, is allotted an appropriate life and motion.
For since the demiurgic sacred law distributes to every mortal nature
that which is adapted to it, and co-arranges every thing with a view
to the blessedness of the universe, what ought we to say concerning
the governors of the world? Ought we not to assert that they have
received from their father, every thing appropriate and every good;
and that shining with the splendors of beauty, they not only fabricate
the generation of time in conjunction with the father, but also lead
and govern the whole world? For by thus speaking of them we shall
speak rightly. In addition to these things likewise, we ought to
assert, that they not only receive the beautiful and the good from the
demiurgic monad, but also that being self-motive, they impart these to
themselves; and that from themselves the giving of good originates.
Plato indeed, indicating this says, “that each of them _arrives_
(αφικεσθαι) at a local motion, adapted to its condition,” as defining
from itself the measure of the life, the order, and the motion which it
is allotted in the universe.

Since, however, each of the seven bodies has a twofold life, the one
inseparable, but the other separable; and the one indeed intellectual,
and in a ruling manner established in itself, but the other divided
about body, which it connects and moves; according to the latter
indeed, it is an animal, but according to the former a God. Plato,
therefore, distinguishing both these, and rightly conceiving that
a divine and intellectual soul, and which does not depart from
intelligibles, is one thing, but another, the animal which is suspended
from it, possesses life from, and is the image of it says, “that their
bodies became animals through the connecting power of vital bonds,
and that they then learned their prescribed order.” For a divine
soul learns indeed the demiurgic will, understands the works of the
father, and fabricates in conjunction with him mundane natures; and
this, through intellectually perceiving him, and being filled from
him with divine powers. For it is not possible for either intellect
or soul to provide for wholes in an exempt manner, in any other way
than by the participation of deity, and through a deific life. The
words, therefore, “a joint fabrication of time,” manifest that they
are allotted a secondary power in the generation of it; in consequence
of their father possessing a primary power. For he, indeed, generated
the wholeness of time; but these divinities co-operate with him in
the production of the parts of which time consists. For the periods
of these are the parts of the whole of time; just as they also were
generated parts of the world.

But the animated body is an animal bound with vital bonds, possessing
life from the soul which it receives according to the demiurgic
allotments. For if with us also, the animal is different from the man,
and the visible Socrates is one thing, but the true another, much more
are the true sun and the true Jupiter different from the visible orbs
of these divinities, and not composites of body and soul. Conformably
to this Socrates in the Phædrus says, “that we do not sufficiently
understand that a God is an immortal animal, possessing indeed a
soul and a body, connascent through the whole of time.” Indeed the
unity in each of these divinities, and the ineffable participation
of the fountain of all the numbers characterized by unity, form that
which is primarily a God. But the intellect which connects each of
these deities stably, uniformly, and invariably, is secondarily a
God. And the soul which is filled from intellect, and evolves the
one comprehension of it, is a God in the third place. And the first
indeed of these is truly a God; the second is most divine; and the
third is itself also divine, but illuminates the animal with which it
is connected with the peculiarity of deity; according to which this
likewise is divine, being bound with animated bonds, which may be said
to be vivific, demiurgic and indissoluble bonds, as Plato himself
afterwards asserts. For the whole of the divine bodies, are bound
in souls, are comprehended by and established in them; the _being
bound_ indeed indicating the stable and immutable comprehension
of bodies in souls, and their undisjoined communion with them. Such
therefore being the nature of divine bodies, they fabricate time in
conjunction with the demiurgus, call forth its one and unapparent
power, and impart a progression to it into the world, which unfolds
many temporal measures.




                              CHAPTER XX.


The celestial Gods therefore, according to Plato subsisting after this
manner, and the unity in each of them ineffably proceeding from the
fountain of good, it is evident that they are all of them beneficent,
and after a similar manner the causes of good. The bodies also which
are suspended from their divine souls possess indescribable powers,
some indeed being firmly established in the divine bodies themselves,
but others proceeding from them into the nature of the world and into
the world itself, descending in an orderly manner through the whole of
generation, and without impediment extending as far as to particulars.
With respect to the powers therefore, which remain in the divine
celestial bodies themselves, there can be no doubt but that they are
all similar; hence those powers remain to be considered which are sent
to this terrestrial region, and are mingled with generation.

These then descend after the same manner for the safety of the
universe, and connect with invariable sameness the whole of generation.
They are likewise impassive and immutable, though they arrive at that
which is mutable and passive. Generation indeed, being multiform, and
consisting of things of a different nature, it receives the unity
and simplicity of these Gods through its appropriate contrariety and
division, in a hostile and partible manner. It likewise receives that
which is impassive passively: and in short it participates of these
Gods according to its own nature, and not according to their power.
Hence, as that which is generated participates of being according to
a flux of existence; and body participates of an incorporeal nature
corporeally; thus also the natural and material substances which are
in generation, participate of the immaterial and etherial bodies which
are above nature and generation, in a confused and disorderly manner.
Those therefore are absurd who attribute colour, figure and contact
to intelligible forms, because the participants of them are coloured,
figured and tangible; and they are no less absurd who ascribe evil to
the celestial bodies, because the participants of them are sometimes
evil. For there could be no participation, if the participant was
not different from that which it participates. But if that which is
participated is received in something different from itself, this
something different, is in terrestrial places that which is evil and
disorderly.

This participation therefore, becomes the cause of the abundant
difference in secondary natures, and also the mixture of material with
immaterial influences. To which may be added likewise, as another
cause, that what is imparted in one way, is received after another in
these inferior realms. Thus for instance, the influence of Saturn is
connective, but that of Mars motive. In these material realms however,
the passive receptacle of generation, receives the former according to
congelation and frigidity; but the latter according to immoderate heat.
Hence, corruption and the privation of symmetry are to be ascribed to
the alterant, material and passive nature of the recipients.

Farther still, the imbecility of material and terrestrial places, not
being able to receive the genuine power and most pure life of the
etherial natures, ascribes its own defects to first causes. Just as if
some one being weak in his body, and not able to bear the vivifying
heat of the sun, should falsely dare to say, influenced by his own
infirmities, that the sun is not advantageous to health and life.
A thing of this kind likewise, may take place in the harmony and
temperament of the universe, I mean, that the same things which are
salutary to the whole, through the perfection of the recipients and
things received, may be noxious to the parts though their partible
privation of symmetry. In the motion of the universe therefore, all the
circulations preserve the whole world after a similar manner, though
frequently one certain part is injured by another; just as in a dance,
where the order of the whole choir is still preserved, though a foot
or a finger may happen to be hurt. Again, to be corrupted, and to be
changed, are affections connascent with particulars. But it is not
proper to accuse on this account wholes and first causes, either as
containing these in themselves, or as if these proceeded from them into
these inferior realms. And thus it appears, that neither the celestial
Gods themselves, nor their gifts are productive of evil.[113]




                             CHAPTER XXI.


And thus much concerning the planetary deities, who were called by the
ancients, the governors of the world. In the next place therefore,
let us direct our attention to what Plato and his best interpreter
Proclus have transmitted to us concerning Minerva, who as a mundane
divinity is connected with ether, and has also an allotment in the
celestial regions. Plato then in the Timæus describes this Goddess as
both a lover of war, and a lover of wisdom; for he says that she is
philopolemic and philosophic. As she every where however exerts this
twofold power, according to her intellectual, supermundane, and mundane
subsistence, I shall present the reader with the whole of what Proclus
says[114] respecting these two powers of the goddess, in his commentary
on that part of the Timæus where she is celebrated by Plato.

In the demiurgus and father, says he, of the whole world, many orders
of Gods that have the form of _the one_ present themselves to
the view. And these are of a guardian, or demiurgic, or elevating,
or connective, or perfective characteristic. But the undefiled and
untamed deity Minerva, is one of the first intellectual unities
subsisting in the demiurgus, according to which he himself remains
firm and immutable, and all things proceeding from him participate
of inflexible power; and through which he intellectually perceives
every thing, and is separate in an exempt manner from all beings.
All theologists therefore, call this divinity Minerva, as being
brought forth indeed from the summit of her father, and abiding in
him, being a demiurgic, separate, and immaterial intelligence. Hence
Socrates in the Cratylus, celebrates her as _theonoe_ (θεονοη)
or _deific intellection_. But as, in conjunction with other
divinities sustaining all things in the one demiurgus, and arranging
wholes, together with her father;--through the first of these, they
denominate her philosophic, but through the second philopolemic. For
she who according to the form of one connectedly contains all the
paternal wisdom is a philosopher. And she who invariably rules over
all contrariety, may be properly called a lover of war. Hence Orpheus
speaking of her birth says, that Jupiter generated her from his head,

    With armour shining like a brazen flower.

Since however, it was necessary that she should proceed into second and
third orders, she appears in the order to which Proserpine belongs,
according to the undefiled heptad; but she generates every virtue
from herself, and elevating powers, and illuminates secondary natures
with intellect, and an undefiled life. Hence she is called _Core
Tritogenes_. She likewise appears among the liberated Gods, uniting
the lunar order with intellectual and demiurgic light, causing the
productions of those divinities to be undefiled, and demonstrating the
one unity of them to be unmingled with their depending powers. She also
appears in the heavens and the sublunary region; and according to the
united gift of herself, imparts the cause both of the philosophic and
the philopolemic power. For her inflexibility is intellectual, and her
separate wisdom is pure and unmingled with secondary natures; and the
one characteristic peculiarity of Minerval providence, extends as far
as to the last orders. For since wherever there are partial souls that
resemble her divinity, they exert an admirable prudence, and exhibit
an unconquerable strength, what ought we to say of her attendant
choirs[115] of dæmons or divine, mundane, liberated, and ruling orders?
For all these receive as from a fountain the twofold peculiarity of
this Goddess. Hence also the divine poet [Homer] indicating both these
powers of Minerva, in conjunction with fabulous devices says,

    The radiant veil her sacred fingers wove,
    Floats in rich waves, and spreads the court of Jove.
    Her father’s warlike robe her limbs invest.[116]

In which verses by the veil which she wove, and to which she gave
subsistence by her intellections, her intellectual wisdom is signified.
But by the warlike robe of Jupiter we must understand her demiurgic
providence, which immutably takes care of mundane natures, and prepares
more divine beings always to have dominion in the world. Hence also, I
think Homer represents her as an associate in battle with the Greeks
against the Barbarians; just as Plato here relates that she was an
associate with the Greeks against the inhabitants of the Atlantic
island; in order that every where more intellectual and divine natures
may rule over such as are more irrational and vile. For Mars also is
a friend to war and contrarieties, but with a separation and division
more adapted to the things themselves. Minerva however, connects
contrariety, and illuminates the subjects of her government with union.
Hence likewise she is said to be philopolemic. For,

    Strife, fighting, war, she always loves.

And she is a friend to war indeed, because she is allotted the summit
of separation; but she is a lover of contrarieties, because these are
in a certain respect congregated through this goddess, in consequence
of better natures having dominion. On this account likewise, the
ancients co-arranged Victory with Minerva.

If therefore, these things are rightly asserted, she is philosophic
indeed, as being demiurgic intelligence, and as separate and immaterial
wisdom. Hence also, she is called Metis by the Gods. But she is
philopolemic, as connecting the contrarieties in wholes, and as an
untamed and inflexible deity. On this account likewise, she preserves
Bacchus undefiled, but vanquishes the giants in conjunction with her
father. She too alone shakes the ægis, without waiting for the mandate
of Jupiter. She also hurls the javelin,

    Shook by her arm, the massy javelin bends,
    Huge, ponderous, strong! that when her fury burns
    Whole ranks of heroes tames and overturns.[117]

Again, she is _Phosphoros_, as every way extending intellectual light;
the _Saviour_, as establishing every partial intellect in the total
intellections of her father; _Ergane_, or the artificer, as presiding
over demiurgic works. Hence the theologist Orpheus says, that the
father produced her,

    That she the queen might be of mighty works.

But she is _Calliergos_, or the beautiful fabricator, as connecting
by beauty all the works of the father; a _Virgin_, as exerting an
undefiled and unmingled purity; and _Aigiochos_, or ægis-bearing, as
moving the whole of fate, and being the leader of its productions.

With respect to the spear and shield with which this Goddess, in
the statues of her, is represented as armed, Jamblichus, as we are
informed by Proclus,[118] explains these in a most divinely-inspired
manner as follows: Since every divine nature ought to act and not to
suffer; in order that by operating it may not have the inefficacious
which is similar to matter, but by not suffering, it may not have that
efficacy which resembles material natures, that produce accompanied
with passion,--that it may have neither of these, he asserts that
shields are powers, through which a divine nature remains impassive
and pure, surrounding itself with an infrangible guard. But spears
are powers, according to which it proceeds without contact through
all things, operates in all things, amputating a material nature, and
giving assistance to every generation-producing form. These powers,
however, are first seen about Minerva. Hence also in the statues of her
she is armed with a spear and shield. For she vanquishes every thing,
and according to theologists, remains inflexibly, and uncontaminated
in her father. But these things are seen in a secondary degree in the
Minerval powers, both in such as are whole, and such as are partial.
For as the Jovian and demiurgic multitudes imitate their monads;
and as the prophetic and Apolloniacal multitudes participate of the
characteristic peculiarity of Apollo; thus also the Minerval number
adumbrates the uncontaminated and unmingled nature of Minerva. And they
are seen ultimately in Minerval souls. For in these also the shield is
the untamed and inflexible power of reason; but the spear is that which
is incisive of matter, and which liberates souls from the perturbations
arising from dæmons or destiny.

With respect to the mundane allotment also of this Goddess who
proceeds supernally from intellectual causes to the earth, Proclus
observes, (in Tim. p. 43.) that she primarily subsists in her father;
but secondarily in the supermundane Gods; that her third progression
is in the twelve liberated rulers; and that after this, she unfolds
into light a liberated authority in the heavens. In one way indeed
in the inerratic sphere; for there also, a certain allotment of this
Goddess is expanded; whether it be the place about the ram, or that
about the virgin, or whether it be some one of the northern stars, as
the Electra which is there is by certain persons asserted to be. But
she unfolds this power in another way in the sun. For there also an
admirable power, and a Minerval order, fabricates wholes, according to
theologists, in conjunction with the sun. And again, in another way
in the moon, being the monad of the triad[119] which is there. But in
another way in the earth, according to the similitude of the allotments
of the earth to the celestial distributions. And lastly, she unfolds
this liberated authority differently in different parts of the earth,
according to the peculiarities of providential energy. This being the
case, it is by no means wonderful that one deity, Minerva, is said by
Plato to have been allotted Athens, and Saïs in Egypt. For it must
not be supposed, that because partial souls are not naturally adapted
to inhabit two bodies at once, this is also impossible to the Gods.
But there is a participation of the same divine power according to
different places, yet in the one power there is also multitude. And by
this place, indeed, it is participated in one way; but by other places
in a different way. And in some sameness is more abundant, but in
others difference.

In another part, likewise, of the same admirable work (p. 30) Proclus
observes of this Goddess, that it is manifest from the Greeks, that
her dominion extends from on high as far as to the last of things;
for they say she was generated from the summit or head of Jupiter.
But the Egyptians relate that this inscription was written in the
adytum of the Goddess. _I am the things that are, that will be, and
that have been. No one has ever laid open the garment by which I am
concealed. The fruit which I brought forth was the sun._[120] The
Goddess, therefore, being demiurgic, and at the same time apparent
and unapparent, has an allotment in the heavens, and illuminates
generation with forms. For of the signs of the zodiack, the ram is
ascribed to the Goddess, and the equinoctial circle itself, where
especially a power motive of the universe is established. And thus much
concerning the philopolemic and philosophic Goddess Minerva.




                             CHAPTER XXII.


Let us in the next place direct our attention to that great mundane
divinity the earth, and consider what it is, whence it proceeds,
and how it is said by Plato in the Timæus to be our nurse, and the
most ancient and first of the Gods within the heavens, deriving our
information about this Goddess also from Proclus, (in Tim. p. 280).
Earth then proceeds primarily from the intelligible earth which
comprehends all the intelligible orders of the Gods, and is eternally
established in the father.[121] It also proceeds from the intellectual
Earth which is co-arranged with Heaven, and all the productions of
which it receives. For being analogous to these, it also abides
perpetually as in the centre of the heavens, and being contained,
on all sides by them, is full of generative power, and demiurgic
perfection. The true earth, therefore, is neither this corporeal-formed
and gross bulk; for it will not be the most ancient of the Gods from
its bulk, nor the first of the Gods that are arranged within the
heavens; nor is it the soul of this body; for it would not be, as
Plato says it is, extended about the pole of the universe, since not
the soul, but the body of the earth is a thing of this kind; but if
it be necessary to speak what is most true concerning it, it is an
animal consisting of a divine soul, and a living body. Hence the whole
is, as Plato says, an animal. For there are in it an immaterial and
separate intellect; a divine soul dancing round this intellect; an
etherial body proximately suspended from its informing soul; and in
the last place, this visible bulk, which is on all sides inspired with
life by the vehicle[122] of this soul, with which also being filled,
it generates and nourishes all-various animals. For some animals[123]
are rooted in it, but others about it. And this likewise, Aristotle
perceiving, was ashamed not to give to the earth a natural life. For
whence is it that plants while they remain in the earth live, but when
divulsed from it die, unless this earthly mass was full of life? It
is necessary, also, to assume universally, that wholes are animated
prior to parts. For it would be ridiculous that man indeed should
participate of a rational soul and of intellect, but that no soul
should be assigned to the earth and the air, supernally riding in [as
it were] and governing the elements, and preserving them in their
proper boundaries. For wholes, as Theophrastus says, would have less
authority than parts, and perpetual than corruptible natures, if they
were destitute of soul. Hence, it is necessary to grant that a soul and
an intellect are in the earth; the former causing it to be prolific,
but the latter connectedly-containing it in the middle of the universe.

Earth herself, therefore, being a divine animal, is also a plenitude
of intellectual and psychical essences, and of immaterial powers. For
if a partial soul has besides a material body an immaterial vehicle,
what ought we to think of a soul so divine as that of the earth? Is
it not, that by a much greater priority visible bodies are suspended
from this soul through other vehicles as media, and that through these,
the visible bodies are able to receive the illuminations of soul?
Such then being the nature of earth herself, she is said to be our
nurse; in the first place, indeed, as possessing a power in a certain
respect equivalent to Heaven. For as that comprehends in itself divine
animals, thus also earth is seen to contain terrestrial animals. But
in the second place, she is our nurse, as inspiring our lives from
her own proper life. For she not only produces fruits, and nourishes
our bodies through these, but she also fills our souls with the
illuminations of herself. For being a divine animal, and generating
us who are partial animals, through her own body indeed she nourishes
and connectedly-contains our bulk; but from her own soul perfects
ours. By her own intellect, likewise, she excites the intellect
which is in us; and thus according to the whole of herself becomes
the nurse of our whole composition. On this account it appears to me
that Plato calls her our nurse, indicating by this her intellectual
nutritive energy. For if she is our nurse, but we are truly souls and
intellects, according to these especially, she will be the perfector
of our essence, moving and exciting our intellectual part. But being
a divine animal, and comprehending in herself many partial animals,
she is said by Plato to be conglobed about the pole which is extended
through the universe; because she is contained and compressed about
its axis. For the axis also is the pole. And the pole is thus now
denominated, because the universe revolves about it. Because, however,
the pole [properly so called] is impartible, but the axis is a pole
with interval, just as if some one should say that a line is a flowing
point,--on this account, the pole is said by Plato to be extended
through the universe, as entirely pervading through the centre of the
earth.

But we must survey the poles as powers that give stability to the
universe, exciting indeed the whole bulk of it to intelligible love,
and impartibly connecting that which is partible, and unitedly and
without interval that which is extended by interval. Hence, also, Plato
in the Republic, makes the spindle of Lachesis of adamant, indicating,
as we have said, their inflexible and untamed power. And we must
consider the axis, as that one divinity which collects the centres
of the universe, which is connective of the whole world, and motive
of the divine circulations; and as that about which wholes dance and
are convolved, and as sustaining all heaven, being on this account
denominated Atlas, as possessing an immutable and unwearied energy. The
word τεταμενον also, or _extended_, used here by Plato, indicates that
this one power is Titannic guarding the circulations of wholes. But
if, as the divine Jamblichus says, we understand by the pole extended
through the universe, the heavens, neither thus shall we wander from
the conception of Plato. For, as Plato says in the Cratylus, those who
are skilled in astronomy call the heavens the pole, as harmoniously
revolving. According to this conception, therefore, you may call heaven
the pole extended through the universe, as being incurvated through
the whole of itself, in consequence of being without an angle. For
after this manner the superficies of a circle is extended. About this,
however, earth is conglobed, not locally, but through a desire of
becoming assimilated to it, converging to the middle, in order that as
heaven is moved about the centre, so she by tending to the centre, may
become similar to that which is essentially spherical, being herself as
much as possible conglobed. Hence she is compressed about the heaven in
such a way as to be wholly extended about it.

According to each of these conceptions, therefore, Plato delivers the
cause through which earth is contained in the middle. For the axis
is a power connective of the earth; and the earth is on all sides
compressed by the circulation of the heaven, and is collected together
into the centre of the universe. Earth, therefore, being such, Timæus
afterwards clearly shows what utility she affords to the universe; for
he calls her the guardian and artificer of day and night. And indeed
that she is the maker of night, is evident. For she produces a conical
shadow; and her magnitude and figure, are the causes of the dimension
and quality of the figure of this shadow. But after what manner is she
likewise the fabricator of day? Or does she not produce this day which
is conjoined with night? For about her the risings and settings of the
sun are surveyed. And that Plato assumes this day which is convolved
with night, is evident from his arranging the former under the latter;
as also prior to this, when he says, night therefore and day were thus
generated. Earth, therefore, is the fabricator of both these, producing
both in conjunction with the sun; the sun indeed being in a greater
degree the cause of day, but the earth of night.

Being, however, the fabricator, she is also the guardian of them,
preserving their boundaries and contrariety with reference to each
other, and also their augmentations and diminutions, according to a
certain analogy. Hence, some denominate her Isis, as equalizing the
inequality, and bringing to an analogy the increase and decrease of
both day and night. But others looking to her prolific power call her
Ceres, as Plotinus, who denominates the intellect of the earth Vesta,
but the soul of it Ceres. We, however, say that the first causes of
these divinities are intellectual, ruling[124] and liberated; but that
from these causes illuminations and powers extend to the earth. Hence
there is a terrestrial Ceres and Vesta, and a terrestrial Isis, in
the same manner as there is a terrestrial Jupiter, and a terrestrial
Hermes; these terrene deities being arranged about the one divinity of
the earth; just as a multitude of celestial Gods proceeds about the one
divinity of the heavens. For there are progressions and terminations
of all the celestial Gods into the earth; and all things are in her
terrestrially, which are contained in the heavens celestially. For
the intellectual earth receives the paternal powers of heaven, and
contains all things after a generative manner. Thus, therefore, we say
that there is a terrestrial Bacchus, and a terrestrial Apollo, who is
the source of prophetic[125] waters in many parts of the earth, and of
openings which predict future events. But the Pæonian[126] and judicial
powers which proceed into it, render other places of it of a purifying
or medicinal nature. All the other powers of the earth, however, it is
impossible to enumerate. For divine powers are indeed inexplicable. But
the orders of angels and demons that follow these powers are still more
numerous, and are circularly allotted the whole earth, and dance round
its one divinity, its one intellect, and one soul.




                            CHAPTER XXIII.


It remains in the next place, that we should survey how the earth is
said to be the most ancient, and the first of the Gods within the
heavens. For this will be taken literally by those who are accustomed
to look only to its material, gross and dark bulk. But we indeed grant
them that there is something of such a kind in the bulk of the earth
as they say there is; but we think it proper that they should likewise
look to the other goods of the earth, through which it surpasses the
prerogatives of the other elements, viz. its stability, its generative
power, its concord with the heavens, and its position in the centre of
the universe. For the centre has great power in the universe, as being
connective of every circulation. Hence also the Pythagoreans call the
centre the tower of Jupiter, in consequence of containing in itself a
demiurgic guard. We shall likewise remind our opponents of the Platonic
hypothesis concerning the earth, mentioned by Socrates in the Phædo,
where he says that the place of our abode is hollow and dark, and
bound by the sea; but that there is another true earth, containing the
receptacles of the Gods, and possessing a beauty resembling that of the
heavens. We ought not, therefore, to wonder if now the earth is said to
be the most ancient and the first of the Gods within the heavens, since
she possesses so great an altitude, and such a surpassing beauty, and
as Socrates afterwards says, was fashioned by the Demiurgus resembling
a sphere covered with twelve skins, just as the heaven is similar to a
dodecahedron. We must likewise understand that the Demiurgus gave to
the earth alone among the elements to have all the elements separately,
causing her to be wholly a world, variegated analogous to the heavens.
For she contains a river of fire, of air, and of water, and of another
earth, which has the same relation to her which she has to the
universe, as Socrates says in the Phædo. But if this be the case, she
very much transcends the other elements as imitating the heavens, and
possessing every thing in herself terrestrially, which is celestially
contained in the heavens.

To this also we may add, that the Demiurgus produced these two elements
the first, earth and fire; but the others for the sake of these, in
order that they might have the ratio of bonds with respect to them. And
that the four elements are both in the heavens, and in the sublunary
region; but in the former, indeed, according to a fiery characteristic,
since fire there predominates, as Plato says, but in the latter
according to a terrestrial peculiarity. For the profundity of air, and
the bulk of water are spread round the earth, and possess much of an
earthly property, on which account they are in their own nature dark.
In the heavens, therefore, there is a predominance of fire, but in the
sublunary region of earth. Since, however, generation is connascently
conjoined with the heavens, the end of the latter is earth, so far
as earth is in the heavens, but the beginning of generation is fire,
considered as subsisting in generation. For it is usual to call the
moon earth, as having the same ratio to the sun, which earth has to
fire. “But [the Demiurgus] says Orpheus, fabricated another infinite
earth, which the immortals call _Selene_, but terrestrials
_Mene_.” And it is usual to denominate the summit of generation
fire, which Aristotle also does, when he calls ether fire. In another
place, however, he does not think it proper to call ether fire, but
fiery-formed. Hence, the end of the heavens is not entirely destitute
of mutation, in consequence of its propinquity to generation; but the
beginning of generation is moved in a circle imitating the heavens.

Farther still, this likewise must be considered, that we ought not
to judge of the dignity of things from places, but from powers and
essence. By what peculiarities, therefore, are we to form a judgment
of transcendencies? By what others than those which the divine orders
exhibit? For transcendency truly so called is with the Gods. From
the divine orders, therefore, we must assume _the monadic_, _the
stable_, _the all-perfect_, _the prolific_, _the connective_, _the
perfective_, _the every-way extended_, _the vivific_, _the adorning_,
_the assimilative_, and _the comprehending_ power. For these are the
peculiarities of all the divine orders. According to all these however,
the earth surpasses the other elements, so that she may justly be
called the most ancient, and the first of the Gods.

Again, a two-fold nature of things may be surveyed, the one indeed
according to progression, which always makes things that have a
secondary arrangement subordinate to those that are prior to them; but
the other according to conversion, which conjoins extremes to primary
natures through similitude, and produces one circle of the whole
generation. Since also the world is spherical, but a figure of this
kind is the peculiarity of things that subsist according to conversion,
earth likewise must be conjoined in it to the heavens, through one.
circle, and one similitude. For thus also the centre is most similar
to the poles. For the heavens indeed entirely comprehend wholes, being
moved about the poles; but the earth is allotted permanency in the
centre. For it is appropriate to generation that the immoveable should
be more ancient than that which is moved. Hence, according to all these
conceptions it may be said, that earth as co-ordinate with heaven, is
the most ancient of the Gods within the heavens. For she is within
them, as being on all sides comprehended by them. For as the demiurgus
fashioned the whole of a corporeal nature within the soul of the world,
thus also he fabricated earth within the heavens, as compressed and
contained by them, and in conjunction with them fabricating wholes.

She has, however, so far as she is _the first_ of the Gods, an
indication of transcendency according to essence; but so far as she
is _the most ancient_, she exhibits to our view the dignity which she
is allotted. For how is it possible not to admit that she is allotted
a great portion in the world, and is very honourable, in whom there
are the tower of Jupiter, and the progression of Saturn? For not
only Tartarus, which is the extremity of the earth, is on all sides
comprehended by Saturn, and the Saturnian power, but also whatever
else may be conceived subordinate to this. For Homer says that this
is connectedly contained through the sub-tartarean Gods. Not that he
arranges Gods beyond Tartarus, as the words indicate; but that Tartarus
itself is on all sides comprehended by them.

Farther still, we may survey the analogy which earth has to the
intellectual earth. For as the latter comprehends and gives subsistence
to perfective, guardian, and Titannic orders of Gods, of which the
Orphic theologies are full, so likewise the former possesses various
powers. And as a nurse indeed she imitates the perfective order,
according to which the Athenians also are accustomed to call her
κουροτροφος, or _the nourisher of youth_, and ανησιδωρα, or _scattering
gifts_, as producing and nourishing plants and animals. But as a guard
she imitates the guardian, and as conglobed about the pole which is
extended (τεταμενη) through the universe, the _Titannic_ order. Since,
however, the intellectual earth prior to other divinities generated
Aigle and the Hesperian Erithya, thus also our earth is the fabricator
of day and night. And the analogy of the latter to the former is
evident.

In the last place, Proclus adds, if also you are willing after another
manner to understand that she is the first and most ancient of the
Gods, as deriving her subsistence from the first and most ancient
causes, this reason also will be attended with probability, since first
causes proceed by their energies to the utmost extent of things; and
besides this, the last of things frequently preserve the analogy of
such as are first, as possessing their order from them alone. Hence,
every way the assertion of Plato is true, whether you are willing to
look to the bulk of the earth, or to the powers which she contains. And
thus much from Proclus, concerning that great mundane divinity, the
earth, who in the language of Theophrastus[127] is the common Vesta
of Gods and men; and on whose fertile surface reclining, says he, as
on the soft bosom of a mother or a nurse, we ought to celebrate her
divinity with hymns, and incline to her with filial affection, as to
the source of our existence.




                             CHAPTER XXIV.


Having thus amply discussed the theory pertaining to the celestial
Gods, it is necessary in the next place, that we should direct our
attention to the sublunary deities, who are denominated γενεσιουργοι,
or _the fabricators of generation_. Plato in the Timæus calls
these Gods dæmons, because they are so with reference to the celestial
Gods. For they are suspended from them, and together with them
providentially attend to their appropriate allotments. Conformably
to this, also, in the Banquet he calls Love a dæmon, as being the
attendant of Venus, and as proceeding from the God Porus, who is truly
the source of abundance; though in the Phædrus he admits Love to be
a God, as with reference to the life of which he is the leader. What
Plato, therefore, says of these Gods in the Timæus is as follows: “But
to speak concerning the other dæmons, and to know their generation,
is a task beyond our ability to perform. It is, therefore, necessary
in this case to believe in ancient men; who being the progeny of the
Gods, as they themselves assert, must have a clear knowledge of their
parents. It is impossible, therefore, not to believe in the children
of the Gods, though they should speak without probable and necessary
arguments: but as they declare that their narrations are about affairs
to which they are naturally allied, it is proper that complying with
the law, we should assent to their tradition. In this manner then,
according to them, the generation of these Gods is to be described.
That Ocean and Tethys were the progeny of Heaven and Earth. That from
hence Phorcys, Saturn, and Rhea, and such as subsist together with
these, were produced. That from Saturn and Rhea, Jupiter, Juno, and all
such as we know are called the brethren of these descended. And lastly
others, which are reported to be the progeny of these.”

Proclus, in his usual admirable manner, copiously elucidates these
words of Plato, and in his comment fully unfolds the theory of the
sublunary Gods. But unfortunately there are many chasms in some of the
most important parts of his elucidations, which no critical acumen, nor
sagacious conjecture, can fully supply. I shall endeavour, however,
to extract from his commentary, in the best manner I am able, all the
information on this subject which can at present be derived from this
invaluable work, occasionally attempting to restore the sense, where
from the mutilated state of the original it is wanting.

Plato then, intending now to speak of the sublunary Gods, says,
that the discourse about them is admirable, and beyond our ability
to perform, if we intend to discover the generation of them, and
promulgate it to others. For what he before said of the demiurgus,
that it is difficult to discover him, and impossible to speak of him
to all men, this he now says of the sublunary Gods, that to know and
to speak of the generation of them, surpasses our ability. What,
therefore, does Plato mean by this mode of indication? For as he has
delivered so many and such admirable things concerning all heaven, and
the intelligible paradigm, how is it that he says, that to speak of
the Gods who are the fabricators of generation, is a task beyond our
ability to perform? Perhaps it is because many physiologists considered
these sublunary elements to be inanimate natures casually borne along,
and destitute of providential care. For they acknowledged that the
celestial bodies, on account of their orderly motions, participate
of intellect and the Gods; but they left generation, as being very
mutable and indefinite, deprived of providential inspection. In order,
therefore, that we might not be affected in the same manner as they
were, he antecedently celebrates and proclaims the generation of the
sublunary Gods to be divine and intellectual, requiring no such mode
of indication in speaking of the celestial Gods. Perhaps also it may
be said, that souls more swiftly forget things nearer to themselves,
but have a greater remembrance of superior principles. For they in a
greater degree operate upon them through transcendency of power, and
appear through energy to be present with them. The same thing also
happens with respect to our sight. For though we do not see many things
that are situated on the earth, yet at the same time we appear to see
the inerratic sphere, and the stars themselves, because they illuminate
our sight with their light. The eye of the soul, therefore, becomes
in a greater degree oblivious of, and blind to, more proximate than
to higher and more divine principles. Thus, all religions and sects
acknowledge that there is a first principle of things, and all men
invoke God as their helper; but all do not believe that there are Gods
posterior to this principle, and that a providential energy proceeds
from them into the universe. For _the one_ is seen by them in a
clearer manner than multitude. Others, again, believe indeed that there
are Gods, but after the Gads, admitting the dæmoniacal genus, they are
ignorant of the heroic order. And in short, this is the greatest work
of science, subtilly to distinguish the media and the progressions of
beings. If, therefore, we rightly assert these things, Plato, when
speaking of the celestial Gods, very properly indicates nothing of the
difficulty of the subject; but when speaking of the sublunary Gods,
says that it surpasses our ability. For the discussion of these is
more difficult, because we cannot collect any thing about them from
apparent objects, but it alone requires a divinely-inspired energy, and
intellectual projection. And thus much concerning this doubt.

Again, though we have assigned a reason why Plato calls the sublunary
Gods dæmons, we may likewise say according to another conception,
that in the celestial regions there are dæmons, and in the sublunary,
Gods; but that in the former the genus is indeed divine,[128] though
dæmons also are generated according to it;[129] and that in the
latter the whole multitude are dæmons. For there indeed, the divine
peculiarity, but here the dæmoniacal predominates, to which some alone
looking, have divided the divine and the dæmoniacal, according to the
heavens and generation. They ought however, to have arranged both in
both; but in the former indeed the divine nature, and in the latter
the dæmoniacal predominates; though in the former there is also the
divine peculiarity. For if the whole world is a blessed God, no one of
the parts which give completion to it is destitute of divinity, and
providential inspection. But if all things participate of deity and
providence, the world is allotted a divine nature. And if this be the
case, appropriate orders of Gods preside over its different parts. For
if the heavens through souls and intellects as media participate of
one soul, and one intellect, what ought we to think of these sublunary
elements? How is it possible, that these should not in a much greater
degree participate through certain middle divine orders, of the one
deity of the world?

Farther still, it would also be absurd that the telestic art (or the
art pertaining to mystic ceremonies) should establish on the earth
places fitted for oracles, and statues of the Gods, and through certain
symbols should cause things generated from a partial and corruptible
matter, to become adapted to the participation of deity, to be moved by
him, and to predict future events; but that the demiurgus of wholes,
should not place over the whole elements which are the incorruptible
plenitudes of the world, divine souls, intellects and Gods. For
whether was he unwilling? But how could he be unwilling, since he
wished to make all things similar to himself? Was he then unable? But
what could hinder him? For we see that this is possible from telestic
works. But if he was both willing and able, it is evident that he gave
subsistence to Gods, who have allotments in, and are the inspective
guardians of generation. Since however the genus of dæmons is every
where an attendant on the Gods, there are also dæmons who are the
fabricators of generation; some of whom indeed rule over the whole
elements, but others are the guardians of climates, others are the
rulers of nations, others of cities, others of certain families, and
others are the guardians of individuals. For the guardianship of dæmons
extends as far as to the most extreme division.




                             CHAPTER XXV.


Having therefore solved the problem pertaining to the essence, let us
in the next place consider the order of the sublunary Gods, and the
meaning of the subsequent words of Plato. For let them be Gods, and
let them be called dæmons for the cause above assigned, where must we
arrange them? Must it be, as we have before said, under the moon, or
prior to the celestial[130] Gods? For this may appear to be proper
for these two reasons; one indeed, because Plato indicates that he
ascends to a greater order, by saying that it exceeds our ability to
speak concerning them, having already spoken concerning the celestial
Gods; but the other, because he follows in what he says, those who
have delivered to us Theogonies. For they prior to the world and the
demiurgus, delivered these generations of Gods proceeding from Heaven
and Earth. In answer to this query however, we must say, that he
produces them after the celestial Gods, and through this from Heaven
and Earth. For on this account he said that Earth was the most ancient
of the Gods within the Heaven, because from this and Heaven, he was
about to produce the other Gods which the heavens contain. This we
demonstrate from the demiurgus addressing his speech to these Gods,
and to all the rest, as being produced by him within the universe.
Why, however, Plato says that he follows the Theogony, and why he
shall omit to speak concerning the sublunary deities, we must refer to
his having no clear indications of the subsistence of these from the
phænomena, as he had of the celestial divinities, from the order of
their periods, which is adapted to the government of Gods. It exceeds
the province therefore of physiology to speak of beings, concerning
whom natural effects afford us no stable belief. Hence Plato says, as a
physiologist, that it surpasses his ability to speak of these.

If, however, he says that he follows those who are divinely inspired,
but they speaking concerning the supercelestial Gods, he adopts a
similar Theogony, though discoursing of the sub-celestial divinities,
we must not consider this as wonderful. For he knew that all the
orders of the Gods, proceed as far as to the last of things, from the
arrangement which is the principle of their progression, every where
generating series from themselves analogous to the superior deities
from which they proceed. Hence, though the orders of these Gods which
are celebrated by theologists, are above the world, yet they subsist
also in the sensible universe. And as this visible heaven is allied
to that which is supermundane, so likewise our earth is allied to the
earth which is there, and the orders subsisting from the one to the
orders proceeding from the other. From these things too, this also
may be assumed, that according to Plato as well as according to other
theologists, first natures as they proceed, produce things subordinate
in conjunction with the causes of themselves. For these sublunary Gods
proceeding from the demiurgus, are also said to be generated from
Heaven and Earth that first proceed from him. The demiurgus therefore
says to all of them that they ought to fabricate mortal natures,
imitating his[131] power about their generation. Hence all of them
proceed from one producing cause, though those of a secondary order
proceed likewise from the Gods that are prior to them. It follows
therefore from this, that not every thing which is produced by the
junior Gods is mortal, since some of these proceed from other junior
Gods; but the contrary alone is true, that every thing mortal is
generated by these divinities. And again, it follows from this, that
the junior Gods produce some things according to the immoveable, but
others according to the moveable hyparxes of themselves. For they would
not be the causes of immortals, if they produced all things according
to moveable hyparxes; if it be true that every thing which subsists
from a moveable cause, is essentially mutable.

Again, when Plato says, “It is therefore necessary to believe in
ancient men, who being the progeny of the Gods as they themselves
assert, must have a clear knowledge of their parents; for it is
impossible not to believe in the children of the Gods, though they
should speak without probable and necessary arguments,” we may collect
from this, that he who simply believes in things which seem difficult
to be known, and which are of a dubious nature, runs in the paths of
abundance, recurring to divine knowledge, and deific intelligence,
through which all things become apparent and known. For all things
are contained in the Gods. But that which antecedently comprehends
all things, is likewise able to fill other things with the knowledge
of itself. Hence, Timæus here sends us to theologists, and to the
generation of the Gods celebrated by them. Who therefore are they, and
what is their knowledge? They indeed are the progeny of the Gods, and
clearly know their progenitors; being the progeny and children of the
Gods, as preserving the form of their presiding deity according to
the present life. For Apolloniacal souls, in consequence of chusing a
prophetic, or telestic life, are called the children and progeny of
Apollo; children indeed, so far as they are souls pertaining to this
God, and adapted to this series; but progeny because they demonstrate
their present life to be conformable to these characteristics of the
God. All souls therefore, are the children of the Gods; but all do not
know their presiding God. Such however, as have this knowledge and
chuse a similar life, are called the children and progeny[132] of the
Gods. Hence Plato adds, “as they say,” for they unfold the order from
which they came. Thus the Sibyl[133] as soon as she was born, uttered
oracles; and Hercules appeared at his birth with demiurgic symbols. But
souls of this kind convert themselves to their progenitors, and are
filled from them with deific knowledge. Their knowledge however, is
enthusiastic, being conjoined to deity through divine light, and exempt
from all other knowledge, both that which is probable, and that which
is demonstrative. For the former is conversant with nature, and the
universal in particulars; but the latter with an incorporeal essence,
and the objects of science. Divinely-inspired knowledge however, alone,
is conjoined with the Gods themselves.

Timæus, or in other words Plato, afterwards adds: “But as they declare
that their narrations are about affairs, to which they are naturally
allied, it is proper that complying with the law, we should assent to
their tradition.” From these words, he who considers them accurately
may assume many things, such as that divinely-inspired knowledge is
perfected through familiarity with and alliance to the Gods. For the
sun is seen through solar-form light, and divinity becomes apparent
through divine illumination. It may likewise be inferred that the
divine law defines the orders of the Gods which the divinely-inspired
conceptions of the ancients unfold, according to which also souls
energizing, though not enthusiastically, are persuaded by those
that enthusiastically energize. Complying with this law, Timæus in
the beginning of this dialogue says that he shall invoke the Gods
and Goddesses. From these words also we may infer, that all the
kingdoms both in the heavens and the sublunary region, are adorned
and distributed in order, according to the first and intellectual
principles; and that all of them are every where according to the
analogous. Likewise that the order of things precedes our conceptions.
But it is Pythagoric to follow the Orphic genealogies. For the science
concerning the Gods proceeded from the Orphic tradition through
Pythagoras, to the Greeks, as Pythagoras himself says in the _Sacred
Discourse_.




                             CHAPTER XXVI.


Again then, following Proclus, we say that the theory of the sublunary
is immediately connected with that of the celestial Gods; and in
consequence of being suspended from it, possesses the perfect and
the scientific: For the generation-producing choir of Gods, follows
the Gods in the heavens, and in imitation of the celestial circle,
convolves also the circle in generation. For secondary follow the
natures prior to them, according to an indivisible and united
progression. Because however, the divinities that govern generation,
subsist immediately from the celestial Gods, on this account also they
are converted to them according to one undisjoined union; just as the
celestial are converted to the supercelestial deities, from whom they
were proximately generated; but the supercelestial to the intellectual,
by whom they were adorned and distributed; and again the intellectual
to the intelligible Gods, from whom they were ineffably unfolded into
light, and who indescribably and occultly comprehend all things.

Of the whole of this truly golden chain therefore, the summit is
indeed the genus of the intelligible Gods, but the end is that of the
sublunary deities, who govern[134] generation in an unbegotten, and
nature in a supernatural manner, to which the demiurgic intellect
now gives subsistence; the dominion of the Gods extending supernally
from the heavens, as far as to the last of things. Of these sublunary
deities however, it is necessary to observe in the first place, that
all of them preserve the generative and perfective energy of their
generating cause, and also his demiurgic and stable productive power.
They likewise receive measures, boundaries, and order from their
father. And such things as he governs exemptly and totally, they being
divided according to allotments, fabricate, generate, and perfect. Some
of them also are proximate to the celestial Gods; but others proceed
to a greater distance from them. Hence, some preserve the idea of
these Gods, so far as it can be preserved in the sublunary order; but
others are established according to their appropriate power. For of
every order, the summit is analogous to the order prior to it. Thus the
summit of intelligibles is unity; of intellectuals is intelligible;
of the supermundane order, is intellectual; and of the mundane order,
supermundane. And some of the sublunary Gods indeed, are in a greater
degree united to the demiurgic monad; but others are more distant
from it. Hence, some being analogous to it, are the leaders of the
whole of this series; but others have a more partial similitude to
it. For the father established in every order powers analogous to him
in their arrangement; since in all the divine orders a certain cause
pre-subsists analogous to _the good_.

Conformably to these causes which are thus analogous to the ineffable
principle of things, and which with reference to it are called monads,
the sublunary Gods proceed, and adorn and distribute generation in a
becoming manner. And some indeed, give completion to this, but others
to some other will of their father. For some complete his connective,
others his prolific, others his motive, others his guardian will, and
others, some other will of the demiurgus pertaining to the wholes in
the sublunary region. And some of them have dominion over souls, others
over dæmons, and others over Gods. All of them however are intellectual
according to essence, but mundane according to allotment. They are also
perfective, and powerful, governing generation in an unbegotten manner,
beings deprived of intellect, intellectually, and inanimate natures,
vitally. For they adorn all things according to their own essence,
and not according to the imbecility of the recipients. But Plato is
evidently of opinion that these Gods use certain other bodies more
simple and perpetual than these elements by saying, that they appear
when they please and become visible to us. That he likewise gives them
souls is manifest from his saying that every mundane God is conjoined
to bodies through soul. For he then first called the world itself a
God, when he had established a soul in it. And again that he suspends
intellects from them, through which their souls are intellectual, and
are immediately converted to the demiurgus, is evident from the speech
of the demiurgus to them.

If likewise it is requisite that the whole world should be perfect, it
is necessary that together with the divine genera we should conceive
that the dæmoniacal order was generated prior to our souls, and which
receives a triple division, viz. into angels, dæmons properly so
called, and heroes. For the whole of this order fills up the middle
space between Gods and men; because there is an all-perfect separation
or interval between our concerns, and those of the Gods. For the latter
are eternal, but the former are frail and mortal. And the former indeed
are satisfied with the enjoyment of intellect in energy partially; but
the latter ascend into total intellects themselves. On this account,
there is a triad which conjoins our concerns with the Gods, and which
proceeds analogous to the three principal causes of things; though
Plato is accustomed to call the whole of this triad dæmoniacal. For
the angelic is analogous to being, or the intelligible which is first
unfolded into light from the ineffable and occult fountain of beings.
Hence also, it unfolds the Gods themselves, and announces that which is
occult in their essence. But the dæmoniacal is analogous to infinite
life. On which account it proceeds every where according to many
orders, and is of a multiform nature. And the heroic is analogous to
intellect and conversion. Hence also, it is the inspective guardian
of purification, and is the supplier of a magnificent and elevated
life. Farther still, the angelic indeed proceeds according to the
intellectual life of the demiurgus. Hence it also is essentially
intellectual, and interprets, and transmits a divine intellect to
secondary natures. But the dæmoniacal proceeds according to the
demiurgic providence of wholes, governs nature, and rightly gives
completion to the order of the whole world. And the heroic again,
proceeds according to the convertive providence of all these. Hence,
this genus likewise is elevated, raises souls on high, and is the cause
of a grand and vigorous energy.

Such therefore being the nature of these triple genera, they are
suspended from the Gods; some indeed from the celestial Gods, but
others from the divinities who are the inspective guardians of
generation. And about every God there is an appropriate number of
angels, heroes and dæmons. For, every God is the leader of a multitude
which receives his characteristic form. Hence of the celestial Gods,
the angels, dæmons aid heroes are celestial; but of the fabricators of
generation, they have a generation-producing characteristic. Of the
elevating Gods, they have an elevating property: but of the demiurgic,
a demiurgic; of the vivific, a vivific property. And so of the rest.
And again, among the elevating Gods, of those that are of a Saturnian
characteristic, the angels, dæmons, and heroes are Saturnian; but of
those that are Solar, they are Solar. Among the vivific Gods likewise
of those that are Lunar, the ministrant powers are Lunar; but of the
Aphrodisiacal, or those that have the characteristic of Venus, they
are Aphrodisiacal. For they bear the names of the Gods from whom
they are suspended, as being in connected continuity with them, and
receiving one and the same idea with an appropriate subjection. Nor is
this wonderful, since partial souls also, when they know their patron
and leading Gods, call themselves by their names. Or whence were the
Esculapiuses, the Bacchuses, and the Dioscuri denominated, who being
men of an heroic character, took the names of the deities from whom
they descended?[135] As therefore, of the celestial, so likewise of
the Gods who are the fabricators of generation, it is necessary to
survey about each of them, a co-ordinate angelical, dæmoniacal, and
heroical multitude; and that the number suspended from them retains
the appellation of its producing monad. Hence, there is a celestial
God, angel and hero; and the like is also true of the earth.[136] In a
similar manner we must say that Ocean and Tethys proceed into all the
orders; and conformably to this the other Gods. For there is likewise a
Jovian, a Junonian, and a Saturnian multitude, which is called by the
same appellation of life. Nor is there any absurdity, in calling man
both the intelligible and the sensible man; though in these, there is
a much greater separation and interval.[137] And thus much in common
concerning the Gods and dæmons who are the fabricators of generation.




                            CHAPTER XXVII.


It now remains to show what conceptions we ought to have of the Gods
mentioned by Plato in the passage before cited from the Timæus. For
of the ancients, some referred what is said about them to fables,
others to the fathers of cities, others to guardian powers, others
to ethical explanations, and others to souls. These, however, are
sufficiently confuted by the divine Jamblichus, who demonstrates
that they wander from the meaning of Plato, and from the truth of
things. After this manner, therefore, we must say, that Timæus being
a Pythagorean, follows the Pythagorean principles. But these are the
Orphic traditions. For what Orpheus delivered mystically through arcane
narrations, these Pythagoras learned, being initiated by Aglaophemus in
the mystic wisdom which Orpheus derived from his mother Calliope. For
these things Pythagoras says in the _Sacred Discourse_. What then
are the Orphic traditions, since we are of opinion that the doctrine of
Timæus about the Gods should be referred to these? They are as follow:
Orpheus delivered the kingdoms of the Gods who preside over wholes,
according to a perfect number, viz. Phanes, Night, Heaven, Saturn,
Jupiter, Bacchus. For Phanes is the first that bears a sceptre, and the
first king is the celebrated Ericapæus. But the second is Night, who
receives the sceptre from her father [Phanes.] The third is Heaven,
who receives it from Night. The fourth is Saturn, who, as they say,
offered violence to his father. The fifth is Jupiter, who subdued
his father. And after him, the sixth is Bacchus. All these kings,
therefore, beginning supernally from the intelligible and intellectual
Gods, proceed through the middle orders, and into the world, that they
may adorn mundane affairs. For Phanes is not only in intelligibles,
but also in intellectuals, in the demiurgic, and in the supermundane
order; and in a similar manner, Heaven and Night. For the peculiarities
of them proceed through all the middle orders. And with respect to the
mighty Saturn, is he not arranged prior to Jupiter, and does he not
after the Jovian kingdom, divide the Bacchic fabrication in conjunction
with the other Titans? And this indeed, he effects in one way in the
heavens, and in another in the sublunary region; in one way in the
inerratic sphere, and in another among the planets. And in a similar
manner Jupiter and Bacchus. _These things, therefore, are clearly
asserted by the ancients._

If, however we are right in these assertions, these divinities have
every where an analogous subsistence; and he who wishes to survey
the progressions of them into the heavens, or the sublunary region,
should look to the first and principal causes of their kingdoms. For
from thence, and according to them, their generation is derived. Some,
therefore, say, that Plato omits to investigate the Gods who are
analogous to the two kings in the heavens, I mean Phanes and Night.
For it is necessary to place them in a superior order, and not among
the mundane Gods; because prior to the world, they are the leaders of
the intellectual Gods, being eternally established in the adytum, as
Orpheus says of Phanes, who by the word adytum signifies their occult
and immanifest order. Whether, therefore, we refer the circulation of
same and different, mentioned by Plato in this dialogue, to the analogy
of these, as male and female, or paternal and generative, we shall
not wander from the truth. Or whether we refer the sun and moon, as
opposed to each other among the planets, to the same analogy, we shall
not err. For the sun indeed through his light preserves a similitude
to Phanes, but the moon to Night. Jupiter, or the demiurgus, in the
intellectual, is analogous to Phanes in the intelligible order. And
the vivific crater Juno is analogous to Night, who produces all life
in conjunction with Phanes from unapparent causes; just as Juno is
parturient with, and emits into light, all the soul contained in the
world. For it is better to conceive both these as prior to the world;
and to arrange the demiurgus himself as analogous to Phanes; since he
is said to be assimilated to him according to the production of wholes;
but to arrange the power conjoined with Jupiter, (i.e. Juno) and which
is generative of wholes, to Night, who produces all things from the
father Phanes. After these, however, we must consider the remaining, as
analogous to the intellectual kingdoms.

If, likewise, it should be asked why Plato does not mention the
kingdoms of Phanes and Night, to whom we have said Jupiter and Juno are
analogous? It may be readily answered, that the tradition of Orpheus
contains these; on which account Plato celebrates the kingdom of Heaven
and Earth as the first, the Greeks being more accustomed to this than
to the Orphic traditions; as he himself says in the Cratylus, where he
particularly mentions the Theogony of Hesiod, and recurs as far as to
this kingdom according to that poet. Beginning, therefore, from this
Theogony as more known, and assuming Heaven and Earth as the first
kingdoms above the world, he produces the visible Heaven and Earth
analogous to those in the intellectual order, and celebrates the latter
as the most ancient of the Gods within the former. From these also, he
begins the Theogony of the sublunary Gods. These things, however, if
divinity pleases, will be manifest from what follows. At present we
shall only add, that it is requisite to survey all these names divinely
or dæmoniacally, and according to the allotments of these divinities in
the four elements. For this ennead is in ether and water, in earth and
in air, all-variously, according to the divine, and also according to
the dæmoniacal peculiarity. And again, these names are to be surveyed
aquatically and aerially, and likewise in the earth terrestrially, in
order that all of them may be every where, according to an all-various
mode of subsistence. For there are many modes of providence divine
and dæmoniacal, and many allotments according to the division of the
elements.




                            CHAPTER XXVIII.


Let us, therefore, now return to the words of Plato. In the first place
then he says that Ocean and Tethys were the progeny of Heaven and
Earth. And here we may observe, that as this whole world is ample and
various, as adumbrating the intellectual order of forms, it contains
these two extremities in itself, Earth and Heaven; the latter having
the relation of a father, but the former of a mother. On this account
Plato calls Earth the most ancient of the Gods within the heavens, in
order that conformably to this he might say, that Earth is the mother
of all that Heaven is the father; at the same time evincing that
partial causes are not only subordinate to their progeny, as Poverty,
in the Banquet of Plato to Love, but are likewise superior to them, as
alone receiving the offspring proceeding from the fathers. These two
extremities, therefore, must be conceived in the world, Heaven as the
father, and Earth as the mother of her common progeny. For all the rest
terminate in these, some giving completion to the celestial number,
but others to the wholeness of Earth. After the same manner, likewise,
in each of the elements of the world, these two principles, Heaven
and Earth, must be admitted, subsisting aerially indeed in air, but
aquatically in water, and terrestrially in earth; and according to all
the above-mentioned modes; in order that each may be a perfect world,
adorned and distributed from analogous[138] principles. For if man is
said to be a microcosm, is it not necessary that each of the elements
by a much greater priority should contain in itself appropriately all
that the world contains totally? Hence, it appears to me that Plato
immediately after speaking about Heaven and Earth, delivers the theory
of these Gods, beginning from those two divinities; for the other
divinities proceed analogous to Heaven and Earth. These two divinities,
however, are totally the causes of all the Gods that are now produced.
And these divinities that are the progeny of Heaven and Earth, are
analogous to the whole of each. These two, likewise, as we have before
observed, are in each of the elements, aerially, or aquatically, or
terrestrially. For Heaven is in Earth, and Earth in Heaven.[139]
And here, indeed, Heaven subsists terrestrially, but there Earth
celestially. For Orpheus calls the moon celestial earth.[140] Nor is it
proper to wonder that this should be the case. For we may survey the
same things every where, according to the analogous, in intelligibles,
in intellectuals, in the supermundane order, in the heavens, and in
generation, conformably to the proper order of each.

With respect, however, to each of these divinities, some of the
interpreters of Plato understand by Earth, this solid bulk which is the
object of sensible inspection; others as that which has an arrangement
analogous to matter, and is supposed to exist prior to generated
natures; others, as intelligible matter; others, as the power of
intellect; others, as life; others, as an incorporeal form inseparable
from earth; others conceive it to be soul; and others intellect. In
a similar manner with respect to Heaven, some suppose it to be the
visible heavens; others, the motion about the middle of the universe;
others, power aptly proceeding in conjunction with motion; others,
that which possesses intellect; others, a pure and separate intellect;
others, the nature of circulation; others, soul; and others, intellect.
I know, likewise, that the divine Jamblichus understands by Earth,
every thing stable and firm, according to the essence of the mundane
Gods, and which according to energy and a perpetual circulation,
comprehends more excellent powers and total lives. But by Heaven, he
understands the total and perfect energy proceeding from the demiurgus,
which is full of appropriate power, and subsists about the demiurgus,
as being the boundary of itself and of wholes. I know, likewise, that
the admirable Theodorus establishes both these powers in the life which
subsists according to habitude.

In order, however, that we may avoid erroneous opinions, and may
adhere to the most pure conceptions of Jamblichus, and the traditions
of Syrianus, if is necessary in the first place to recollect, that
Plato is now speaking of the sublunary Gods, that all of them are
every where, and that they proceed according to the analogy of the
intelligible and intellectual kings. And in the second place we must
say, that as the first Heaven is the boundary of and connectedly
contains the intellectual Gods, containing the measure which proceeds
from _the good_[141] and the intelligible Gods, into the intellectual
orders, after the same manner the Heaven which is now mentioned
by Plato, is the boundary and container of the Gods that are the
fabricators of generation, comprehending in one bound the demiurgic
measure, and also that which proceeds from the celestial Gods to those
divinities that are allotted the realms of generation, and connecting
them with the celestial government of the Gods. For as the demiurgus
is to _the good itself_, so is the one divinity of this Heaven, to the
intellectual Heaven. Hence, as there, measure and bound proceeds from
_the good_ through Heaven to all the intellectual Gods, so likewise
here a bound arrives to the Gods the fabricators of generation and to
the more excellent genera [viz. to angels, dæmons and heroes] from
the demiurgus, and the summit of the mundane Gods; viz. through the
connectedly-containing medium of this Heaven.[142] For the everywhere
proceeding Heaven is allotted this order; in one procession of
things indeed, unitedly and occultly; but in another manifestly and
separately. For in one order, it introduces bound to souls; in another
to the works of nature; and in another in a different manner to other
things. And in air indeed, it effects this primarily; but in the
aquatic orders secondarily; and in earth, and terrestrial works, in
an ultimate degree. But there are also complications of these. For
the divine mode of subsistence, and also the dæmoniacal are different
in the air, and in the earth. For in one place, the mode is the same
in different orders; but in another the mode is different in one
allotment. And thus much concerning the power of Heaven.




                             CHAPTER XXIX.


In the next place, directing our attention to Earth, we shall derive
the whole of the theory concerning her from her first evolution into
light. She first becomes manifest, therefore, in the middle triads[143]
of the intellectual Gods, together with Heaven who connectedly
contains the whole intellectual order. She likewise proceeds analogous
to the intelligible Earth, which we find to be the first of the
intelligible[144] triads. And as ranking in the vivific orders, she is
assimilated to the first infinity. But she is the receiving bosom of
the generative deity of Heaven, and the middle centre of his paternal
goodness. She also reigns together with him, and is the power of him
who ranks as a father. The Earth, however, which is analogous to her,
and presides in the sublunary regions, is as it were the prolific power
of the Heaven pertaining to the realms of generation, unfolding into
light his paternal, definitive, measuring and containing providence,
which prolifically extends to all things. She likewise generates
all the sublunary infinity;[145] just as Heaven who belongs to the
co-ordination of bound, introduces termination and end to secondary
natures. Bound, therefore, and end define the hyparxis of every thing
according to which Gods and dæmons, souls and bodies are connected and
made to be one, imitating the one unity of wholes, or in other words,
the ineffable principle of things; but infinity multiplies the powers
of every being. For there is much bound in all sublunary natures, and
likewise much infinity, which through divinity, and after the Gods
extends to all things. We have, therefore, these two orders, which
are generative of the divine or dæmoniacal progressions, in all the
sublunary genera and elements; and one kingdom of them in the same
manner as in the intellectual orders.

From these, however, a second duad proceeds, Ocean and Tethys, this
generation not being effected by copulation, nor by any conjunction
of things separated, nor by division, nor according to a certain
abscission, for all these are foreign from the Gods; but they are
accomplished according to one union and indivisible conjunction of
powers. And this union theologists are accustomed to call marriage.
For marriage, as the theologist Orpheus says, is appropriate to this
order. For he calls Earth the first Nymph, and the union of her
with Heaven the first marriage; since there is no marriage in the
divinities that are in the most eminent degree united. Hence there
is no marriage between Phanes and Night, who are intelligibly united
to each other. And marriage appears on this account to be adapted to
the Heaven and Earth which we are at present considering, so far as
they adumbrate the intellectual Heaven and Earth; which the sacred
laws of the Athenians likewise knowing, ordered that the marriages of
Heaven and Earth should be celebrated, as preparatory to initiation
into the mysteries. Directing their attention to these also, in the
Eleusinian mysteries looking upward to the heavens, they exclaimed, O
son! but looking downward to the earth, O parent! According to this
union, therefore, in conjunction with separation, Heaven and Earth
produce through their goodness Ocean and Tethys. Or rather, they do not
immediately produce these, but prior to these two monads, two triads,
and duple hebdomads, among which are Ocean and Tethys. And the monads
indeed, together with the triads, remain with the father. But of the
hebdomads, Ocean, together with Tethys, abide, and at the same time
proceed. All the rest, however, proceed into another order of Gods. And
this indeed is the mode of their subsistence in the intellectual order.
But here, Plato entirely omits the causes that abide in the father,
but delivers to us those that proceed and at the same time abide,
because his intention is to speak of the Gods that are the fabricators
of generation. To these, however, progression, motion, and difference,
are adapted, and a co-arrangement of the male with the female; in
order that there may be generation, that matter may be adorned with
forms, and that difference may be combined with sameness. Hence Plato
commences from the duad, proceeds through it, and again returns to it.
For the duad is adapted to material natures, as well as difference, on
account of the division of forms about matter. Having mentioned a duad,
likewise, he begins from Earth; for this is more adapted to things
pertaining to generation.

With respect to these two divinities, however, Ocean and Tethys, who
abide in their causes and at the same time proceed from them, some
say that Ocean is a corporeal essence; others, that it is a swiftly
pervading nature; others, that it is the motion of a humid essence;
others, that it is ether, through the velocity of its motion; and
others, that it is the intelligible profundity itself of life. The
divine Jamblichus, however, defines it to be the middle motive divine
cause, which middle souls, lives, and intellections, efficacious
natures, and those elements that are pneumatic, such as air and fire,
first participate. And with respect to Tethys, some say that it is a
humid essence; others, that it is a very-mutable nature; and others,
that it is the hilarity of the universe. But the divine Jamblichus
asserts it to be a productive power, possessing in energizing an
efficacious establishment, the stable intellections of which, souls,
natures, and powers participate, and which is likewise participated by
certain solid receptacles, either of earth or water, which prepare a
seat for the elements.

We, however, again assuming our principles, say, that the causes of
these are indeed in the intellectual Gods, and that they are likewise
in the sensible universe. For Ocean every where distinguishes first
from second orders, in consequence of which poets do not improperly
call it the boundary of the earth. But the Ocean which is now the
subject of discussion, is the cause of motion, progression, and power;
inserting in intellectual lives indeed, acme, and prolific abundance;
but in souls, celerity and vigour, in their energies, and purity in
their generations; and in bodies facility of motion. And in the Gods
indeed it imparts a motive and providential cause; but in angels an
unfolding and intellectual celerity and vigour. Again, in dæmons it
is the supplier of efficacious power; but in heroes, of a magnificent
and flourishing life. It likewise subsists in each of the elements,
according to its characteristic peculiarity. Hence, the aerial Ocean
is the cause of all the mutation of aerial natures, and of the circle
of the meteors, as also Aristotle says. But the aquatic Ocean gives
subsistence to fertility, facility of motion, and all-various powers.
For according to the poets,

    From this all seas, and every river flow.

And the terrestrial ocean is the producing cause of generative
perfection, of the separation of forms, and of generation and
corruption. Whether also there are certain terrestrial orders, vivific
and demiurgic, it is the source of their distinction; or whether there
are powers connective of the productive principles of the earth, and
the inspective guardians of generation,--these also it excites and
multiplies, and calls into motion.

With respect to Tethys, as the name indeed evinces, she is the most
ancient, and the progenitor, of the Gods, in the same manner as it
is fit to acknowledge of the mother Rhea. For theologists denominate
another Goddess prior to her, Maia. Thus, Orpheus,

    Maia, of Gods supreme, immortal Night,
    What mean you, say?

But according to the etymology of Plato, she is a certain fontal
deity. For the undefiled and pure, and that which percolates are
signified through her name. For since Ocean produces all things, and
is the source of all motions, whence also it is called the generation
of the Gods, Tethys separates the unical cause of his motions into
primary and secondary motions. Hence Plato says, that she derives her
appellation from _leaping_ and _percolating_. For these are separative
names, in the same manner, as he says in the Sophista, (το ξαινειν και
κερκιζειν) to card, and to separate threads in weaving with a shuttle.
Ocean, therefore, generating all motion collectively, whether divine,
or intellectual, or psychical, Tethys separating both internal and
external motions, is so called from causing material motions to leap
and be percolated from such as are immaterial. Hence, the separating
characteristic is adapted to the female, and the unical[146] to the
male, Plato, therefore, would assert such peculiarities as these, of
Ocean and Tethys, and does assert them in the Cratylus. But according
to the divine Jamblichus, Tethys must be defined to be the supplier of
position and firm establishment. From all that has been said, however,
it may be summarily asserted that Tethys is the cause of permanency,
and a firm establishment of things in herself, separating them from the
motions that proceed externally.

In short, Ocean is the cause of all motion, intellectual, psychical,
and physical to all secondary natures; but Tethys is the cause of all
the separation of the streams proceeding from Ocean, imparting to each
a proper purity in the motion adapted to it by nature; through which
each, though it may move itself, or though it may move other things,
yet moves in a transcendent manner. But theologists manifest that Ocean
is the supplier of all motion, when they say that he sends forth ten
streams, nine of which proceed into the sea; because it is necessary,
that of motions nine should be corporeal, but that there should be one
alone of the essence which is separate from bodies, as we are informed
by Plato in the Laws.[147] Such divine natures, therefore, as the
mighty Ocean generates, these he excites to motion, and renders them
efficacious. But Tethys distinguishes these, preserving generative
causes pure from their progeny, and establishing them in energies more
ancient than those that proceed into the external world. And thus much
concerning each of these divinities, Ocean and Tethys.

Since, however, as we have said, the generation of these, is from
the prior divinities, Heaven and Earth, but is not effected either
by a copulation such as that which is in sensibles, nor according to
such a union as that of Night and Phanes in intelligibles, it very
properly follows that their progeny are separated from each other,
analogously to their parents, and that each receives a similitude to
both. For Ocean indeed, as being the male, is assimilated to the
paternal cause, Heaven; but as the supplier of motion to the maternal
cause, Earth, who is the cause of progressions. And Tethys indeed, as
the female, is assimilated to the prolific cause; but as producing a
firm establishment[148] of her progeny in their proper lives, she is
assimilated to the fabricating cause. For the male is analogous to the
monadic; but the female to the dyadic. And the stable is adapted to the
former; but the motive to the latter. A duad, therefore, proceeding
from a duad, and being assimilated according to the whole of itself
to the duad which is generative of it, defines and distinguishes the
causes of itself, and all the number posterior to itself; in order that
every where we may ascribe that which defines and separates, to the
order of Ocean and Tethys.




                             CHAPTER XXX.


In the next place Plato says, “that from Ocean and Tethys, Phorcys,
Saturn, and Rhea, and such as subsist together with these were
produced;” the theory of which divinities is as follows. In the former
progeny, a duad generative and motive, was produced from a terminating
and definitive duad; viz. Ocean and Tethys, from Heaven and Earth; but
in the second progeny, a multitude converted to its causes through the
triad, ts generated from the duad; indicating likewise an all-perfect
progression. For this multitude also is divided, into the analogous
to bound, and the co-ordinate to infinity. For the triad is the bound
in this multitude; but the nameless number is the infinity in it. And
of the triad itself, likewise, one thing is analogous to the monad
and bound, but another to the duad and infinity. And in the former
progression, indeed, the progeny alone proceeded according to bound
and the intellectual; but in this there is also a mixture of the
indefinite. But after the boundary from the triad, Plato adds, “And
such as subsist together with these,” indicating the entire progression
and separation of these triple orders; so that the progeny of this
progression is triadic through the peculiarity of conversion, and
dyadic through the intervention of the infinite and indefinite.

Since, however, these differ according to their intellectual causes, in
the same manner as the before-mentioned orders; but in them Ocean and
Tethys were said to be the brethren, and not the fathers[149] of Saturn
and Rhea; for the progression to these was from Heaven and Earth, and
all the Titannic order is thence derived; let us see on what account
Plato here gives subsistence to Phorcys, Saturn and Rhea, from Ocean
and Tethys. For he may appear to say this not conformably to the Orphic
principles. For “Earth latently bore from Heaven, as the theologist
says, seven pure beautiful virgins with rolling eyes, and seven sons
that were kings, with fine long hair. And the daughters indeed were
Themis, and the joyful Tethys, Mnemosyne with thick-curled hair, and
the blessed Thea. She likewise bore Dione having a very-graceful form,
and Phœbe, and Rhea the mother of king Jupiter. But the venerable
Earth brought forth those celestial youths, who are called by the
appellation of Titans, because they revenged the mighty starry Heaven.
And she also bore Cæus, the great Cræus, and the strong Phorcys, and
likewise Saturn, and Ocean, Hyperion and Japetus.” These things then
having been written by the theologist prior to Plato, how is it that
Timæus produces Saturn and Rhea, from Ocean and Tethys? In answer to
this, as we have before arranged Ocean and Tethys above Saturn and
Rhea, as being the media between these and the fathers, and guardians
of the boundaries of both, as it is usual to celebrate them; we must
say in the first place, indeed, that it is not wonderful that the same
divinities should be brothers, and yet through transcendency of dignity
should be called the fathers of certain Gods. For such things as are
first, when they proceed from their causes, produce in conjunction
with those causes, the natures posterior to themselves. Thus all souls
indeed are sisters, according to one demiurgic cause, and according to
the vivific principle and fountain from which they proceed; at the same
time divine souls produce partial souls together with the demiurgus
and vivific causes, in consequence of first proceeding into light,
and abiding in their wholeness, receiving the power of fabricating
natures similar to themselves. Besides, in the Gods themselves, all the
offspring of Saturn are brethren, according to the one generative monad
by which they were produced; yet at the same time Jupiter is called
father, in the divine poet Homer, both by Juno and Neptune. So that it
is not at all wonderful, if Ocean and Tethys are called both brethren
and fathers of Saturn and Rhea; in consequence of preserving as among
brethren the paternal peculiarity. In the first place, therefore, the
doubt may after this manner be solved.

In the next place, it may be said, that of the divine Titannic
hebdomads, Ocean indeed both abides and proceeds, uniting himself
to his father, and not departing from his kingdom. But all the rest
rejoicing in progression, are said to have given completion to the
will of Earth, but to have assaulted their father, dividing themselves
from his kingdom, and proceeding into another order. Or rather, of
all the celestial genera, some alone abide in their principles, as
the two first triads. For, as soon as Heaven understood that they
had an implacable heart, and a lawless nature, he hurled them into
Tartarus, the profundity of the earth, [says Orpheus]. He concealed
them, therefore, in the unapparent, through transcendency of power. But
others both abide in, and proceed from, their principles, as Ocean and
Tethys. For when the other Titans proceeded to assault their father
Heaven, Ocean prohibited them from obeying the mandates of their
mother, being dubious of their rectitude. He, therefore, abides, and
at the same time proceeds, together with Tethys; for she is conjoined
with him according to the first progeny. But the other Titans are
induced to separation and progression. And the leader of these is the
mighty Saturn, as the theologist says; though he evinces that Saturn
is superior to Ocean, by saying, that Saturn himself received the
celestial Olympus, and that there being throned he reigns over the
Titans; but that Ocean obtained all the middle allotment. For he says,
that he dwells in the divine streams which are posterior to Olympus,
and that he environs the Heaven which is there, and not the highest
Heaven, but as the fable says, that which fell from Olympus, and was
there arranged.[150]


Ocean and Tethys, therefore, so far as they abide, and are united to
Heaven, produce in conjunction with him the kingdom of Saturn and
Rhea; and so far as they are established in the first power of their
mother, so far they produce Phorcys in conjunction with her.[151] For
she produces him together with Nereus and Thaumas,[152] from being
mingled through love with the sea. For Phorcys is not celestial, but
Ocean, as is evident from the Theogony.[153] And so far as Tethys is
full of Earth, so far being as it were a certain Earth, she may be said
to produce this Phorcys in conjunction with Ocean; so far as Ocean
also comprehends the intelligible in himself. Hence Tethys, so far as
she is Earth according to participation, and Ocean so far as he is
causally the sea, give subsistence in conjunction with Saturn and Rhea
to this God. If, however, any arguments should demonstrate that in the
intellectual order Saturn is above Ocean, or Rhea above Tethys, it must
be said that this arrangement is indeed there; for in that order the
causes of intellection are superior to those of motion; but that here
on the contrary, all things are in mutation and a flowing condition,
so that here Ocean is very properly prior to Saturn, since it is the
fountain of motion, and Tethys is prior to Rhea. Hence, after another
manner, the doubt may be thus solved.

That we may speak, however, about each of these Gods, Theodorus refers
souls that subsist in habitude to these divinities, and arranges
them as presiding over the three divisions of the world. And Phorcys
indeed, he arranges in the starless sphere, as moving the lation of the
universe. He ought, however, to persuade us that Plato was acquainted
with a certain starless sphere, and afterwards, that he thus arranged
Phorcys in this sphere. But he places Saturn over the motions of
the stars, because time[154] is from these, and the generations and
corruptions of things. And he places Rhea over the material part of
the world, because by materiality she has a redundancy with respect to
the divinities prior to herself. But the divine Jamblichus arranges
them in the three spheres between the heavens and the earth. For some
of the sublunary deities give a two-fold division to the sublunary
region, but these divide it in a three-fold manner. And Phorcys indeed,
according to him, presides over the whole[155] of a humid essence,
containing all of it impartibly. But Rhea is a divinity connective of
flowing and aerial-formed spirits. And Saturn governs the highest and
most attenuated sphere of ether, having a middle arrangement according
to Plato; because the middle and the centre in incorporeal essences,
have a greater authority than the powers situated about the middle.
We, indeed, admire this intellectual explanation of Jamblichus; but
we think it proper to survey these Gods every where, both in all the
elements, and all orders. For thus we shall behold that which is common
in them, and which extends to all things. And we say, indeed, that
Phorcys is the inspective guardian of every spermatic essence, and of
physical, and as it were spermatic productive principles, as being
pregnant with, and the cause of generation. For there are spermatic
productive principles in each of the elements; and different orders of
Gods and dæmons preside over them, all which Plato comprehends through
Phorcys. But king Saturn divides forms and productive principles, and
produces more total into more partial powers. Hence he is not only
an animal but pedestrious, aquatic and a bird. And he is not only
pedestrious, but likewise man and horse. For the productive principles
in him are more partial than in the celestial deities. Among the
intellectual Gods, therefore, he is allotted this power, viz. to
multiply and divide intelligibles. Hence, he is the leader of the
Titans, as being especially characterized by the dividing peculiarity.

Again, we say that Rhea receives the unapparent powers of king Saturn,
leads them forth to secondary natures, and excites the paternal powers
to the fabrication of visible objects. For thus also, her first order
is moved, is filled with power and life, and produces into that which
is apparent, the causes that abide in Saturn. Hence Saturn is every
where the supplier of intellectual forms; Rhea is the cause of all
souls, and of every kind of life; and Phorcys is prolific with physical
productive principles. Since however another number of Gods pertains
to the kingdom of these, and which Saturn and Rhea comprehend, on this
account Plato adds, “and such as subsist together with these.” For he
not only through this comprehends dæmons, as some say, but both the
angelic and the dæmoniacal Saturn have with themselves a multitude,
the one angelic, but the other dæmoniacal. And the multitude which is
in the Gods is divine; that which is in the air is aerial; and in a
similar manner in the other elements, and in the other more excellent
genera arranged under these Gods.

By the words also “such as subsist together with these,” Plato appears
to signify the remaining Titans, viz. Cæus and Hyperion, Creus,
Japetus, and likewise the remaining Titanidæ, viz. Phœbe, Theia,
Mnemosyne, Themis, and Dione, with whom Saturn and Rhea proceeded into
light. Also, those that proceeded together with Phorcys, viz. Nereus
and Thaumas, the most motive Eurybia, and those who especially contain
and connect the whole of generation. Moreover, it is worth while to
observe that it is not proper to discuss accurately the arrangement in
these divinities, and whether Saturn or Phorcys is the superior deity;
for they are united and similar to each other. But if it be requisite
to make a division, it is better to adopt the arrangement of the divine
Jamblichus, viz. that Saturn is a monad; but Rhea a certain duad
calling forth the powers that are in Saturn; and that Phorcys gives
perfection to their progression.




                             CHAPTER XXXI.


It now remains that we direct our attention to the other kings, who
produce the apparent sublunary order of things; for such is the
arrangement which they are allotted. Plato adds therefore, “That from
Saturn and Rhea, Jupiter, Juno, and all such as we know are called
the brethren of these descended.” This is the third progression of
the Gods who are the fabricators of generation, but the fourth order,
closing as a tetrad the nomination of the leading Gods. For the tetrad
is comprehensive of the divine orders. But as a duad this progression
is assimilated to the first kingdom; because that as well as this is
dyadic. There are, however, present with it, the all-perfect according
to progression, and the uncircumscribed according to number. But
Plato here not only adds the words “_such as_,” as in the progression
prior to it, but likewise the word “_all_,” that he may indicate
the progression of them to every thing. For we use the term το οσον
_such as_ in speaking of things united, but the term το παντας _all_,
in speaking of things now divided and multiplied. The total (το
ολικον) likewise pertains to this progression. For the Gods which are
denominated in it, and those that proceed every where together with
them, are characterized according to this form of fabrication. For all
demiurgi are total. Who therefore are they, and what kind of order do
they possess?

The divine Jamblichus then asserts that Jupiter is the perfector of all
generation; but that Juno is the cause of power, connexion, plenitude
and life to all things; and that the brethren of them are those that
communicate with them in the fabrication of generation, being also
themselves intellects, and receiving a completion according to a
perfection and power similar to them. But Theodorus, again dividing
the life which animates the total in habitude, and forming it as he is
accustomed to do into triads, calls Jupiter the power that governs the
upper region as far as to the air; but Juno the power who is allotted
the aerial part of the world; and the brethren of them those that give
completion to the remaining parts. For Jupiter is the essential of
the soul that subsists in a material habit, because there is nothing
more vital than essence. But Juno is the intellectual part of such a
soul, because the natures on the earth are governed by the productive
principles proceeding from the air. And the other number is the
psychical distributed into particulars.

We, however, consequently[156] to what has been before asserted, say,
that according to Plato there are many orders of Jupiter. For one is
the demiurgus, as it is written in the Cratylus; another, is the first
of the Saturnian triad, as it is asserted in the Gorgias; another is
the liberated, as it is delivered in the Phædrus; and another is the
celestial, whether in the inerratic sphere, or among the planets.
Moreover, as the first Jupiter produced into the visible fabrication
the power of his father, which was concealed in the unapparent, being
excited[157] to this by his mother Rhea; after the same manner the
Jupiter delivered here, who is the fabricator of generation, causes the
unapparent divisions and separations of forms made by Saturn to become
apparent; but Rhea calls them forth, into motion and generation; and
Phorcys inserts them in matter, produces sensible natures, and adorns
the visible essence, in order that there may not only be divisions of
productive principles in natures and in souls, and in intellectual
essences prior to these, but likewise in sensibles. For this is the
peculiarity of fabrication. And if it be requisite to speak what
appears to me to be the truth, Saturn indeed produces intellectual
sections, but Rhea such as are psychical, and Phorcys such as are
physical. For all spermatic productive principles are under nature.
But Jupiter adorning sensible and visible sections, gives a specific
distinction to such beings in the sublunary region as are totally
vital, and causes them to be moved. Since, however, these sensible
forms which are generated and perfected, are multiformly evolved,
being moved and changed according to all-various evolutions, on this
account, the queen Juno is conjoined with Jupiter, giving perfection to
this motion of visible natures, and to the evolution of forms. Hence
fables represent her as at one time sending mania to certain persons,
but ordering others to undergo severe labours, in order that through
intellect being present with all things, and partial souls energizing
divinely both theoretically and practically, every progression, and all
the generation of the sublunary region may obtain complete perfection.

Such, therefore, being the nature of this duad, there are also other
demiurgic powers which triply divide the apparent[158] world of
generation; one of these being allotted the government of air; another,
that of water; and another that of earth, conformably to demiurgic
allotments. Hence they are said to be the brothers of these, because
they also preside over the visible fabrication. And farther still,
there are others the progeny of these; which is the last progression
of the divinities mentioned in this place by Plato. Hence, they are
delivered anonymously; Plato by this indicating the diminution of it
as far as to the last division: For as in the Gods that are above the
world, the partible proceeds from the total fabrication, and the series
of kings terminates in this; after the same manner also among the
sublunary Gods, the progeny of Jupiter proceed from the Jovian order;
among which progeny, likewise, is the choir of partible fabrication.
For the before-mentioned demiurgi producing sensibles totally, it is
necessary that those deities should have a subsistence who distribute
different powers and peculiarities to different natures, and divide the
sublunary generation into multitude. Hence Plato alone denominates them
_others_, and does not employ the expressions _such as_, and
_all_, because they associate with all-various diversity.

With respect, therefore, to this ennead of Gods, Heaven terminates,
Earth corroborates, and Ocean moves all generation. But Tethys
establishes every thing in its proper motion; intellectual essences in
intellectual; middle essences in psychical; and such as are corporeal
in physical, motion; Ocean at the same time collectively moving all
things. Saturn alone divides intellectually; Rhea vivifies; Phorcys
distributes spermatic productive principles; Jupiter perfects things
apparent from such as are unapparent; and Juno evolves according
to the all-various mutations of visible natures. And thus through
this ennead all the sublunary world derives its completion, and is
fitly arranged; divinely indeed from the Gods, but angelically, as
we say, from angels, and dæmoniacally from dæmons; the Gods indeed
subsisting about bodies, souls and intellects; but angels exhibiting
their providence about souls and bodies; and dæmons being distributed
about the fabrication of nature, and the providential care of bodies.
But again, the number of the ennead is adapted to generation. For
it proceeds from the monad as far as to the extremities without
retrogression;[159] which is the peculiarity of generation. For reasons
(i.e. productive principles) fall into matter, and are unable to
convert themselves to the principles of their existence. Moreover, the
duad is triadic; for three dyadic orders were assumed; viz. Heaven and
Earth; Ocean and Tethys; Jupiter and Juno. And this last duad ranks
as the fourth progression, because prior to it, is the triad Phorcys,
Saturn, and Rhea; which manifests the complication here, of the perfect
and the imperfect, and of bound with infinity. For all celestial
natures are definite, and as Aristotle says, are always in the end. But
things in generation proceed[160] from the imperfect to the perfect,
and receive the same boundary indefinitely. Besides this, the tetrad
arising from the generation of these divinities is adapted to the
orders of the fabricators of the sublunary region; in order that they
may contain multitude unitedly, and the partible impartibly; and also
to the natures that exist in generation. For the sublunary elements are
four; the seasons according to which generation is evolved are four;
and the centres are four. And in short, there is an abundant dominion
of the tetrad in generation.

Why, however, it may be said, does Plato comprehend all the multitude
of the Gods that fabricate generation, in this ennead? I answer,
because this ennead gives completion to all the fabrication of
generation. For in the sublunary realms there are bodies and natures,
souls, and intellects, and this both totally and partially. And all
these are in both respects in each of the elements. This ennead in each
of the elements, is as follows, viz. total and partial bodies, total
and partial natures, total and partial souls, and total and partial
intellects, and the monad which contains these, viz. the elementary
sphere itself; because wholes and parts are consubsistent with each
other. Heaven and Earth, however, generate the unapparent essences
of these, i.e. of wholes and parts, the former indeed according to
union, but the latter according to multiplication. And the former
according to bound, but the latter according to infinity; being the
leaders of essence to all things. But Ocean and Tethys give perfection
to both the common and divided motion of them. There is, however, a
different motion of different things, viz. of total intellect, of
total soul, and of total nature; and in a similar manner in such of
these as are partial. The sublunary wholes, therefore, being thus
adorned and distributed, Saturn, indeed, divides partial from total
natures, but intellectually; Rhea, calls forth this division from
intellectuals, into all-various progressions,[161] as far as to the
last forms of life, being a vivific deity; but Phorcys produces the
Titannic separation, to physical productive principles. After these
three, are the fathers of composite natures. And Jupiter indeed,
adorns sensibles totally, according to an imitation of Heaven. For
the Jupiter in the intellectual order, proceeds analogous to the
intellectual Heaven, in the royal series. But Juno moves wholes, fills
them with powers, and evolves, according to every progression. And the
Gods posterior to these fabricate the partial works of sensibles, some
according to one, but others according to another peculiarity, either
demiurgic, or vivific, or perfective, or connective, being evolved and
dividing themselves, as far as to the last of things, analogously to
the Saturnian order. For the dividing peculiarity originates from the
Saturnian dominion.




                            CHAPTER XXXII.


In the last place, let us consider why Plato denominates the sublunary
deities, “such as become apparent when they please.” Shall we say
it is because these material elements are hurled forth before them
as veils[162] of the splendour of the etherial vehicles which are
proximately suspended from them? For it is evident that being mundane
they must also necessarily have a mundane starry vehicle. The light of
them, however, shines forth to the view, when they are about to benefit
the places that receive their illumination. But if Plato says that they
become visible when they please, it is necessary that this appearance
of them should either be an evolution into light of the incorporeal
powers which they contain, or of the bodies which are entirely spread
under them. But if it is an evolution of their incorporeal powers, this
is also common to the visible Gods. For they are not always apparent
by their incorporeal powers, but only sometimes, and when they please.
It is not proper, therefore, to divide the sublunary oppositely to the
visible Gods, according to that which is common to both, but so far as
they have entirely something peculiar. But if they produce a luminous
evolution of certain bodies when they please, they must necessarily use
other bodies prior to these material elements; and which then become
visible to us, when it seems fit to the powers that use them. Hence,
other bodies more divine than such as are apparent, are spread under
the invisible Gods; and according to these, they are said to be, and
are mundane. Through these also as media, they ride in and govern these
elements. For they impart to them as much of themselves as they are
able to receive, and contain the forms and the natures of them in their
powers. For since no one of these is an object of sense, and it is
necessary that the vehicles of rational souls should be things of this
kind, it is evident that they must use other vehicles prior to these
visible bodies.

With respect, however, to all the Gods that govern generation, we
must not say, that they have an essence mingled with matter, as the
Stoics assert they have. For nothing which verges to matter is able
to govern with intellect and wisdom, nor is properly a producing
cause, but an organ of something else. Nor must we say that they have
an essence unmingled with matter, but powers and energies mingled
with it, as Numenius and his followers assert. For the energies of
the Gods concur with their essences, and their inward subsist prior
to their externally proceeding energies; since a partial soul also
prior to the life which is inserted in the animal suspended from it,
contains a more principal life in itself; and prior to the externally
proceeding motion, through which it moves other things, it is moved
with a motion converted to itself. The sublunary Gods, therefore, are
entirely unmingled with matter; adorning indeed things mingled in an
unmingled, and things generated, in an unbegotten manner. They likewise
contain partibles impartibly, are the causes of life, the suppliers of
intellect, the replenishers of power, the givers of soul, the primary
leaders of all good, and the sources of order, providence, and the best
administration. They also give subsistence to more excellent animals
about themselves, are the leaders of angels, the rulers of dæmons, and
the prefects of heroes; governing through this triple army the whole
of generation. If, therefore, we assert that the appropriate order
of these divinities about generation, is the basis and seat of the
total Gods, we shall speak rightly. And we shall likewise not err in
asserting that they convolve the end of the divine decrement to the
beginning. Such then being the nature of these divinities, Plato indeed
looking to the Gods that are both intelligible and intellectual, and to
those that are properly called intellectual, surveyed four progressions
of them in common. But they also contain powers derived from the
supermundane Gods; whether they proceed from the twelve leaders, or
from certain other deities.

From the celestial choir of Gods likewise, a certain order proceeds
into generation, which, as the divine Jamblichus says, is doubled in
its progression. For from the twenty-one leaders, forty-two governments
of Gods who are the fabricators of generation, are derived, according
to each elementary allotment. But from the thirty-six decadarchs,[163]
seventy-two sublunary rulers proceed; and in a similar manner other
Gods; being the double of the celestial Gods in multitude, but falling
short of them in power. It is likewise necessary to survey their triple
progressions, their quintuple divisions, and their divine generation
according to the hebdomad. For they receive an orderly distribution in
a three-fold, five-fold, and sevenfold manner analogous to the whole
world; in order that each of the elements may be a world, and may be
truly an imitation of the universe. Such, therefore, is the concise
doctrine concerning the sublunary Gods, according to twofold essences,
lives, and allotments; just as Plato also makes the ruling progeny of
them to be dyadic.




                            CHAPTER XXXIII.


Having therefore discussed the theory pertaining to the celestial and
sublunary Gods, it now remains that we ascend to the summit or monad
of all the mundane Gods, Bacchus, in whose divinity they all subsist
and are rooted, similarly to the fixed stars in the inerratic sphere.
For after this manner, every monad analogously contains its co-ordinate
multitude.

Bacchus therefore, is the mundane intellect, from which the soul and
body of the world are suspended. With respect however, to intellect
it is necessary to observe that one kind is imparticipable and total;
another is participable indeed but essentially so; and a third is
participable, and subsists as a habit. All intellects unconnected
with soul belong to the first kind. The mundane intellect, and the
intellects of all the mundane Gods and beneficent dæmons, rank in the
second division. And to the third class such intellects as ours belong.
This deity also is the monad of the Titans, or ultimate fabricators
of things, by whom he is said in divine fables to have been torn in
pieces; because the mundane soul which participates of this divinity,
and is on this account intellectual, is participated by the Titans,
and through them distributed into every part of the universe. Plato
in the Cratylus says of this divinity “that he is the giver of wine;
and that οινος _wine_ may most justly be denominated οιονους because
it is accustomed to deprive those of intellect who possessed it
before.” On which words Proclus in his MS Scholia on that dialogue
observes as follows: “The young man Cratylus appears to inquire about
our sovereign master Bacchus, as if it were about things of small
importance, and on this account he is silenced by Socrates.[164] And
he does not indeed pay attention to the occult, but only to the last
and mundane progressions of the Gods.” These indeed, the wise man
venerates, though as he says, they are sports, through these Gods
[Bacchus and Venus] being lovers of sport. For as he says of the
terminations of the other Gods, that they are terrible, and that they
avenge and punish, and thus give perfection to souls; as for instance,
that Justice follows Jupiter, the avenger of the divine law, and that
this divinity is benevolent to those whose manners are orderly, and
who live according to intellect, but that she is baneful to those who
mingle their life with insolence and ignorance, till she has entirely
subverted them, their houses and cities;--in like manner, he venerates
the terminations of Bacchus and Venus, which produce γλυκυθυμια
_sweetness of sensation_; every where purifying our conceptions
concerning the Gods, and preparing us to understand that all things
look to the best end, whatever it may be. For because the terminations
of these divinities strengthen the infirmity of the mortal nature, and
alleviate corporeal molestation, on this account the Gods the causes
of these things, are φιλοπαιγμονες lovers of sport. Hence, of statues,
they make some of them laughing and dancing, and exhibiting relaxation,
but others austere, astonishing, and terrible to the view, analogously
to the mundane allotments of the Gods.

But theologists frequently call Bacchus _wine_, from the last of his
gifts, as for instance, Orpheus,

    Οινου παντα μελη κοσμῳ λαβε, και μοι ενεικε.

i.e. “Take all the members of _Wine_ [that are distributed] in the
world, and bring them to me.” If however the God is thus denominated,
certainly his first and middle energies will be thus called, as well
as his last; so that Socrates now looking to this calls the God
διδοινυσος, beginning from wine, which as we have said manifests all
the powers of Bacchus. Thus also in the Phædrus, Socrates calls Love in
common _great_, both that which is divine, and that which is a lover
of body. By this epithet _wine_ therefore, we must understand that the
peculiarity of a partial intellect, is in common presented to our view.
For the word οιουν _such as_, is nothing else than intellectual form
separated from a total intellect, and in consequence of this becoming
participated, particular and _alone_. For an all-perfect intellect
is all things, and energizes according to all things with invariable
sameness: but a partial and participated intellect, is indeed all
things, but this according to one form, such as a solar, lunar, or
mercurial form. This therefore, the peculiarity of which is to be
separated from the rest, wine indicates, signifying an intellect _such
as_, and _particular_. (σημαινων τον οιον και τινα νουν)

Since, therefore, every partial fabrication is suspended from the
Dionysiacal or Bacchic monad, which distributes participated mundane
intellects from total intellect, (or that intellect which ranks as a
whole) many souls from one soul, and all sensible forms from their
proper wholenesses; on this account theologists call both this God
and all his fabrications _wine_. For all these are the progeny of
intellect. And some things participate of the partial distribution
of intellect in a more distant, but others in a nearer degree. Wine
therefore energizes in things analogous to its subsistence in them;
in body indeed, after the manner of an image, according to a false
opinion and imagination; but in intellectual natures, according to an
intellectual energy and fabrication. For in the laceration of Bacchus
by the Titans, the _heart_ of the God is said to have alone remained
undistributed, i.e. _the indivisible_ or impartible _essence of
intellect_.

With respect to the mundane soul which is the immediate participant
of this Bacchic intellect, the composition of it is most accurately
delivered by Plato in the Timæus, and admirably unfolded by Proclus
in his Commentaries on that dialogue. For full information therefore
on this subject I refer the reader to those works; and shall only
summarily observe at present that there are five genera of being, from
which all things after the first being are composed; viz. _essence_,
_permanency_, _motion_, _sameness_, and _difference_. For every thing
must possess _essence_; must _abide_ in its cause, from which also
it must _proceed_, and to which it must be _converted_; must be the
_same_ with itself and certain other natures, and at the same time
different from others, and distinguished in itself. But Plato for the
sake of brevity, assumes only three of these in the composition of
the mundane soul, viz. _essence, sameness, and difference_; for the
other two must necessarily subsist in conjunction with these. When
therefore Plato says, “that from an essence impartible, and always
subsisting according to sameness of being, and from a nature divisible
about bodies, the demiurgus mingled from both a third form of essence,
having a middle subsistence between the two,”--by the impartible
essence he means intellect, and by the nature which is divisible about
bodies, a corporeal life. Hence the mundane soul is a medium between
the mundane intellect, and the whole of that corporeal life which the
world participates. We must not however suppose that when the soul
is said to be mingled from these two, the indivisible and divisible
natures are consumed in the mixture, as is the case when corporeal
substances are mingled together; but we must understand that the soul
is of a middle nature between these, so as to be different from each,
and yet a participant of each. In short, the intellect participated by
soul, is called by Plato impartible; but the nature which is divisible
about bodies is the corporeal-formed life proceeding from the mundane
soul, and which has the relation of splendour to it. For intellect is
analogous to the sun; soul, to the light proceeding from the sun; and a
divisible life to the splendour proceeding from light.

Proclus observes on the above cited words of Plato, that they are
conformable to the Orphic traditions. “For, says he,[165] Orpheus does
not predicate the impartible of every intelligible or intellectual
order, but according to him there are certain natures superior to this
appellation, in the same manner as others are superior to other names.
For king and father are not adapted to all the divine orders. Where,
therefore, according to Orpheus, shall we first survey the impartible,
in order that we may understand the divine conception of Plato? Orpheus
therefore establishes one demiurgus of every divisible fabrication,
analogous to the one father who generates the total fabrication, and
from him produces the whole intellectual mundane multitude, the number
of souls, and corporeal compositions. And this one demiurgus indeed
(i.e. Bacchus) generates all these unitedly; but the Gods that surround
him, divide and separate his fabrications. Orpheus however says, that
all his other fabrications were distributed into parts by the Gods
whose characteristic is of a dividing nature; but that his heart alone
was preserved impartible, through the providence of Minerva. For
since he gives subsistence to intellects, souls and bodies; but souls
and bodies indeed, receive in themselves an abundant division and
distribution into parts, intellect remaining united and indivisible,
being all things in one, and comprehending total intelligibles in one
intellection;--this being the case, he says that the intellectual
essence alone, and the intellectual number was saved entire by Minerva.
For says he,

    The intellectual heart alone was left,

directly calling it intellectual.

If therefore the impartible heart is intellectual, it will evidently
be intellect and an intellectual number; not indeed every intellect,
but the mundane; for this is the impartible heart, since the divided
God was also the fabricator of this. Orpheus therefore calls the
impartible essence of Bacchus intellect. But he denominates the life
which is divisible about body, which is physical, and pregnant with
seeds, the genitals of the God. And he says that Diana who presides
over all the generation in nature, and is the midwife of physical
productive principles, extends these genitals, distributing as far as
to subterranean natures, the prolific power of the God. But all the
remaining body of Bacchus was, he says, the psychical essence, this
also being divided into seven parts. For they divided all the seven
parts of the boy, says the theologist, speaking of the Titans; just as
Timæus divides the soul into seven parts. And perhaps Timæus, when he
says that soul is extended through the whole world, will remind the
followers of Orpheus of the Titannic division, through which soul is
not only spread round the universe like a veil, but is also extended
through it. Very properly therefore, does Plato call the essence which
is proximately above soul, an impartible essence. And in short, he thus
denominates the intellect which is participated by soul, following the
Orphic fables, and wishing to be as it were an interpreter of what is
said in the mysteries.” And thus much concerning Bacchus, or the monad
of the mundane Gods.




                            CHAPTER XXXIV.


In the next place let us direct our attention to the Parmenides of
Plato, and see how in that most theological dialogue the mundane
Gods are characterized. In the first hypothesis therefore of that
dialogue, in which all the divine orders are denied of _the one_,
Parmenides characterizes the mundane Gods by the equal and the unequal
as follows: “But since _the one_ is such, it will neither be equal
nor unequal either to itself or to another. How so? If it were equal,
indeed, it would be of the same measures with that to which it is
equal. Certainly. But that which is greater or less than the things
with which it is commensurate, will possess more measures than the
less quantities, but fewer than the greater. Certainly. But to those
to which it is incommensurable, with respect to the one part, it will
consist of less; and with respect to the other of greater measures. How
should it not? Is it not therefore impossible that a thing which does
not participate of same should either be of the same measures, or admit
any thing in any respect the same? It is impossible. It will therefore
neither be equal to itself nor to another, if it does not consist of
the same measures. It does not appear that it will. But if it consists
of more or fewer measures, it will be of as many parts as there are
measures; and so again, it will no longer be _the one_, but as many as
there are measures. Right. But if it should be of one measure, it would
become equal to that measure. It has, however, appeared that _the one_
cannot be equal to any thing. It has appeared so. _The one_, therefore,
neither participates of one measure, nor of many, nor of a few; nor
(since it in no respect participates of _same_) can it ever, as it
appears, be equal to itself or to another, nor again greater or less
either than itself or another. It is in every respect so.”

As the commentary of Proclus on the second hypothesis of the
Parmenides, in which the equal and the unequal are affirmed of _the
one_, is lost, and in which I have no doubt, the properties of the
mundane Gods were most fully unfolded, I shall present the reader with
the following extract from his commentary on the above passage in the
Parmenides of Plato. The peculiarity of the mundane Gods is the equal
and the unequal, the former of these indicating their fulness, and
their receiving neither any addition nor ablation; (for such is that
which is equal to itself, always preserving the same boundary;) but the
latter, the multitude of their powers, and the excess and defect which
they contain. For in these, divisions, variety of powers, differences
of progressions, analogies, and bonds through these, are, according to
ancient theologists, especially allotted a place. Hence, Timæus also
constitutes souls through analogy, the causes of which must necessarily
presubsist in the Gods that proximately preside over souls. And as all
analogies subsist from equality, Plato very properly indicates the
peculiarity of these divinities by the equal and the unequal. But he
now rightly frames the demonstrations of the negations of the equal
and the unequal from _sameness and the many_, and not from _the
similar and the dissimilar_, though immediately before he spoke of
these. For every mundane deity proceeds from the demiurgic monad, and
the first multitude which he denies of _the one_.

Of this then we must be entirely persuaded, that the things of which
demonstrations consist are the preceding causes of the particulars
about which Parmenides discourses; so that _the equal_ and _the
unequal_, so far as they proceed from _the one_, and subsist through
_sameness_ and _the many_, so far through these they are denied of
_the one_. Hence, Plato thus begins his discussion of them:--“But
since it (viz. _the one_) is such,” i.e. not as we have just now
demonstrated, but as was formerly shown, that it neither receives
_same_ nor _different_, and is _without multitude_,--being such, it is
neither equal nor unequal, neither to itself, nor to others. For again,
there are here twofold conclusions, in the same manner as concerning
the similar and the dissimilar, and the same and the different. But
that _the equal_ and _the unequal_ are suspended from the twofold
co-ordinations of divine natures is not immanifest. For _the equal_ is
arranged under _the similar_, and _the same, subsistence in another,
the round, and the whole_; but _the unequal_, under _the dissimilar_,
_the different_, _subsistence in itself_, _the straight_, and _the
possession of parts_. And again, of these the former are suspended from
_bound_, but the latter from infinity. Plato also appears to produce
the discourse through certain oppositions, as it were, that he may show
that _the one_ is above all opposition. For _the one_ cannot be the
worse of the two opposites, since this would be absurd; nor can it be
the better of the two, since in this case it would not be the cause
of all things. For the better opposite is not the cause of the worse,
but in a certain respect communicates with it, without being properly
its cause. For neither does sameness give subsistence to difference,
nor permanency to motion; but comprehension and union pervade from the
better to the worse.

It is, however, by no means wonderful that the demonstrations of
_the equal_ and _the unequal_, which are here assumed as symbols of
mundane deity, should be adapted to physical and mathematical equals,
to the equals in the reasons of soul, and to those in intellectual
forms. For it is necessary that demonstrations in all these negations
should begin supernally, and should extend through all secondary
natures, that they may show that _the one_ of the Gods is exempt from
intellectual, psychical, mathematical, and physical forms. All such
axioms, therefore, as are now assumed concerning things equal and
unequal, must be adapted to this order of Gods. Hence, as it contains
many powers, some of which are co-ordinate with each other, and extend
themselves to the self-perfect and _the good_, but others differ
according to transcendency and subjection--the former must be said to
be characterized by _equality_, but the latter by _inequality_. For
_the good_ is the measure of every thing: and hence such things as are
united by the same good are measured by the same measure, and are equal
to each other. But things which are unco-ordinated with each other make
their progression according to the unequal.

Since, however, of things unequal, some are commensurate and others
incommensurate, it is evident that these also must be adapted to
divine natures. Hence commensuration must be referred to those Gods,
through whom secondary natures are mingled with those prior to them,
and participate of the whole of more excellent beings. For thus, in
things commensurate, the less is willing to have a common measure
with the greater, the same thing measuring the whole of each. But
incommensuration must be ascribed to those divinities from whom things
subordinate, through the exempt transcendency of more excellent
natures, participate of them in a certain respect, but are incapable
through their subjection of being conjoined with the whole of them.
For the communion proceeding from first to partial and multifarious
natures is incommensurate to the latter. If, indeed, _the equal_ and
_the unequal_ are symbols of the mundane Gods, _the commensurate_
and _the incommensurate_ are here very properly introduced. For in
things incorporeal and immaterial this opposition has no place, all
things being there effable; but where there is a material subject,
and a mixture of form and something formless, there an opposition of
commensuration very properly subsists. Hence, as the mundane Gods are
proximately connective of souls and bodies, form and matter, a division
appears in them, according to _the equal_ and _the unequal_.




                             CHAPTER XXXV.


After the mundane Gods, the scientific order of discussion requires
that we should consider divine souls, and the triple genera of natures
more excellent than man, viz. angels, dæmons, and heroes. Previous,
however, to this, that I may as much as possible unfold to the reader
the whole of the Platonic theory about the Gods, I shall present him
with a development of the nature of certain other divinities mentioned
by Plato; and which, owing to the loss of the seventh book of Proclus,
and of other theological works of the most genuine Platonists, cannot
at this remote and barren period be scientifically classed.

In the first place, then, I shall present the reader with what Plato
says in the Phædrus of Boreas and Orithya, the Centaurs, Chimæras,
Gorgons, Pegasuses, Typhons, Achelous, and the Nymphs, accompanied
with the elucidations of Ammonius Hermeas. “Phædr. Inform me, Socrates,
whether this is not the place in which Boreas is reported to have
ravished Orithya from Ilissus. Soc. It is reported so indeed. Phædr.
Was it not just here then? for the brooks hereabouts appear to be
grateful to the view, pure and transparent, and very well adapted to
the sports of virgins. Soc. It was not, but two or three stadia lower
down, where we meet with the temple of Diana, and in that very place
there is a certain altar sacred to Boreas. Phædr. I did not perfectly
know this. But tell me by Jupiter, Socrates, are you persuaded that
this fabulous narration is true? Soc. If I should not believe in it,
as is the case with the wise, I should not be absurd: and afterwards,
speaking sophistically, I should say that the wind Boreas hurled from
the neighbouring rocks Orithya, sporting with Pharmacia; and that she
dying in consequence of this, was said to have been ravished by Boreas,
or from the hill of Mars. There is also another report, that she was
not ravished from this place, but from that. But for my own part,
Phædrus, I consider interpretations of this kind as pleasant enough,
but at the same time, as the province of a man vehemently curious
and laborious, and not entirely happy; and this for no other reason,
than because after such an explanation, it is necessary for him to
correct the shape of the Centaurs, and Chimæra. And besides this, a
crowd of Gorgons and Pegasuses will pour upon him for an exposition
of this kind, and of certain other prodigious natures, immense both
in multitude and novelty. All which, if any one, not believing in
their literal meaning, should draw to a probable sense, employing for
this purpose a certain rustic wisdom, he will stand in need of most
abundant leisure. With respect to myself, indeed, I have not leisure
for such an undertaking; and this because I am not yet able, according
to the Delphic precept, to know myself. But it appears to me to be
ridiculous, while I am yet ignorant of this, to speculate things
foreign from the knowledge of myself. Hence, bidding farewell to these,
and being persuaded in the opinion which I have just now mentioned
respecting them, I do not contemplate these, but myself, considering
whether I am not a wild beast, possessing more folds than Typhon,
and far more raging and fierce; or whether I am a more mild and
simple animal, naturally participating of a certain divine and modest
condition. But are we not, my friend, in the midst of our discourse
arrived at our destined seat? And is not yonder the oak to which you
were to lead us? Phædr. That indeed is it. Soc. By Juno, a beautiful
retreat. For the plane-tree very widely spreads its shady branches,
and is remarkably tall; and the height and opacity of the willow, are
perfectly beautiful, being now in the vigour of its vegetation, and, on
this account, filling all the place with the most agreeable odour. Add
too, that a most pleasant fountain of extreme cool water flows under
the plane-tree, as may be inferred from its effect on our feet, and
which appears to be sacred to certain Nymphs, and to Achelous, from the
virgins and statues with which it is adorned.”

On this very beautiful passage, Hermes comments as follows: The
Athenians established a temple of Rural Diana, because this Goddess is
the inspective guardian of every thing rural, and represses every thing
rustic and uncultivated. But the altars and temples of the Gods signify
their allotments; as you may also call this mundane body, or apparent
solar orb, the altar and temple of the sun, and of the soul of the sun.

With respect to the fable, a two-fold solution may be given of it; one
from history, more ethical, but the other transferring us to wholes.
And the former of these is as follows: Orithya was the daughter of
Erectheus, and the priestess of Boreas; for each of the winds has a
presiding deity, which the telestic art, or the art pertaining to
sacred mysteries, religiously cultivates. To this Orithya, then,
the God was so very propitious, that he sent the north wind for the
safety of the country; and besides this, he is said to have assisted
the Athenians in their naval battles. Orithya, therefore, becoming
enthusiastic, being possessed by her proper God Boreas, and no longer
energizing as a human being (for animals cease to energize according to
their own peculiarities when possessed by superior causes) died under
the inspiring influence, and thus was said to have been ravished by
Boreas. And this is the more ethical explanation of the fable.

But the second, which transfers the narration to wholes, is as follows,
and does not entirely subvert the former: for divine fables often
employ transactions and histories in subserviency to the discipline
of wholes. They say, then, that Erectheus is the God that rules
over the three elements, air, water, and earth. Sometimes, however,
he is considered as alone the ruler of the earth, and sometimes
as the presiding deity of Attica alone. Of this deity, Orithya is
the daughter. And she is the prolific power of the earth, which is
indeed co-extended with the word _Erectheus_, as the unfolding
of the name signifies. For it is _the prolific power of the earth
flourishing and restored according to the seasons_. But Boreas is
the providence of the Gods supernally illuminating secondary natures;
for the providence of the Gods in the world is signified by Boreas,
because this divinity blows from lofty places. But the elevating power
of the Gods is signified by the south wind, because this wind blows
from low to lofty places; and besides this, things situated towards the
south are more divine. The providence of the Gods, therefore, causes
the prolific power of the earth, or of the Attic land, to ascend, and
proceed into the apparent.

Orithya, also, may be said to be a soul[166] aspiring after things
above, from ορουω and θειω, according to the Attic custom of adding a
letter at the end of a word, which letter is here an ω. Such a soul,
therefore, is ravished by Boreas supernally blowing. But if Orithya
was hurled from a precipice, this also is appropriate. For such a
soul dies a philosophic, not receiving a physical death, and abandons
a _proairetic_,[167] at the same time that she lives a physical
life. And philosophy, according to Socrates in the Phædo, is nothing
else than a meditation of death.

According to some, however, Socrates in what he here says about Orithya
and Boreas does not admit the explanation of fables. But it is evident
that he frequently does admit and employ fables. Now, indeed, he blames
those explanations which make fables to be nothing more than certain
histories, and unfold them into material causes, airs, and earth, and
winds, which do not revert to true beings, nor harmonize with divine
concerns. Hence, Socrates now says, If unfolding this fable I should
recur to physical causes, and should assert that the wind Boreas,
blowing vehemently, hurled Orithya as she was playing from the rock,
and thus dying she was said to have been ravished by Boreas,--should
I not speak absurdly? For this explanation which is adopted by the
_wise_, viz. by those who are employed in physical speculations,
is meagre and conjectural; since it does not recur to true beings,
but to natures, and winds, airs and vortices, as he also says in the
Phædo. He rejects, therefore, these naturalists, and those who thus
explain this fable, as falling into the indefinite and infinite, and
not recurring to soul, intellect, and the Gods. But when Socrates says
that he considers such interpretations as the province of a man _very
curious and laborious, and not entirely happy_, these words indicate
the being conversant with things sensible and material. And the
Centaurs, Chimæras, Gorgons, and Pegasuses, are powers which preside
over a material nature, and the region about the earth.[168]

When Socrates also says, that he is not yet able to know himself, his
meaning may be, either that he does not yet know himself as pure soul
itself, but that as being in body he knows himself; or that he does not
yet know himself, as he is known by divinity. For if ever any man knew
himself, this was certainly the case with Socrates.

When likewise he says, “I do not contemplate these, but myself;” this
is because he who knows himself knows all things. For in consequence
of the soul being παμμορφον αγαλμα an omniform image, he beholds all
things in himself. But by Typhon here we must understand that power
which presides over the confused and disordered in the universe,
or in other words over the last procession of things. The term
_manifold_, therefore, in this place, must not be applied to the
God Typhon, but to that over which he presides, as being in its own
nature moved in a confused, disordered, and manifold manner. For
it is usual with fables to refer the properties of the objects of
providential care to the providing powers themselves.

Farther still, Socrates mentions Juno, as generating and adorning
the beauty of the mundane fabrication; and hence she is said to have
received the Cestus from Venus. But Achelous is the deity who presides
over the much-honoured power of water. For by this mighty river, the
God who is the inspective guardian of potable water is manifested. And
Nymphs are Goddesses who preside over regeneration, and are ministrant
to Bacchus the offspring of Semele. But this Bacchus supplies the
regeneration of the whole sensible world.

I shall only add, that Nymphs according to Servius on the first Æneid
are distributed into three classes. But Nymphs belonging to mountains
are called Oreades; to woods, Dryades; those that are born with woods,
Hamadryades; those that belong to fountains, Napæ, or Naiades; and
those that belong to the sea, Nereides.




                            CHAPTER XXXVI.


Again, the following divinities are also mentioned by Plato in
different parts of his works. In the first place, Pan, at the end
of the Phædrus; to which divinity Socrates addresses the following
admirable prayer: “O beloved Pan, and all ye other Gods, who are
residents of this place, grant that I may become beautiful within,
and that whatever I possess externally may be friendly to my inward
attainments! Grant also, that I may consider the wise man as one who
abounds in wealth; and that I may enjoy that portion of gold, which no
other than a prudent man is able either to bear, or properly manage!”
In this prayer, by Pan and the other Gods, we must understand local
deities under the moon. But Pan is denominated as it were _all_,
because he possesses the most ample sway in the order of local Gods.
For as the supermundane Gods are referred to Jupiter, and the celestial
to Bacchus, so all the sublunary local Gods and dæmons are referred to
Pan.

In the next place, Tartarus is mentioned by Plato in the Phædo, as one
of the greatest chasms of the earth; and of which, says he, Homer[169]
thus speaks:

    Far, very far, where under earth is found
    A gulf, of every depth, the most profound.

But Tartarus, says Olympiodorus, is the extremity of the universe, and
subsists oppositely to Olympus. It is also a deity, the inspective
guardian of that which is last in every order. Hence, there is a
celestial Tartarus, in which Heaven concealed his offspring; a
Saturnian Tartarus, in which likewise Saturn concealed his offspring;
and also a Jovian of this kind, which is demiurgic.

Again, the characteristic peculiarity of Prometheus, as mentioned by
Plato in the Gorgias, is thus unfolded by Olympiodorus in his MS.
Scholia on that dialogue: Prometheus is the inspective guardian of the
descent of rational souls. For to exert a _providential energy_
is the employment of the rational soul, and, prior to any thing else,
to know itself. Irrational natures indeed perceive through percussion,
and prior to impulsion know nothing; but the rational nature is able,
prior to information from another, to know what is useful. Hence,
_Epimetheus_ is the inspective guardian of the irrational soul,
because it knows through percussion, and not prior to it. Prometheus,
therefore, is that power which presides over the descent of rational
souls. But _fire_ signifies the rational soul itself; because, as
fire tends upwards, so the rational soul pursues things on high. But
you will say, why is this fire said to have been stolen? Because that
which is stolen is transferred from its proper place to one that is
foreign. Hence, since the rational soul is sent from its proper place
of abode on high, to earth, as to a foreign region, on this account
the fire is said to be stolen. But why was it concealed in a reed?
Because a reed is full of cavities, and therefore signifies the flowing
body in which the soul is carried. But why was the fire stolen contrary
to the will of Jupiter? Again, the fable speaks as a fable. For both
Prometheus and Jupiter are willing that the soul should abide on high;
but as it is requisite that she should descend, the fable fabricates
particulars accommodated to the persons. And it represents indeed the
superior character, which is Jupiter, as unwilling; for he wishes the
soul always to abide on high. But the inferior character, Prometheus,
obliges her to descend: Jupiter, therefore, ordered Pandora to be made.
And what else is this than the irrational soul, which is of a feminine
characteristic? For as it was necessary that the soul should descend
to these lower regions, but being incorporeal and divine, it was
impossible for her to be conjoined with body without a medium, hence
she becomes united with it through _the irrational soul_. But this
irrational soul was called Pandora, because each of the Gods bestowed
on it some particular gift. And this signifies that the illuminations
which terrestrial natures receive take place through the celestial
bodies.[170]

Again, in the Phædo, mention is made by Plato of Cadmus, who, according
to Olympiodorus, is the sublunary world, as being Dionysiacal, on which
account Harmonia or Harmony is united to the God, and also as being the
father of the four Bacchuses. The four elements likewise he informs
us are said to be Dionysiacal, viz. _fire_ to be _Semele_; _earth_,
_Agave_, tearing in pieces her own offspring; _water_, _Ino_; and
lastly, _air_, _Autonoe_. There is great beauty in conjoining Harmony,
the daughter of Venus and Mars, with Cadmus. For Venus, as we have
before observed, is the cause of all the harmony and analogy in the
universe, and beautifully illuminates the order and communion of all
mundane concerns. But Mars excites the contrarieties of the universe,
that the world may exist perfect and entire from all its parts. The
progeny, therefore, of these two divinities must be the _concordant
discord_, or _harmony_ of the sublunary world.

Farther still, the Syrens are mentioned by Plato, both in the 10th book
of the Republic, and in the Cratylus. And Proclus, in the 6th book of
this work, has explained the meaning of what Plato says of them in
the former of those dialogues. But in his MS. Scholia on the Cratylus
he says, “The divine Plato knew that there are three kinds of Sirens;
the _celestial_, which is under the government of Jupiter; _that which
produces generation_, and is under the government of Neptune; and that
which is _cathartic_, and is under the government of Pluto. It is
common to all these, to incline all things through an harmonic motion
to their ruling Gods. Hence, when the soul is in the heavens, the
Sirens are desirous of uniting it to the divine life which flourishes
there. But it is proper that souls living in generation should sail
beyond them, like the Homeric Ulysses, that they may not be allured
by generation, of which the sea is an image. And when souls are in
Hades, the Sirens are desirous of uniting them through intellectual
conceptions to Pluto. So that Plato knew that in the kingdom of Hades
there are Gods, dæmons, and souls, who dance as it were round Pluto,
allured by the Sirens that dwell there.”




                            CHAPTER XXXVII.


In the next place, let us direct our attention to Plato’s theological
conceptions of Nature, Fate, and Fortune. From the Timæus, therefore,
it appears that Plato does not consider either matter, or material
form, or body, or natural powers, as worthy to be called Nature, though
it has been thus denominated by others. Nor does he think proper
to call Nature soul; but establishing its essence between soul and
corporeal powers, he considers it as inferior to the former through
its being divided about bodies, and its incapacity of conversion to
itself, but as surpassing the latter through containing the productive
principles, and generating and vivifying every part of the visible
world. For Nature verges towards bodies, and is inseparable from their
fluctuating empire. But soul is separate from body, is established in
herself, and subsists both from herself and another; from another, that
is, from intellect through participation; and from herself, on account
of not verging to body, but abiding in her own essence, and at the
same time illuminating the obscure nature of matter with a secondary
life. Nature, therefore, is the last of the causes which fabricate this
corporeal and sensible world; bounds the progressions of incorporeal
essences; and is full of reasons and powers through which she governs
mundane affairs. And she is a Goddess indeed considered as deified,
and not according to the primary signification of the word; for divine
bodies also are called Gods, as being the statues or images of the
Gods. But she governs the whole world by her powers; by her summit
comprehending the heavens; but through heaven governing generation. And
she every where weaves partial natures in amicable conjunction with
wholes.

Nature, however, thus subsisting, she proceeds from the vivific Goddess
Rhea; (for “immense Nature, says the Chaldean oracle, is suspended from
the shoulders of the Goddess;”) from whom all life is derived, both
that which is intellectual, and that which is inseparable from the
subjects of its government. But Nature being from thence suspended,
she pervades through and inspires all things without impediment.
Hence, the most inanimate beings participate of a certain soul, and
corruptible natures remain perpetually in the world, being connected
and comprehended by the causes of forms which she contains. And those
indeed who call Nature demiurgic art, if they mean by this the Nature
which abides in the demiurgus himself, they do not speak rightly;
but if they mean that which proceeds from him, their conception
is accurate. For art must be considered as having a three-fold
subsistence; one, that which does not proceed out of the artist; the
second, that which proceeds indeed, but is converted to him; and
the third, that which has now proceeded, and has its subsistence in
something else. The art, therefore, which is in the demiurgus, abides
indeed in him; but the intellectual soul is art, yet at the same time
both abiding and proceeding. And Nature is art, alone proceeding into
something different from herself. Hence, she is said to be the organ of
the Gods, not deprived of life, nor alter-motive alone, but having in a
certain respect, a self-motive power, in consequence of energizing from
herself. For the organs of the Gods are essentialized in efficacious
powers, are vital, and concur with their energies. And thus much
concerning Nature according to the conceptions of Plato, as unfolded by
Proclus.

In the next place with respect to Fate, in the fable in the Politicus,
Plato says, that “Fate and connate desire convolve the world, when it
is considered by itself as a corporeal nature, without the intellectual
Gods.” And in the Timæus he represents the demiurgus exhibiting to
souls the nature of the universe, and announcing to them the laws of
Fate. On which Proclus admirably comments as follows: It must not be
said, that Fate is a partial nature, as some of the Peripatetics assert
it is; as for instance, Alexander; for such a nature is imbecil and not
perpetual. For from common conceptions, we pre-assume that the power of
Fate is something very great and stable. Nor must it be said, that it
is the order of the mundane periods, as Aristotle asserts it to be, who
denominates the increase which is contrary to order _preterfatal_,
as if order and Fate were the same. For the cause of order is one
thing, but order itself is another. Nor is it soul subsisting in
habitude, as Theodorus says; for such a form of life in wholes is not
a principle. Nor is it simply Nature, as Porphyry says it is. For many
things which are supernatural, and out of the dominion of Nature are
produced by Fate, such as nobility, renown, and wealth. For where is
it seen that physical motions become the cause of these? Nor is it the
intellect of the universe, as again Aristotle says in a certain place,
if the treatise On the World was written by him. For intellect produces
every thing which it produces at once, and is not at all in want of
an administration which proceeds according to a certain period, and a
continued and well-ordered series of things. But the chain, the order,
the periodic production of many causes constitute the peculiarity of
Fate.

If, however, it be requisite to comprehend the whole form of it
concisely, we must say, that the subject matter as it were of it is
Nature herself, but considered as deified, and filled with divine,
intellectual, and psychical illuminations. For the order of Gods called
the presidents of destiny, (των μοιρηγετων καλουμενων) and the genera
that are more excellent than man terminate in Nature. For these impart
powers from themselves to the one life of Nature; and the demiurgus of
wholes collects and unites all these gifts, and demonstrates them to
be one power. For if visible bodies [i.e. the celestial bodies], are
filled with divine[171] powers, Nature, is by a much greater priority
divine. And if the whole visible world is one, much more is the whole
essence of Fate one, and derives from many causes the completion of
its composition. For being suspended from the providence of the Gods,
and from demiurgic goodness, it is united and governed by it, being
a productive principle subsisting from productive principles, one
multiform power, a divine life, and an order of things that have a
prior arrangement. Hence, the ancients looking to this its various
and multiform nature, were led to form different opinions concerning
it. And some indeed said that it is a Goddess, on account of that
which is divine in it; others, that it is a dæmon, on account of the
efficacious and at the same time multiform nature of its production;
others, that it is intellect, because a certain participation of
intellect reaches it; but others, that it is order, so that every
thing which has an arrangement is invisibly comprehended by it. Plato,
however, alone surveyed the essence of it, asserting indeed that it
is Nature, but Nature suspended from the demiurgus. For how could the
demiurgus exhibit Nature to souls, otherwise than by containing the
principle of it in himself? And how could he announce to them the laws
of Fate, after exhibiting to them the Nature of the universe, except by
constituting Nature as the one power that comprehends these laws?

Farther still, in the Politicus, Plato more clearly suspends the second
life of the universe from Fate, after the departure of the one dæmon
that governed it, and the many dæmons that were the followers of that
one. Hence, he separates all the providential care of these powers
from the universe, and alone leaves it the government according to
Fate; the world, indeed, always possessing both these, but the fable
separating the first from the second. For he says, “that Fate and
connate desire convolve the world,” just as the Chaldæan oracles say,
“that unwearied Nature rules over the worlds and works, and draws
downward in order that the heavens may run an eternal course; and
that the other periods of the sun, the moon, the seasons, night and
day may be accomplished.” Thus, therefore, Plato also says, that the
second period of the world is convolved by Fate, and not the first and
intellectual period, all but clearly asserting that Fate is the power
which proximately moves the sensible world, and is suspended from
the invisible providence of the Gods. For establishing Necessity the
mother of the Fates prior to these, he represents her in the Republic
convolving[172] the world on her knees. And if it be requisite to give
my opinion, Plato arranges these three causes of order successive
to each other, viz. Adrastia, Necessity, and Fate; the first being
intellectual, the second supermundane, and the third mundane. For
the demiurgus as Orpheus says, was nourished indeed by Adrastia,
but associated with Necessity, and generated Fate. And as Adrastia
was comprehensive of divine institutions,[173] and the collector of
all-various laws, thus also Fate is comprehensive of all the mundane
laws, which the demiurgus now inscribes in souls, that he may lead
them in conjunction with wholes, and may define what is adapted to
them according to the different elections of lives. Hence, a vicious
life tends to that which is dark and atheistical, but a pious life
leads the soul to the heavens to which she is also conducted by wholes;
because each of these lives is full of the laws of Fate; and souls
lead themselves, as Plotinus says, thither where the law that is in
them announces. For this is the peculiarity of the providence of the
Gods, to conduct inwardly the subjects for which it provides. And
why is it wonderful that this should be the case, since Nature also
inserting material and corporeal-formed powers in bodies, moves them
through these powers; earth indeed through gravity, but fire through
levity. In a much greater degree, therefore, do the Gods move souls
through the powers which they disseminate in them. Hence, if they
lead souls according to the laws of Fate, these laws also subsist in
souls. And they pre-exist indeed intellectually in the demiurgus;
for the divine law is established with him. But they exist in divine
souls; for according to these laws they govern the universe. And they
are participated by partial souls; for through these they conduct
themselves to an appropriate place, themselves moving themselves.
And through deliberate choice, indeed, they act erroneously and with
rectitude; but through law they distribute to themselves an order
adapted to their former conduct.

in the last place with respect to Fortune, it is necessary to observe
that Plato does not assert as the Stoics do, that the worthy man has
no need of the assistance of this divinity; but he is of opinion that
the energies of our reasoning power, since according to their external
progression they are complicated with corporeal energies, require the
inspiration of good Fortune, in order that they may be prosperous and
benefit others. Hence in the Timæus and the Parmenides, the persons of
the dialogues are represented as meeting together through a certain
good Fortune. And in the Laws he says, that God, and after God,
Fortune and Time govern all human affairs. “Fortune, therefore,” says
Proclus,[174] “and her gifts, are not things destitute of design and
indefinite; but she is a power collective of many dispersed causes, and
which adorns things disordered, and gives completion to the allotments
assigned to every thing from the universe.” According to Sallust in his
elegant treatise On the Gods and the World, “Fortune must be considered
as a power of the Gods, disposing things differing from each other, and
happening contrary to expectation, to beneficent purposes.” He adds,
“On this account it is proper that cities should celebrate this Goddess
in common; since every city is composed of different particulars. But
this Goddess holds her dominion in sublunary concerns, since every
thing fortuitous is excluded from the regions above the moon.”

In conformity to this, Simplicius also, in his Commentary On the
Physics of Aristotle,[175] admirably observes concerning Fortune as
follows: “The power of Fortune particularly disposes in an orderly
manner the sublunary part of the universe, in which contingencies
subsist, and which being essentially disordered, Fortune, in
conjunction with other primary causes, directs, places in order, and
governs. Hence she is represented guiding a rudder, because she governs
things sailing on the sea of generation. Her rudder too is fixed on
a globe, because she directs that which is unstable in generation.
In her other hand, she holds the horn of Amalthea, which is full of
fruits, because she is the cause of obtaining all divine fruits. And
on this account, we venerate the fortunes of cities and houses, and
of each individual; because being very remote from divine union, we
are in danger of being deprived of its participation, and require in
order to obtain it the assistance of the Goddess Fortune, and of those
natures[176] superior to the human who possess the characteristic of
this divinity. Indeed, every fortune is good; for every attainment
respects something good, nor does any thing evil subsist from divinity.
But of things that are good, some are precedaneous, and others are of a
punishing or revenging characteristic, which we are accustomed to call
evils. Hence we speak of two Fortunes, one of which we denominate GOOD,
and which is the cause of our obtaining precedaneous goods, but the
other EVIL, which prepares us to receive punishment or revenge.” And
thus much concerning Fortune.




                           CHAPTER XXXVIII.


It remains that we should consider in the next place, what Time, Day
and Night, Month and Year are, so far as they are deities, according
to the theology of Plato; the Commentaries of Proclus on the Timæus
fortunately presenting us with much valuable information respecting
the nature of these divinities. The speculation also of Time in this
place will be very appropriate, as immediately after, the discussion
of divine souls, angels, dæmons and heroes will naturally follow, with
whose essence Time is intimately and inseparably connected. Plato
therefore in the Timæus says, “that while the demiurgus was adorning
and distributing the universe, he at the same time formed an eternal
image flowing according to number, of eternity abiding in one; and
which receives from us the appellation of time. But besides this he
fabricated the generation of days and nights, and months and years,
which had no subsistence prior to the universe, but which together with
it rose into existence. And all these indeed, are the proper parts of
Time.” Proclus[177] in commenting on what Plato here says about Time,
after having shown that it is neither any thing belonging to motion,
nor an attendant on the energy of soul, nor, in short, the offspring of
soul, investigates what it is in the following admirable manner:

“Perhaps, says he, it is not sufficient to say that it is the measure
of mundane natures, nor to enumerate the goods of which it is the
cause, but to the utmost of our power we should endeavour to apprehend
its peculiarity. May we not therefore say, since its essence is most
excellent, perfective of soul, and present to all things, that it is
an intellect not only abiding but also subsisting in motion? Abiding
indeed according to its inward energy, and by which it is truly
eternal, but being moved according to its externally proceeding energy,
by which it becomes the boundary of all transition. For eternity
possessing permanency, both according to its inward energy, and that
which it exerts to things eternal, Time being assimilated to it,
according to the former of these energies, becomes separated from it
according to the latter, abiding and being moved. And as with respect
to the essence of the soul, we say that it is intelligible and at
the same time generated, partible, and at the same time impartible,
and are no otherwise able to apprehend its middle nature than by
employing after a manner opposites, what wonder is there if, perceiving
the nature of Time to be partly immoveable, and partly subsisting
in motion, we, or rather not we, but prior to us, the philosopher,
through _the eternal_, should indicate its intellectual monad abiding
in sameness, and through _the moveable_ its externally proceeding
energy, which is participated by soul and the whole world? For we must
not think that the expression _the eternal_ simply indicates that Time
is the image of eternity; for if this were the case, what would have
hindered Plato from directly saying that it is the _image_, and not
the _eternal image_ of eternity? But he was willing to indicate this
very thing, that time has an eternal nature, but not in such a manner
as animal itself [the paradigm of the universe] is said to be eternal.
For that is eternal both in essence and energy; but Time is partly
eternal, and partly, by its external gift, moveable. Hence theurgists
call it eternal; and Plato very properly denominates it not _only_ so.
For one thing is _alone_ moveable, both essentially and according to
the participants of it, being _alone_ the cause of motion, as soul, and
hence it _alone_ moves itself and other things; but another thing is
_alone_ immoveable, preserving itself without transition, and being the
cause to other things of a perpetual subsistence after the same manner,
and to moveable natures through soul. It is necessary therefore, that
the medium between these two extremes should be that which, both
according to its own nature, and the gifts which it imparts to others,
is immoveable and at the same time moveable, essentially immoveable
indeed, but moved in its participants. A thing however of this kind is
Time.

Hence Time is truly, so far as it is considered in itself, immoveable;
but so far as it is in its participants, it is moveable, and subsists
together with them, unfolding itself into them. It is therefore,
eternal, and a monad and center essentially, and according to its own
abiding energy; but it is at the same time, continuous, and number, and
a circle, according to its proceeding and being participated. Hence,
it is a certain proceeding intellect, established indeed in eternity,
and on this account is said to be eternal. For it would not otherwise
contribute to the assimilation of mundane natures to more perfect
paradigms, unless it were itself previously suspended from them. But
it proceeds and abundantly flows into the things which are guarded
by it. Whence I think the chief of theurgists celebrate Time as a
God, as Julian in the seventh of the Zones, and venerate it by those
names, through which it is unfolded in its participants, causing some
things to be older, and others to be younger, and leading all things
in a circle. Time therefore, possessing a certain intellectual nature,
circularly leads according to number, both its other participants
and souls. For Time is eternal, not in essence only, but also in its
inward energy; but so far as it is participated by externals, it is
alone moveable, coextending and harmonizing with them the gift which it
imparts. But every soul is transitively moved, both according to its
inward and external energies, by the latter of which it moves bodies.
And it appears to me that those who thus denominated Time χρονος had
this conception of its nature, and were therefore willing to call it as
it were χορευοντος νους, an intellect moving in measure; but dividing
the words, perhaps for the sake of concealment, they called it χρονος.
Perhaps too, they gave it this appellation because it abides and is at
the same time moved in measure; by one part of itself abiding, and by
the other proceeding with measured motion. By the conjunction therefore
of both these, they signify the wonderful and demiurgic nature of
this God. And it appears, that as the demiurgus being intellectual
began from intellect to adorn the universe, so Time being itself
supermundane, began from soul to impart perfection. For that Time is
not only mundane, but by a much greater priority supermundane, is
evident; since as eternity is to animal itself, the paradigm of the
universe, so is Time to the world, which is animated and illuminated
by intellect, and wholly an image of animal itself, in the same manner
as Time of eternity. And thus much concerning Time, according to its
first subsistence, and considered as a God.

With respect to Day and Night, according to their more principal
subsistence, they are demiurgic measures of Time, exciting and
convolving all the apparent and unapparent life and motion, and orderly
distribution of the inerratic sphere. For these are the true parts of
Time, are present after the same manner to all things, and comprehend
the primary cause of apparent day and night, each of these having a
different subsistence in apparent time; to which also Timæus looking
reminds us how time was generated together with the world. Hence he
says in the plural number _nights_ and _days_, and also _months_ and
_years_. But these are obvious to all men. For the unapparent causes of
these have a uniform subsistence prior to things multiplied, and which
circulate infinitely. Things immoveable also subsist prior to such
as are moved, and intellectual natures are prior to sensibles. Such
therefore, must be our conceptions of Night and Day according to their
first subsistence.

By Month we must understand that truly divine temporal measure which
convolves the lunar sphere, and every termination of the circulation
about the zodiac. But Year is that which perfects and connects
the whole of middle fabrication, according to which the Sun is
seen possessing the greatest strength, and measuring all things in
conjunction with Time. For neither Day nor Night, nor Month is without
the Sun, nor much more Year, nor any other mundane nature. I do not
here speak according to the apparent fabrication of things alone; for
the apparent Sun is the cause of these measures; but also according to
that fabrication which is unapparent. For, ascending higher, we shall
find that the more true Sun[178] measures all things in conjunction
with Time, being itself in reality Time of Time, according to the
Chaldæan oracle concerning it. For that Plato not only knew these
apparent parts of Time, but also those divine parts to which these are
homonymous, is evident from the 10th book of his Laws. For he there
asserts that we call Hours and Months divine, as having the same divine
lives, and divine intellects presiding over them, as the universe. Let
these therefore be the parts of Time, of which some are accommodated
to the inerratic Gods, others to the Gods that revolve about the poles
of the oblique circle, and others to other Gods, or attendants of the
Gods, or to mortal animals, or the more sublime or more abject parts of
the universe.

Farther still, concerning Night and Day, Plato afterwards says, “that
through these, the period of one most wise circulation [i.e. the
circulation of the inerratic sphere,] was produced;” on which Proclus
observes as follows: “It may be doubted how Plato calls Night and Day
the measure of the circulation of this sphere. For this measure is
every where, originating supernally from the one intelligible cause
of the universe, and the first paradigm; but in the sublunary region
it is the space of day and night. In answer to this, it must be said
that the temporal interval which first subsists in the circulation
of the inerratic sphere, and the solar light are productive of the
_nycthemeron_ or space of day and night. From the last of things
therefore, and which are known to us, the whole measure is defined. For
this _nycthemeron_ is one thing, but another that which subsists in
unapparent time. And the former is the image and ultimate termination
of the latter. For there are many orders of Night and Day, intelligible
and intellectual, supermundane, celestial and sublunary, as we are
taught by the Orphic theology. And some of these indeed, are prior to
fabrication; but others are comprehended in it; and others proceed from
it. Some also are unapparent, but others are apparent. For with respect
likewise to Month and Year, one order of these is unapparent, measures,
connectedly contains, and gives perfection to the intellectual and
corporeal periods of the sun and moon; but another is apparent, which
terminates and is the measure of the solar revolution. Thus too in
the other Gods, the unapparent Saturnian number is one thing, and the
apparent another. And in a similar manner the unapparent and apparent
Martial, Jovian and Mercurial numbers differ from each other. For with
respect to Month and Year, each of these being one according to each
period, and always the same, is a certain God, immoveably bounding the
measure of motion. For whence have the periods always an invariable
sameness, except from a certain immoveable cause? And whence do they
derive the difference of their restitutions to their pristine state,
except from different immoveable causes? Whence also the unceasing, and
the again and again to infinity, except from the infinite powers they
contain? But Plato considering all this series as temporal, arranges
it under one and that the first Time, which defines the periodic time
of a perpetually circulating body, and is, as we have before observed,
true number. From these invisible causes however, we must conceive the
visible periodic times are derived, proceeding from them according to
that which is numbered, since they are able both to number and generate
them. And in all these astronomy beautifully instructs us, doxastically
apprehending the number of the periodic restitutions of each; and
making comparisons of the ratios of the periods to each other; such
as that the Saturnian period, is the double and a half of the period
of Jupiter, and in a similar manner of the rest. For though their
restitutions differ, yet they have a ratio to each other. Sacred rumour
also venerates the unapparent causes of these, proclaiming the divine
names of Night and Day, and also the causes that constitute, and the
invocations, and self-manifestations of Month and Year. Hence, they are
not to be surveyed superficially, but as having a subsistence in divine
hyparxes. And these the laws of sacred institutions, and the oracles of
Apollo ordered to be worshiped and honoured by statues and sacrifices,
as histories inform us. When these also are reverenced, mankind are
supplied with the benefits arising from the periods of the Seasons,
and of the other divinities in a similar manner; but a preternatural
disposition of every thing about the earth, is the consequence of the
worship of these being neglected.”[179] Plato likewise in the Laws
proclaims that all these are Gods, viz. the Seasons, Years and Months,
in the same manner as the stars and the sun; and we do not introduce
any thing new by thinking it proper to direct our attention to the
unapparent powers of these prior to those that are apparent.” And
thus much concerning Time, Day and Night, Month and Year, considered
according to their first subsistence, by which they are Gods.




                            CHAPTER XXXIX.


After the Gods, it is necessary in the next place to consider the order
of divine souls, who are deified by always participating of the Gods.
This order, Plato in the Parmenides denies of _the one_ as follows:
“Does it appear that _the one_ can be either older or younger, or be
of the same age? What should hinder? If it had in any respect the same
age, either with itself, or with another, it would participate equally
of time and similitude, which we have nevertheless asserted _the one_
does not participate. We have asserted so. And this also we have said,
that it neither participates of dissimilitude nor inequality. Entirely
so. How therefore being such, can it either be older or younger than
any thing, or possess the same age with any thing? It can in no
respect. _The one_ therefore, will neither be younger nor older, nor
will it be of the same age, either with itself or with another. It
does not appear that it will. Will it not therefore, be impossible
that _the one_ should be at all in time, if it be such? Or, is it not
necessary that, if any thing is in time, it should always become older
than itself? It is necessary. But is not that which is older, always
older than the younger? What then? Hence that which is becoming to be
older than itself, is at the same time becoming to be younger than
itself, if it is about to have that through which it may become older.
How do you say? Thus: It is requisite that nothing should subsist
in _becoming_ to be different from another, when it _is_ already
different, but that it should _be_ now different from that which _is_
different, _have been_ from that which _was_, and _will be_ from that
which _is to be hereafter_. But from that which is _becoming to be_
different, it ought neither to _have been_, nor to _be hereafter_,
nor _to be_, but to subsist in _becoming to be_ different, and no
otherwise. It is necessary. But the older differs from the younger,
and no other. Certainly. Hence, that which is _becoming to be_ older
than itself, must necessarily at the same time subsist in _becoming
to be_ younger than itself. It seems so. But likewise it ought not to
subsist in _becoming to be_ in a longer time than itself, nor yet in a
shorter; but in a time equal to itself it should subsist in _becoming
to be_, should _be_, _have been_, and _be hereafter_. For these are
necessary. It is necessary, therefore, as it appears, that such things
as are in time, and participate an affection of this kind, should each
one possess the same age with itself, and should subsist in becoming
to be both older and younger than itself. It seems so. But no one of
these passions belongs to _the one_. None. Neither, therefore, is time
present with it, nor does it subsist in any time. It does not indeed
according to the decisions of reason.”

Plato having proceeded, says Proclus, as far as to the mundane Gods,
always taking away things in a consequent order from _the one_, through
the middle genera, or, to speak more clearly, the negations always
producing things secondary, through such as are proximate to _the one_,
from the exempt cause of wholes, he is now about to separate from
_the one_ the divine essence itself, which first participates of the
Gods, and receives their progression into the world; or, to speak more
accurately, he is now about to produce this essence from the ineffable
fountain of all beings. For, as every thing which has being derives its
subsistence from the monad of beings, both _true being_, and that which
is assimilated to it, which of itself indeed is not, but through its
communion with true being receives an obscure representation of being;
in like manner from the one unity of every deity, the peculiarity of
which, if it be lawful so to speak, is to deify all things according
to a certain exempt and ineffable transcendency, every divine number
subsists, or rather proceeds, and every deified order of things. The
design, therefore, as we have before observed, of what is now said,
is to show that _the one_ is exempt from, and therefore produces this
essence.

And here we may see how Parmenides subverts their hypothesis who
contend that the first cause is soul, or any thing else of this kind,
and this by showing that _the one_ does not participate of time. For
it is impossible that a nature which is exempt from time should be
soul; since every soul participates of time, and uses periods which
are measured by time. _The one_ also is better than, and is beyond
intellect, because every intellect is both moved and permanent;
but it is demonstrated that _the one_ neither stands still, nor is
moved. Hence through these things, the three hypostases which rank
as principles, viz. _the one_, _intellect_, and _soul_, become known
to us. But that _the one_ is perfectly exempt from time, Parmenides
demonstrates by showing in the first place, that it is neither older
nor younger, nor of the same age with itself, nor with any other. For
every thing which participates of time necessarily participates of
these; so that by showing that _the one_ is exempt from these which
happen to every thing that participates of time, he also shows that
_the one_ has no connexion with time. This, however, is incredible to
the many, and appeared so to the physiologists prior to Plato, who
thought that all things were comprehended in time, and that, if there
is any thing perpetual, it is infinite time, but that there is not any
thing which time does not measure. For, as they were of opinion that
all things are in place, in consequence of thinking that all things
are bodies, and that nothing is incorporeal, so they thought that
all things subsist in time, and are in motion, and that nothing is
immoveable; for the conception of bodies introduces with itself place,
but motion time. As, therefore, it was demonstrated that _the one_ is
not in place, because it is not in another, and on this account is
incorporeal,--in like manner through these arguments it is also shown
that neither is it in time, and on this account that it is not soul,
nor any thing else which requires and participates of time, either
according to essence or according to energy.

And here it is well worthy our observation that Parmenides no longer
stops at the dyad as in the former conclusions, but triadically
enumerates the peculiarities of this order, viz. _the older_, _the
younger_, and _the possession of the same age_, though he might have
said dyadically, _of an equal age_, and _of an unequal age_, as there
_the equal_ and _the unequal_. But there indeed having previously
introduced the dyad, he passes from the division of the unequal to the
triadic distribution; but here he begins from the triad. For there
union precedes multitude, and the whole the parts; but in this order of
things multitude is most apparent, and a division into parts, as Timæus
says, whom Parmenides, in what is now said imitating, begins indeed
from the triad, but proceeds as far as to the hexad. For, _the older_
and _the younger_, and _the possession of the same age_, are doubled,
being divided into _itself_ and _relation to another_. That the triad,
indeed, and the hexad are adapted to this order is not immanifest.
For the triple nature of soul, consisting of _essence_, _same_ and
_different_, and its triple power, which receives its completion from
the charioteer and the two horses, as we learn from the Phædrus,[180]
evince its alliance with the triad; and its essence being combined from
both these shows its natural alliance with the hexad.

It is likewise necessary to observe, that as the discourse is about
divine souls who are deified by always participating of the Gods, Time
according to its first subsistence pertains to these souls,--not that
which proceeds into the apparent, but that which is liberated, and
without habitude; and this is the Time which is now denied of _the
one_. All the periods of souls, their harmonious motions about the
intelligible, and their circulations, are measured by this Time. For
it has a supernal origin, imitates eternity, and connects, evolves,
and perfects every motion, whether vital, or pertaining to soul, or
in whatever other manner it may be said to subsist. This Time also is
indeed essentially an intellect, as we have before observed; but it is
the cause to divine souls, of their harmonic and infinite motion about
the intelligible, through which these likewise are led to _the older_
and to _the same age_: and this in a twofold respect. For _the older_
in these _with respect to themselves_ takes place, so far as with their
more excellent powers they enjoy in a greater degree the infinity of
Time, and participate it more abundantly. For they are not filled with
similar perfection from more divine natures, according to all their
powers, but with some more, and with others less. But that is said to
be older which participates more of time. That which is older in these
divine souls _with respect to other things_ is effected, so far as
some of these receive the whole measure of Time, and the whole of its
extension proceeding to souls, but others are measured by more partial
periods. Those therefore are older, whose period is more total, and is
extended to a longer time. They may also be said to be _older and at
the same time younger with respect to themselves_, by becoming _hoary_
as it were above, through extending themselves to the whole power of
Time, but juvenile _beneath_, by enjoying Time more partially. But, _as
with respect to others_, they may be said to be _older and at the same
time younger_ according to a diminution of energy. For that which has
its circulation measured by a less period is younger than that whose
circulation is measured by a more extended period.

Again, among things co-ordinate, that which has the same participation
and the same measure of perfection with others may be said to be of
_the same age with itself and others_. But every divine soul, though
its own period is measured according to one Time, and that of the body
which is suspended from it according to another, yet it has an equal
restitution to the same condition; itself always according to its own
Time, and its body also according to its time. Hence, again, it is of
the same age with itself and its body, according to the analogous. By
thus interpreting what is now said of _the one_, we shall accord with
Plato in the Timæus, who there evinces that Time is the measure of
every transitive life, and who says that soul is the origin of a divine
and wise life through the whole of time. And we shall also accord with
his assertion in the Phædrus, that souls see true being through Time,
because they perceive temporally and not eternally.

Farther still, Plato here demonstrates that _the one_ is neither older
nor younger than itself, or another. For it was necessary to show
that _the one_ is beyond every divine soul, prior to other souls, in
the same manner as it is demonstrated to be prior to true beings, and
to be the cause of all things. Hence, since it is the cause of every
divine soul, so far as these derive their subsistence as well as all
beings from the divine unities, with great propriety is it necessary
to show that _the one_ is beyond the order of deified souls. For these
souls so far as they are intellectual have intellect for their cause;
so far as they are essences they originate from being; and so far as
they have the form of unity, they are derived from _the one_; receiving
their subsistence from this, so far as each is a multitude consisting
of certain unities, and of these as elements.

Again, that which participates of time is twofold, the one proceeding,
as it were, in a right line, and beginning from one thing, and ending
in another; but the other proceeding circularly, and having its motion
from the same to the same, to which both the beginning and the end
are the same, and the motion is unceasing, every thing in it being
both beginning and end. That, therefore, which energizes circularly,
participates of time periodically: and so far as it departs from the
beginning it becomes older, but so far as it approaches to the end it
becomes younger. For becoming nearer the end, it becomes nearer to
its proper beginning. But that which becomes nearer to its beginning
becomes younger. Hence, that which circularly approaches to the end
becomes younger, the same also according to the same becoming older;
for that which approximates to its end proceeds to that which is
older. That to which the beginning therefore is one thing, and the end
another, to this the younger is different from the older; but that to
which the beginning and the end are the same, is in no respect older
than younger, but as Plato says, at the same time becomes younger and
older than itself. Every thing, therefore, which participates of time,
if it becomes both older and younger than itself, is circularly moved.
But divine souls are of this kind: for they participate of time, and
the time of their proper motion is periodical.




                              CHAPTER XL.


Having in the preceding chapters presented the reader from the most
genuine sources, with all the information that can at present be
obtained concerning the mundane Gods, the order of scientific theology
requires that those perpetual attendants of the Gods, denominated
angels, dæmons and heroes, should be in the next place considered.
As all these ministrant powers however, are frequently called by one
name dæmons; and as Love is denominated by Plato a great dæmon, and
contains in himself the paradigm of the whole dæmoniacal series, it is
necessary that the developement of the nature of Love should precede
the discussion of the peculiarities of dæmons. The following admirable
account therefore of this mighty divinity, by Proclus the Coryphæus
of all true philosophers, is extracted from his MS. Commentary on the
First Alcibiades of Plato.

There are different properties of different Gods. For some are the
fabricators of wholes, of the form of beings, and of their essential
ornament. But others are the suppliers of life, and are the sources of
its various genera. Others again preserve the unchangeable order, and
guard the indissoluble connexion of things. And others lastly, who are
allotted a different power, preserve all things by their beneficent
energies. In like manner every amatory order is the cause to all
things of conversion to divine beauty, leading back, conjoining, and
establishing all secondary natures in the beautiful, replenishing them
from thence, and irradiating all things with the gifts of its light.
On this account it is asserted in the Banquet of Plato that Love is a
great dæmon, because Love first demonstrates in itself a power of this
kind, and is the medium between the object of desire and the desiring
nature, and is the cause of the conversion of subsequent to prior
natures. The whole amatory series therefore, being established in the
vestibule of the cause of beauty, calls upwards all things to this
cause, and forms a middle progression between the object of Love and
the natures which are recalled by Love. Hence it pre-establishes in
itself the paradigm of the whole dæmoniacal order, obtaining the same
middle situation among the Gods as dæmons between divine and mortal
natures. Since therefore, every amatory series possesses this property
among the Gods, we must consider its uniform and occult summit as
ineffably established in the first orders of the Gods, and conjoined
with the first and intelligible beauty; its middle process as shining
forth among the supermundane Gods, with an intellectual condition; its
third progression as possessing an exempt power among the liberated
Gods; and its fourth as multifariously distributed about the world,
producing many orders and powers from itself, and distributing gifts of
this kind to the different parts of the world.

But after the unific and first principle of Love, and after the
tripartite essence perfected from thence, a various multitude of Loves
shines forth with divine light, from whence the choirs of angels are
filled with Love; and the herds of dæmons full of this God attend on
the Gods who are recalled to intelligible beauty. Add too, that the
army of heroes, together with dæmons and angels, are agitated about
the participation of the beautiful with divine bacchanalian fury.
Lastly, all things are excited, revive and flourish through the influx
of the beautiful. But the souls of such men as receive an inspiration
of this kind, and are naturally allied to the God, assiduously move
about beauty, and fall into the realms of generation, for the purpose
of benefiting more imperfect souls, and providing for those natures
which require to be saved. The Gods indeed, and the attendants on the
Gods, abiding in their proper habits, benefit all following natures,
and convert them to themselves; but the souls of men descending, and
touching on the coasts of generation, imitate the beneficent providence
of the Gods. As, therefore, souls established according to some other
God descend with purity into the regions of mortality, and benefit
souls that revolve in it; and some indeed benefit more imperfect
souls by prophecy, others by mystic ceremonies, and others by divine
medicinal skill;--thus also souls that chose an amatory life, are moved
about the deity who presides over beautiful natures, for the purpose
of taking care of well-born souls. But from apparent beauty they are
led back to divine beauty, and together with themselves elevate those
who are the objects of their love. And this also divine Love primarily
effects in intelligibles. For he unites himself to the object of
love, extends to it the participants of his power, and inserts in all
things one bond, and one indissoluble friendship with each other, and
with the beautiful itself. Souls therefore possessed with Love, and
participating the inspiration thence derived, in consequence of using
an undefiled vehicle, are led from apparent to intelligible beauty, and
make this the end of their energy. Likewise enkindling a light in more
imperfect souls, they also lead these back to a divine nature, and are
divinely agitated together with them about the fountain of all-perfect
beauty.

But such souls as from a perverse education fall from the gift which
is thence derived, yet are allotted an amatory nature, these, through
their ignorance of true beauty, are busily employed about that which
is material and divisible, at which also they are astonished in
consequence of not knowing the passion which they suffer. Hence, they
abandon every thing divine, and gradually decline into impiety and the
darkness of matter. They appear indeed to hasten to a union with the
beautiful, in the same manner as perfectly amatory souls; but they are
ignorant of the union, and tend to a dissipated condition of life, and
to matter, which Plato calls the sea of dissimilitude. They are also
conjoined with the base itself, and material privation of form. For
where are material natures able to pervade through each other? Or where
is apparent beauty, pure and genuine, being thus mingled with matter,
and replete with the deformity of its subject? Some souls therefore
genuinely participate the gifts of Love, and by others these gifts are
perverted. For as according to Plotinus the defluxion of intellect
produces craft, and an erroneous participation of wisdom sophistry,
so likewise the illumination of Love when it meets with a depraved
recipient, produces a tyrannic and intemperate life.




                             CHAPTER XLI.


In another part, likewise, of the same admirable Commentary, Proclus
presents us, as he says, with some of the more arcane assertions
concerning Love; and these are as follow:

Love is neither to be placed in the first, nor among the last of
beings. Not in the first, because the object of Love is superior to
Love: nor yet among the last, because the lover participates of Love.
It is requisite, therefore, that love should be established between the
object of Love and the lover, and that it should be posterior to the
beautiful, but prior to every nature endued with love. Where then does
it first subsist? How does it extend itself through the universe, and
with what monads does it leap forth?

There are three hypostases, therefore, among the intelligible and
occult Gods. And the first, indeed, is characterized by _the good_,
understanding _the good itself_, and residing in that place where
according to the oracle the paternal monad abides. But the second is
characterized by wisdom, where the first intelligence flourishes.
And the third by the beautiful, where, as Timæus says, the most
beautiful of intelligibles abides. There are, however, three monads
according to these intelligible causes, subsisting uniformly and
causally in intelligibles, but first unfolding themselves into light
in the ineffable order of the Gods,[181] I mean Faith, Truth, and
Love. And Faith indeed establishes all things in good; but Truth
unfolds all the knowledge in beings; and lastly, Love converts all
things, and congregates them into the nature of the beautiful. This
triad, indeed, thence proceeds through all the orders of the Gods,
and imparts to all things, by its light, a union with intelligible
itself. It also unfolds itself differently in different orders, every
where combining its powers with the peculiarities of the Gods. And
among some it subsists ineffably, incomprehensibly, and unifically;
but among others, as the cause of connecting and binding; and among
others, as endued with a perfective and forming power. Here again, it
subsists intellectually and paternally; but there in a manner entirely
motive, vivific, and effective. Here, as governing and assimilating;
there in a liberated and undefiled manner; and elsewhere according to
a multiplied and dividing mode. Love, therefore, supernally descends
from intelligibles to mundane natures, calling all things upwards to
divine beauty. Truth also proceeds through all things, illuminating all
things with knowledge. And lastly, Faith proceeds through the universe,
establishing all things unically in good. Hence the Chaldæan oracles
assert that all things are governed by, and abide in, these. And on
this account they order Theurgists to conjoin themselves to divinity
through this triad. Intelligibles themselves, indeed, do not require
the amatory medium, on account of their ineffable union. But where
there is a union and separation of beings, there also Love abides. For
it is the binder and conciliator of natures posterior and prior to
itself; but the converter of subsequent into prior, and the elevating
and perfecting case of imperfect natures.

The Chaldæan oracles, therefore, speak of Love as binding, and residing
in all things: and hence, if it connects all things, it also copulates
us with the governments of dæmons. But Diotima in the Banquet, calls
Love a great dæmon, because it every where fills up the medium between
desiring and desirable natures. And indeed that which is the object of
Love vindicates to itself the first order; but that which loves is in
the third order from the beloved object. Lastly, Love usurps a middle
situation between each, congregating and collecting together that
which desires and that which is desired, and filling subordinate from
better natures. But among the intelligible and occult Gods, it unites
intelligible intellect to the first and secret beauty by a certain
life better than intelligence. Hence, the theologist of the Greeks
[Orpheus], calls this Love, blind; for he says,

    In his breast feeding, eyless, rapid Love.[182]

But in natures posterior to intelligibles, it imparts by illumination
an indissoluble bond to all things perfected by itself; for a bond is
a certain union, but accompanied with much separation. On this account
the Chaldæan oracles are accustomed to call the fire of this Love a
copulator. For proceeding from intelligible intellect, it binds all
following natures to each other, and to itself. Hence, it conjoins
all the Gods with intelligible beauty, and dæmons with Gods; but it
conjoins us both with Gods and dæmons. In the Gods indeed it has a
primary subsistence; in dæmons a secondary one; and in partial souls
a subsistence through a certain third procession from principles.
Again, in the Gods it subsists above essence; for every genus of Gods
is superessential. But in dæmons it subsists according to essence;
and in souls according to illumination. And this triple order appears
similar to the triple power of intellect. For one intellect subsists as
imparticipable, being exempt from all partial genera; but another as
participated, of which also the souls of the Gods participate as of a
better nature; and another is from this ingenerated in souls, and which
is indeed their perfection. And these three distinctions of intellect
Tamæus himself indicates. Hence, that Love which subsists in the Gods
must be considered as analogous to imparticipable intellect; for this
is exempt from all the beings which receive and are illuminated by its
nature. But dæmoniacal Love is analogous to participated intellect;
for this is essential and is perfected from itself, in the same manner
as participated intellect is proximately resident in souls. And the
third Love is analogous to intellect which subsists as a habit, and
which inserts an illumination in souls. Nor is it unjustly that we
consider Love as co-ordinate with this intellectual difference; for in
intelligible intellect it possesses its first and occult subsistence.
And if it thence leaps forth, it is also established there according to
cause. It likewise appears to me that Plato finding that intelligible
intellect was called by Orpheus both Love and a great dæmon, was
himself pleased to celebrate Love in a similar manner. Very properly,
therefore, does Diotima call it a great demon. And Socrates conjoins
the discourse about Love with that concerning dæmons. For as every
thing dæmoniacal is suspended from the amatory medium, so likewise
the discourse concerning a dæmoniacal nature is conjoined with that
concerning Love, and is allied to it. For Love is a medium between the
object of Love and the lover; and a dæmon is a medium between man and
divinity.




                             CHAPTER XLII.


The nature of dæmons, therefore, remains in the next place to be
more fully disclosed; for the reader has been already presented with
some very important information concerning them, in the discussion
of the sublunary Gods. As there is no vacuum then in corporeal, so
neither in incorporeal natures. Hence, between divine essences which
are the first of things, and partial essences such as ours, which
are nothing more than the dregs of the rational nature, there must
necessarily be a middle rank of beings, in order that divinity may
be connected with man, and that the progression of things may form
an entire whole, suspended like the golden chain of Homer from the
summit of Olympus. This middle rank of beings, considered according
to a two-fold division, consists of dæmons and heroes, the latter of
which is proximate to partial souls such as ours, and the former to,
divine natures, just as air and water subsist between fire and earth.
Hence, whatever is ineffable and occult in the Gods, dæmons and heroes
express and unfold. They likewise conciliate all things, and are the
sources of the harmonic consent and sympathy of all things with each
other. They transmit divine gifts to us, and equally carry back ours
to the divinities. But the characteristics of divine natures are
unity, permanency in themselves, a subsistence as an immoveable cause
of motion, transcendent providence, and which possesses nothing in
common with the subjects of their providential energies. And these
characteristics are preserved in them according to essence, power
and energy. On the other hand, the characteristics of partial souls
are, a declination to multitude and motion, a conjunction with the
Gods, an aptitude to receive something from other natures, and to
mingle together all things in itself, and through itself. And these
characteristics they also possess according to essence, power and
energy. Such then being the peculiarities of the two extremes, we
shall find that those of dæmons are to contain in themselves the gifts
of divine natures, in a more inferior manner indeed than the Gods,
but yet so as to comprehend the conditions of subordinate natures,
under the idea of a divine essence. In other words, the prerogatives
of deity characterize and absorb as it were by their powerful light,
whatever dæmons possess peculiar to inferior beings. Hence, they are
multiplied indeed but unitedly; mingled, but yet so that the unmingled
predominates; and are moved, but with stability. On the contrary,
heroes possess unity, identity, permanency, and every excellence, under
the condition of multitude, motion, and mixture; viz. the prerogatives
of subordinate predominate in these over the characteristics of
superior natures, yet so as never to induce a cessation of energy
about, or oblivion of, divinity. In short, dæmons and heroes are
composed of the properties of the two extremes--Gods and partial souls;
but in dæmons there is more of the divine, and in heroes more of the
human nature.

Having premised thus much, I shall next present the reader with all
the information I have been able to collect from the most genuine
Platonists, and especially from Proclus, on the nature of this middle
order of beings. In the first place, therefore, what follows on this
subject is derived from the MS. Commentary of Proclus On the First
Alcibiades, in which extract also the nature of the dæmon of Socrates
is unfolded, about which modern wit has been so much puzzled, and so
egregiously mistaken.

Let us now speak first, concerning dæmons in general; secondly,
concerning those that are allotted us in common; and thirdly,
concerning the dæmon of Socrates. For it is always requisite that
demonstrations should begin from things more universal, and proceed
from these as far as to individuals. For this mode of proceeding is
natural, and is more adapted to science. Dæmons, therefore, deriving
their first subsistence from the vivific Goddess [Juno], and flowing
from thence as from a certain fountain, are allotted an essence
characterized by soul. This essence in those of a superior order is
more intellectual, and more perfect according to hyparxis; in those
of a middle order it is more rational; and in those which rank in the
third degree, and which subsist at the extremity of the dæmoniacal
order, it is various, more irrational, and more material. Possessing,
therefore, an essence of this kind, they are distributed in conjunction
with the Gods, as being allotted a power ministrant to deity. Hence,
they are in one way subservient to the liberated Gods, who are the
leaders of wholes prior to the world; and in another to the mundane
Gods, who proximately preside over the parts of the universe. For there
is one division of dæmons according to the twelve supercelestial Gods,
and another according to all the peculiarities of the mundane Gods.
For every mundane God is the leader of a certain dæmoniacal order,
to which he proximately imparts his power; viz. if he is a demiurgic
God, he imparts a demiurgic power; if immutable, an undefiled power;
if telesiurgic, a perfective power. And about each of the divinities,
there is an innumerable multitude of dæmons, and which are dignified
with the same appellations as their leading Gods. Hence, they rejoice
when they are called by the names of Jupiter, Apollo, and Hermes, &c.
as expressing the peculiarity of their proper deities. And from these,
mortal natures also participate of divine influxions. And thus animals
and plants are fabricated, bearing the images of different Gods; dæmons
proximately imparting to these the representations of their leaders.
But the Gods in an exempt manner supernally preside over dæmons; and
through this last natures sympathize with such as are first. For the
representations of first are seen in last natures; and the causes of
things that are last are comprehended in primary beings. The middle
genera, too, of dæmons give completion to wholes, the communion of
which they bind and connect; participating indeed of the Gods, but
participated by mortal natures. He, therefore, will not err who asserts
that the mundane artificer established the centres of the order of
the universe in dæmons; since Diotima also assigns them this order,
viz. that of binding together divine and mortal natures, of deducing
supernal streams, elevating all secondary natures to the Gods, and
giving completion to wholes through the connexion of a medium.

Hence, we must not assent to their doctrine, who say that dæmons are
the souls of men that have changed the present life. For it is not
proper to consider a dæmoniacal nature _according to habitude_, as
the same with a nature essentially dæmoniacal; nor to assert that the
perpetual medium of all mundane natures consists from a life conversant
with multiform mutations. For a dæmoniacal guard subsists always the
same, connecting the mundane wholes. But soul does not always thus
retain its own order, as Socrates says in the Republic; since at
different times it chooses different lives. Nor do we praise those who
make certain of the Gods to be dæmons, such as the erratic Gods, [i.e.
the planets] according to Amelius. But we are persuaded by Plato, who
calls the Gods the rulers of the universe, but subjects to them the
herds of dæmons. And we shall every where preserve the doctrine of
Diotima, who assigns the middle order, between all divine and mortal
natures, to a dæmoniacal essence. Let this then be the conception
respecting the whole of the dæmoniacal order in common.




                            CHAPTER XLIII.


In the next place, let us speak concerning the dæmons, who are allotted
the superintendence of mankind. For of these dæmons, which, as we
have said, rank in the middle order, the first and highest are divine
dæmons, and who often appear as Gods, through their transcendent
similitude to the divinities. For, in short, that which is first
in every order preserves the form of the nature prior to itself.
Thus, the first intellect is a God, and the most ancient of souls is
intellectual. Hence, the highest genus of dæmons, as being proximate to
the Gods, is uniform and divine. The next to these in order are those
dæmons who participate of an intellectual peculiarity, and preside
over the ascent and descent of souls, and who unfold into light and
deliver to all things the productions of the Gods. The third are those
who distribute the productions of divine souls to secondary natures,
and complete the bond of those that receive effluxions from thence. The
fourth are those that transmit the efficacious powers of whole natures
to things generated and corrupted, and who inspire partial natures
with life, order, reasons, and the all-various perfect operations
which things mortal are able to effect. The fifth are corporeal, and
bind together the extremes in bodies. For, how can perpetual accord
with corruptible bodies, and efficients with effects, except through
this medium? For it is this ultimate nature which has dominion over
corporeal goods, and provides for all natural prerogatives. The sixth
in order are those that revolve about matter, connect the powers
which descend from celestial to sublunary matter, perpetually guard
this matter, and defend the shadowy representation of forms which it
contains.

Dæmons, therefore, as Diotima also says, being many and all-various,
the highest of them conjoin souls proceeding from their father to
their leading Gods. For every God, as we have said, is the leader in
the first place of dæmons, and in the next of partial souls. For the
demiurgus disseminated these, as Timæus says, into the sun and moon,
and the other instruments of time. These divine dæmons, therefore,
are those which are essentially allotted to souls, and conjoin them
to their proper leaders. And every soul, though it revolves together
with its leading deity, requires a dæmon of this kind. But dæmons of
the second rank preside over the ascensions and descensions of souls;
and from these the souls of the multitude derive their elections.
For the most perfect souls, who are conversant with generation in an
undefiled manner, as they choose a life conformable to their presiding
God, so they live according to a divine dæmon, who conjoined them
to their proper deity when they dwelt on high. Hence, the Egyptian
priest admired Plotinus, as being governed by a divine dæmon. To
souls, therefore, who live as those that will shortly return to the
intelligible world whence they came, the supernal is the same with the
dæmon which attends them here. But to imperfect souls the essential is
different from the dæmon that attends them at their birth.

If these things then are rightly asserted, we must not assent to those
who make our rational soul a dæmon. For a dæmon is different from
man, as Diotima says, who places dæmons between Gods and men, and as
Socrates also evinces, when he divides a dæmoniacal oppositely to the
human nature. “For,” says he, “not a human but a dæmoniacal obstacle
detains me.” But man is a soul using the body as an instrument. A
dæmon, therefore, is not the same with the rational soul.

This also is evident from Plato in the Timæus, where he says that
intellect has in us the relation of a dæmon. But this is only true
as far as pertains to analogy. For a dæmon according to essence is
different from a dæmon according to analogy. For in many instances,
that which proximately presides, subsisting in the order of a dæmon
with respect to that which is inferior, is called a dæmon. Thus Jupiter
in Orpheus calls his father Saturn an illustrious dæmon; and Plato in
the Timæus calls those Gods who proximately preside over, and orderly
distribute the realms of generation, dæmons. “For,” says he, “to speak
concerning other dæmons, and to know their generation, exceeds the
ability of human nature.” But a dæmon according to analogy is that
which proximately presides over any thing, though it should be a God,
or though it should be some one of the natures posterior to the Gods.
And the soul that through similitude to the dæmoniacal genus produces
energies more wonderful than those which belong to human nature, and
which suspends the whole of its life from dæmons, is a dæmon κατα
σχεσιν, according to habitude, i.e. proximity or alliance. Thus, as it
appears to me, Socrates in the Republic calls those dæmons, who have
lived well, and who in consequence of this are transferred to a better
condition of being, and to more holy places. But an essential dæmon
is neither called a dæmon through habitude to secondary natures, nor
through an assimilation to something different from itself; but is
allotted this peculiarity from himself, and is defined by a certain
hyparxis, by appropriate powers, and by different modes of energies.
In short, the rational soul is called in the Timæus the dæmon of the
animal; but we investigate the dæmon of man, and not of the animal;
that which governs the rational soul itself, and not its instrument;
and that which leads the soul to its judges, after the dissolution of
the animal, as Socrates says in the Phædo. For when the animal is no
more, the dæmon which the soul was allotted while connected with the
body, conducts it to its judge. For, if the soul possesses that dæmon
while living in the body, which is said to lead it to judgment after
death, this dæmon must be the dæmon of the man, and not of the animal
alone. To which we may add, that beginning from on high, it governs the
whole of our composition.

Nor again, dismissing the rational soul, must it be said that a dæmon
is that which energizes in the soul: as for instance, that in those
who live according to reason, reason is the dæmon; in those that
live according to anger, the irascible part; and in those that live
according to desire, the epithymetic or desiring part. Nor must it
be said that the nature which proximately presides over that which
energizes in our life, is a dæmon: as for instance, that reason is
the dæmon of the irascible, and anger of those that live according to
desire. For, in the first place, to assert that dæmons are parts of
our soul, is to admire human life in an improper degree, and oppose
the division of Socrates in the Republic, who after Gods and dæmons
places the heroic and human race, and blames the poets for introducing
in their poems heroes in no respect better than men, but subject to
similar passions. By this accusation, therefore, it is plain that
Socrates was very far from thinking that dæmons, who are of a sublimer
order than heroes, are to be ranked among the parts and powers of the
soul. For from this doctrine it will follow that things essentially
more excellent give completion to such as are subordinate. And in the
second place, from this hypothesis, mutations of lives would also
introduce multiform mutations of dæmons. For the avaricious character
is frequently changed into an ambitious life, this again into a life
which is formed by right opinion, and this last into a scientific life.
The dæmon, therefore, will vary according to these changes; for the
energizing part will be different at different times. If, therefore,
either this energizing part itself is a dæmon, or that part which has
an arrangement prior to it, dæmons will be changed together with the
mutation of human life, and the same person will have many dæmons in
one life; which is of all things the most impossible. For the soul
never changes in one life the government of its dæmon; but it is the
same dæmon which presides over us till we are brought before the judges
of our conduct, as also Socrates asserts in the Phædo.

Again, those who consider a partial intellect, or that intellect which
subsists at the extremity of the intellectual order, as the same with
the dæmon which is assigned to man, appear to me to confound the
intellectual peculiarity with the dæmoniacal essence. For all dæmons
subsist in the extent of souls, and rank as the next in order to divine
souls. But the intellectual order is different from that of soul, and
is neither allotted the same essence, nor power, nor energy.

Further still, this also may be said, that souls enjoy intellect then
only when they convert themselves to it, receive its light, and conjoin
their own with intellectual energy; but they experience the presiding
care of a dæmoniacal nature through the whole of life, and in every
thing which proceeds from fate and providence. For it is the dæmon that
governs the whole of our life, and that fulfils the elections which we
made prior to generation, together with the gifts of fate, and of those
Gods that preside over fate. It is likewise the dæmon that supplies and
measures the illuminations from providence. And as souls indeed, we
are suspended from intellect, but as souls using the body we require
the aid of a dæmon. Hence, Plato in the Phædrus calls intellect the
governor of the soul; but he every where calls a dæmon the inspector
and guardian of mankind. And no one who considers the affair rightly,
will find any other one and proximate providence of every thing
pertaining to us, besides that of a dæmon. For intellect, as we have
said, is participated by the rational soul, but not by the body; and
nature is participated by the body, but not by the dianoëtic part.
And further still, the rational soul rules over anger and desire, but
it has no dominion over fortuitous events. But the dæmon alone moves,
governs, and orderly disposes all our affairs. For he gives perfection
to reason, measures the passions, inspires nature, connects the body,
supplies things fortuitous, accomplishes the decrees of fate, and
imparts the gifts of providence. In short, he is the king of every
thing in and about us, and is the pilot of the whole of our life. And
thus much concerning our allotted dæmons.




                             CHAPTER XLIV.


In the next place, with respect to the dæmon of Socrates, these three
things are to be particularly considered. First, that he not only ranks
as a dæmon, but also as a God. For in the First Alcibiades Socrates
clearly says, “I have long been of opinion that the God did not as
yet direct me to hold any conversation with you.” He calls the same
power therefore a dæmon and a God. And in the Apology he more clearly
evinces that this dæmon is allotted a divine transcendency, considered
as ranking in a dæmoniacal order. And this is what we before said, that
the dæmons of divine souls, and who make choice of an intellectual and
elevating life, are divine, transcending the whole of a dæmoniacal
genus, and being the first participants of the Gods. For, as is a dæmon
among Gods, such also is a God among dæmons. Among the divinities
however the hyparxis is divine; but in dæmons on the contrary, the
peculiarity of their essence is dæmoniacal, but the analogy which they
bear to divinity evinces their essence to be godlike. For on account
of their transcendency with respect to other dæmons they frequently
appear as Gods. With great propriety therefore, does Socrates call his
dæmon a God; for he belonged to the first and highest dæmons. Hence
Socrates was most perfect, being governed by such a presiding power,
and conducting himself by the will of such a leader and guardian of his
life. This then was one of the illustrious prerogatives of the dæmon of
Socrates. The second was this: that Socrates perceived a certain voice
proceeding from his dæmon. For this is asserted by him in the Theætetus
and in the Phædrus. This voice also is the signal from the dæmon,
which he speaks of in the Theages. And again in the Phædrus, when he
was about to pass over the river, he experienced the accustomed signal
from the dæmon. What then, does Socrates indicate by these assertions,
and what was the voice through which he says the dæmon signified to him
his will?

In the first place, we must say that Socrates, through his dianoëtic
power, and his science of things, enjoyed the inspiration of his dæmon,
who continually recalled him to divine love. In the second place, in
the affairs of life, Socrates supernally directed his providential
attention to more imperfect souls. And according to the energy of
his dæmon, he received the light proceeding from thence, neither in
his dianoëtic part alone, nor in his doxastic powers, but also in
his spirit, the illumination of the dæmon suddenly diffusing itself
through the whole of his life, and now moving sense itself. For it is
evident that reason, imagination, and sense, enjoy the same energy
differently; and that each of our inward parts is passive to, and is
moved by the dæmon in a peculiar manner. The voice therefore, did
not act upon Socrates externally with passivity; but the dæmoniacal
inspiration, proceeding inwardly through his whole soul, and diffusing
itself as far as to the organs of sense, became at last a voice, which
was rather recognized by consciousness than by sense. For such are the
illuminations of good dæmons and the Gods.

In the third place, let us consider the peculiarity of the dæmon of
Socrates; for it never exhorted, bet perpetually recalled him. This
also must be again referred to the Socratic life. For it is not a
property common to our allotted dæmons, but was the characteristic of
the guardian of Socrates. We must say therefore, that the beneficent
and philanthropic disposition of Socrates, and his great promptitude
with respect to the communication of good, did not require the
exhortation of the dæmon. For he was impelled from himself, and was
ready at all times to impart to all men the most excellent life. But
since many of those that came to him were unadapted to the pursuit
of virtue and the science of wholes, his governing good dæmon
restrained him from a providential care of such as these. Just as a
good charioteer alone restrains the impetus of a horse naturally
well adapted for the race, but does not stimulate him, in consequence
of his being excited to motion from himself, and not requiring the
spur, but the bridle. And hence Socrates, from his great readiness
to benefit those with whom he conversed, rather required a recalling
than an exciting dæmon. For the inaptitude of auditors, which is for
the most part concealed from human sagacity, requires a dæmoniacal
discrimination; and the knowledge of favourable opportunities can by
this alone be accurately announced to us. Socrates therefore being
naturally impelled to good, alone required to be recalled in his
unseasonable impulses.

But farther still, it may be said, that of dæmons, some are allotted
a purifying and undefiled power; others a perfective; and others a
demiurgic power. And in short, they are divided according to the
characteristic peculiarities of the Gods, and the powers under which
they are arranged. Each likewise, according to his hyparxis, incites
the object of his providential care to a blessed life; some of them
moving us to an attention to inferior concerns; and others restraining
us from action, and an energy verging to externals. It appears
therefore, that the dæmon of Socrates being allotted this peculiarity,
viz. cathartic, and the source of an undefiled life, and being arranged
under this power of Apollo, and uniformly presiding over the whole of
purification, separated also Socrates from too much commerce with the
vulgar, and a life extending itself into multitude. But it led him into
the depths of his soul, and an energy undefiled by subordinate natures.
And hence it never exhorted, but perpetually recalled him. For, what
else is to recall, than to withdraw him from the multitude to inward
energy? And of what is this the peculiarity except of purification?
Indeed, it appears to me, that as Orpheus places the Apolloniacal monad
over king Bacchus, which recalls him from a progression into Titannic
multitude, and a desertion of his royal throne, in like manner the
dæmon of Socrates conducted him to an intellectual place of survey,
and restrained his association with the multitude. For the dæmon is
analogous to Apollo, being his attendant, but the intellect of Socrates
to Bacchus; for our intellect is the progeny of the power of this
divinity.




                             CHAPTER XLV.


From the MS. Scholia also of Proclus on the Cratylus, we derive the
following important information concerning this order of beings who
connect the divine and human nature together. Of the genera posterior
to the Gods, and which are indeed their perpetual attendants, but
produce in conjunction with them mundane fabrications from on high, as
far as to the last of things,--of these genera, some unfold generation
into light; others are transporters of union; others of power; and
others call forth the knowledge of the Gods, and an intellectual
essence. But of these, some are called angelic, by those that are
skilful in divine concerns, in consequence of being established
according to the hyparxis itself of the Gods, and making that which
is uniform in their nature commensurate with things of a secondary
rank. Hence, the angelic tribe is _boniform_, as unfolding into light
the occult _goodness_ of the Gods. Others among these are called by
theologists dæmoniacal, as binding the middle of all things, and as
distributing divine power, and producing it as far as to the last of
things. For δαισαι is το μερισαι. But this genus possesses abundance
of power, and is multifarious, as giving subsistence to those last
dæmons who are material, who draw down souls, and proceed to the most
partial and material form of energy. Others again, are denominated
by them heroic, who lead human souls on high through love, and who
are the suppliers of an intellectual life, of magnitude of operation,
and transcendency of wisdom. In short, they are allotted a convertive
order and providence, and an alliance to a divine intellect, to which
they also convert secondary natures. Hence, they are allotted this
appellation, as being able to _raise_ and _extend_ souls to the Gods.
(ως αιρειν και ανατεινειν τας ψυχας επι θεους δυναμενα)

These triple genera posterior to, are indeed, always suspended from
the Gods, but they are divided from each other. And some of them are
essentially intellectual; others are essentialized in rational souls;
and others subsist in irrational and phantastic lives, i.e. in lives
characterized by imagination. It is also evident that such of them as
are intellectual, are allotted a prudence or wisdom transcending that
of human nature, and which is eternally conjoined with the objects
of their intellection. But such of them as are rational, energize
discursively according to prudence. And the irrational kind are
destitute of prudence. For they dwell in matter, and the darkest parts
of the universe. They also bind souls to image-producing bosoms, (και
συνδει τας ψυχας τοις ειδωλοποιοις κολποις) and strangle such as are
brought into that region, until they have suffered the punishment which
is their due. These three genera therefore, which are more excellent
than us, Socrates now calls dæmons. And thus much concerning these
triple genera, according to Proclus.

Again, with respect to dæmons properly so called, there are three
species of them according to the Platonic theology; the first of
which is rational only, and the last is irrational only; but the
middle species is partly rational and partly irrational. And again, of
these the first is perfectly beneficent, but many among the other two
species are malevolent and noxious to mankind: not indeed essentially
malevolent (for there is nothing in the universe, the ample abode of
all-bountiful Jove, essentially evil), but only so from the office
which they are destined to perform. For nothing which operates
naturally, operates as to itself evilly. But the Platonic Hermeas in
his MS. Commentary on the Phædrus, and on that part of it in which
Plato says, “There are indeed, other evils besides these, but a certain
dæmon immediately mingles pleasure with most of them,” admirably
observes respecting dæmons as follows: “The distribution of good and
evil originates from the dæmoniacal genus. For every genus transcending
that of dæmons, uniformly possesses good. There are therefore, certain
genera of dæmons, some of which adorn and administer certain parts of
the world; but others certain species of animals. Hence, the dæmon who
is the inspective guardian of life, hastens souls into that condition
which he himself is allotted; as for instance, into injustice or
intemperance, and continually mingles pleasure in them as a snare. But
there are other dæmons transcending these, who are the punishers of
souls, converting them to a more perfect and elevated life. And the
first of these it is necessary to avoid; but the second sort we should
render propitious. There are other dæmons however, more excellent than
these, who distribute good in an uniform manner.”

Farther still, Plato in the Phædo, says, “that the dæmon of each
person, which was allotted to him while living, endeavours to lead
each to a certain place, where it is necessary that all of them being
collected together, after they have been judged, should proceed to
Hades, together with their leader, who is ordered to conduct them from
hence thither. But there receiving the allotments proper to their
condition, and abiding for a necessary time, another leader brings them
back hither again, in many and long periods of time.” Olympiodorus
in his MS. Commentary on that dialogue, observes on this passage as
follows:

“Since there are in the universe, things which subsist differently at
different times, and since there are also natures which are conjoined
with the superessential unities, it is necessary that there should be
a certain middle genus, which is neither immediately suspended from
deity, nor subsists differently at different times according to better
and worse, but which is always perfect, and does not depart from its
proper virtue; and is immutable indeed but is not conjoined with the
superessential. The whole of this genus is dæmoniacal. There are also
different genera of dæmons; for they are arranged under the mundane
Gods. The highest of these subsists according to _the one_ of the
Gods, which is called an unific and divine genus of dæmons. The next
according to the intellect which is suspended from Deity, and is called
intellectual. The third subsists according to soul, and is called
rational. The fourth according to nature, and is denominated physical.
The fifth according to body, and is called corporeal-formed. And the
sixth according to matter, and this is denominated material. Or after
another manner it may be said, that some of these are celestial, others
ethereal, others aerial, others aquatic, others terrestrial, and others
subterranean. With respect also to this division, it is evident that
it is derived from the parts of the universe. But irrational dæmons
originate from the serial governors, whence also the [Chaldean] Oracle
says,

    ηεριων ελατηρα κυνων χθονιων τε και υγρων.

i.e. “being the charioteer of the aerial, terrestrial and aquatic
dogs.” Our guardian dæmons, however, belong to that order of dæmons,
which is arranged under the Gods that preside over the ascent and
descent of souls.”

Olympiodorus further observes, “that the dæmon endeavours to lead
the soul as exciting its conceptions and imaginations, at the same
time, however, yielding to the self-motive power of the soul. But
in consequence of the dæmon exciting, one soul follows voluntarily,
another violently, and another according to a mode subsisting between
these. There is also one dæmon who leads the soul to its judges from
the present life; another who is ministrant to the judges, giving
completion, as it were, to the sentence which is passed; and a third
who is allotted the guardianship of life.”

In the next place, with respect to irrational dæmons, it remains to
investigate how they subsist. For if they derive their subsistence
from the junior Gods, how, since these are the fathers of mortal
natures, are these dæmons immortal? But if from the demiurgus how are
they irrational? For he is the father of things in conjunction with
intellect. This doubt is beautifully solved by Proclus as follows:
irrational dæmons derive their subsistence from the junior Gods, yet
are not on this account mortal, since of these Gods some generate
others. And perhaps the generated Gods are called by Plato, in the
Timæus, dæmons, because those that are truly dæmons are produced by the
junior Gods. But they likewise proceed from the one demiurgus. For as
Timæus says, he is the cause of all immortal natures. If, however, the
demiurgus imparts intellect to all things, there is also in irrational
dæmons an ultimate vestige of the intellectual peculiarity, so far as
they have a facility of imagination; for this is the last echo as it
were of intellect. And on this account the phantasy is not improperly
called by others passive intellect.

Lastly, after essential heroes, an order of souls follows, who
proximately govern the affairs of men, and are dæmoniacal according to
habitude or alliance, but not essentially. These souls likewise are
the perpetual attendants of the Gods, but they have not an essence
_wholly_ superior to man. Of this kind, as we are informed by
Proclus in his MS. Scholia on the Cratylus, are the Nymphs that
sympathize with waters, Pans with the feet of goats and the like. They
also differ from those powers that are essentially of a dæmoniacal
characteristic in this, that they assume a variety of shapes (each
of the others immutably preserving one form) are subject to various
passions, and are the causes of every kind of deception to mankind.
Proclus likewise observes, that the Minerva which so often appeared to
Ulysses and Telemachus belonged to this order of souls.




                             CHAPTER XLVI.


After the triple genera that are the perpetual attendants of the Gods,
those human souls follow that are of an heroic characteristic, are
undefiled, associating with generation, and abandoning their proper
order but for a little time. For the souls that descend and are
defiled with vice, are very remote from those that abide on high with
immaculate purity. The media, therefore, between these, are the souls
that descend indeed, but without defilement; since it is not lawful
for the contrary to take place, viz. to be defiled with vice, and yet
to abide on high. For evil is not in the Gods, but in the regions of
mortality, and material affairs. The first genus of souls, therefore,
is divine. For every where, that which is the recipient of deity has a
ruling and leading order, in essences, in intellects, in souls and in
bodies. But the second genus of souls is always conjoined to the Gods,
in order that through this those that sometimes depart from, may again
be recalled to them. The third genus is that which descends indeed into
generation, but descends with purity, exchanges a more divine life for
one of a subordinate nature, but is exempt from vice, and liberated
from the dominion of the passions. For this genus exists in continuity
with that which always abides on high, and is always undefiled. And
the fourth and last genus is that of the souls of the bulk of mankind,
which wanders abundantly, descends as far as to Tartarus, and is
again excited from thence. It likewise evolves all-various forms of
life, uses a variety of manners, is under the influence of different
passions at different times, and assumes the forms of dæmons, men, and
irrational animals. At the same time, however, it is corrected and
amended by Justice, recurs from earth to heaven, and is led round from
matter to intellect, but according to certain orderly periods of wholes.

Plotinus beautifully alludes to this undefiled genus of human souls
in the 9th book of his 5th Ennead, On Intellect, Ideas, and Being,
as follows: “Since all men from their birth employ sense prior to
intellect, and are necessarily first conversant with sensibles, some
proceeding no farther pass through life, considering these as the
first and last of things, and apprehending that whatever is painful
among these is evil, and whatever is pleasant is good; thus thinking
it sufficient to pursue the one and avoid the other. Those too, among
them, who pretend to a greater share of reason than others, esteem
this to be wisdom, being affected in a manner similar to more heavy
birds, who, collecting many things from the earth, and being oppressed
with the weight, are unable to fly on high, though they have received
wings for this purpose from nature. But others are in a small degree
elevated from things subordinate, the more excellent part of the soul
recalling them from pleasure to a more worthy pursuit. As they are,
however, unable to look on high, and as not possessing any thing else
which can afford them rest, they betake themselves together with the
name of virtue to actions and the election of things inferior, from
which they at first endeavoured to raise themselves, though in vain.
_In the third class is the race of divine men_, who through a more
excellent power, and with piercing eyes, acutely perceive supernal
light, to the vision of which they raise themselves above the clouds
and darkness as it were of this lower world, and there abiding despise
every thing in these regions of sense; being no otherwise delighted
with the place which is truly and properly their own, than he who after
many wanderings is at length restored to his lawful country.”

These undefiled souls are called by the author of the Golden Verses,
“terrestrial dæmons,” because, as Hierocles observes, they are by
nature men, but by habitude dæmons, and possess a scientific knowledge
of divinity. For since all men are terrestrial, as ranking in the third
degree of rational beings, but all are not skilful (δαημονων) and wise,
the author of the verses very properly calls wise men both terrestrial
and dæmons conjointly. For neither are all men wise, nor are all the
beings that are wise, men. But the illustrious heroes[183] and the
immortal Gods, being naturally more excellent than men, are wise and
good. The verses therefore exhort us to reverence those men who are
co-arranged with the divine genera, and who (according to habitude) are
equal to angels and dæmons, and are similar to the illustrious heroes.

Plato, in the Cratylus, calls these undefiled souls both dæmons and
heroes, and speaks of them as follows: “Soc. Do you not know who those
dæmons are which Hesiod speaks of? Herm. I do not. Soc. And are you
ignorant that he says the golden race of men was first generated?
Herm. This I know. Soc. He says, therefore, that after this race was
concealed by Fate, it produced dæmons denominated holy, terrestrial,
good, expellers of evil, and guardians of mortal men. Herm. But what
then? Soc. I think, indeed, that he calls it a golden race, not as
naturally consisting of gold, but as being beautiful and good. I infer
this, however, from his denominating our race an iron one. Herm. You
speak the truth. Soc. Do you not therefore think, that if any one
of the present times should appear to be good, Hesiod would say he
belonged to the golden race? Herm. It is probable he would. Soc. But
are the good any other than such as are [intellectually] prudent? Herm.
They are not. Soc. On this account, therefore, as it appears to me,
more than any other he calls them dæmons, because they were _prudent_
and _learned_ (δαημονες). And in our ancient tongue this very name is
to be found. Hence both he and many other poets, speak in a becoming
manner, when they say that a good man after death will receive a
mighty destiny and renown, and will become a _dæmon_, according to the
surname of prudence. I therefore assert the same, that every good man
is _learned_ and _skilful_; that he is dæmoniacal both while living
and when dead; and that he is properly denominated a dæmon. Herm. And
I also, Socrates, seem to myself to agree with you perfectly in this
particular. But what does the name hero signify? Soc. This is by no
means difficult to understand. For this name is very little different
from its original, evincing that its generation is derived from love.
Herm. How is this? Soc. Do you not know that heroes are demigods? Herm.
What then? Soc. All of them were doubtless generated either from the
love of a God towards a mortal maid, or from the love of a man towards
a Goddess. If, therefore, you consider this matter according to the
ancient Attic tongue, you will more clearly understand the truth of
this derivation. For it will be evident to you that the word hero is
derived from love, with a trifling mutation for the sake of the name.”

The meaning of Plato in this passage, and also the characteristic
properties of terrestrial heroes are beautifully unfolded by Proclus as
follows, in his very rare and invaluable MS. Scholia on the Cratylus.
“Every where the extremities of a prior, are conjoined with the
summits of a secondary order. Thus for instance, our master Hermes
(ο δεσποτης ημων Ερμης) being an archangelic monad, is celebrated as
a God. But Plato calls the whole extent between Gods and men dæmons.
And they indeed, are dæmons by nature. Those dæmons, however, that are
now mentioned, together with the demigods heroes, are not dæmons and
heroes by nature, for they do not always follow the Gods; but they are
only so from habitude, being souls who naturally deliver themselves
to generation, such as was the great Hercules, and others of the like
kind. But the peculiarity of heroic souls is magnitude of operation,
elevation and magnificence. Such heroes also it is necessary to
honour, and to perform funeral rites to their memory, conformably to
the exhortation of the Athenian guest in the Laws. This heroic genus
of souls, therefore, does not always follow the Gods, but is undefiled,
and more intellectual than other souls. And it descends indeed for
the benefit of the life of men, as partaking of a destiny inclining
downwards; but it has much of an elevated nature, and which is properly
liberated from matter. Hence souls of this kind are easily led back to
the intelligible world, in which they live for many periods; while on
the contrary, the more irrational kind of souls, are either never led
back, or this is accomplished with great difficulty, or continues for a
very inconsiderable period of time.”

Each of the Gods indeed is perfectly exempt from secondary natures,
and the first and more total of dæmons are likewise established above
a habitude of this kind. They employ, however, terrestrial and partial
spirits in the generations of some of the human race, not physically
mingling with mortals, but moving nature, perfecting its power,
expanding the path of generation, and removing all impediments. Fables,
therefore, through the similitude of appellation conceal the things
themselves. For spirits of this kind are similarly denominated with the
Gods, the leading causes of their series. Hence they say, either that
Gods have connexion with women, or men with Goddesses. But if they were
willing to speak plainly and clearly, they would say that Venus, Mars,
Thetis, and the other divinities, produce their respective series,
beginning from on high, as far as to the last of things; each of which
series comprehends in itself many essences differing from each other;
such as the angelical, dæmoniacal, heroical, nymphical, and the like.
The lowest powers, therefore, of these orders, have much communion with
the human race; for the extremities of first are connascent with the
summits of secondary natures. And they contribute to our other natural
operations, and to the production of our species. On this account it is
frequently seen that from the mixture of these powers with men heroes
are generated, who appear to possess a certain prerogative above human
nature. Not only a dæmoniacal genus, however, of this kind, physically
sympathizes with men, but a different genus sympathizes with other
animals, as Nymphs with trees, others with fountains, and others with
stags, or serpents.

But how is it that at one time the Gods are said to have connexion with
mortal females, and at another time mortal females with the Gods? We
reply, that the communion of Gods with Goddesses gives subsistence to
Gods or dæmons eternally; but heroic souls having a two-fold form of
life, viz. _doxastic_ and _dianoëtic_, the former of which is called by
Plato in the Timæus _the circle of difference_, and the latter, _the
circle of sameness_, and which are characterized by the properties of
_male_ and _female_;--hence these souls at one time exhibit a deiform
power, by energizing according to the masculine prerogative of their
nature, or _the circle of sameness_, and at another time according to
their feminine prerogative, or _the circle of difference_; yet so as
that according to both these energies they act with rectitude, and
without merging themselves in the darkness of body. They likewise know
the natures prior to their own, and exercise a providential care over
inferior concerns, without at the same time having that propensity to
such concerns which is found in the bulk of mankind. But the souls
which act erroneously according to the energies of both these circles,
or which, in other words, neither exhibit accurate specimens of
practical, nor of intellectual virtue--these differ in no respect from
_gregarious_ souls, or the herd of mankind, with whom the circle of
sameness is fettered, and the circle of difference sustains all-various
fractions and distortions.

As it is impossible therefore, that these heroic souls can act with
equal vigour and perfection, according to both these circles at once,
since this is the province of natures more divine than the human, it is
necessary that they should sometimes descend and energize principally
according to their doxastic part, and sometimes according to their
more intellectual part. Hence, one of these circles must energize
naturally, and the other be hindered from its proper energy. On this
account heroes are called _demigods_, as having only one of their
circles illuminated by the Gods. Such of these therefore, as have the
circle of sameness unfettered, as are excited to an intellectual life,
and are moved about it according to a deific energy,--these are said
to have a God for their father, and a mortal for their mother, through
a defect with respect to the doxastic form of life. But such, on the
contrary, as energize without impediment according to the circle of
difference, who act with becoming rectitude in practical affairs, and
at the same time _enthusiastically_, or in other words, under the
inspiring influence of divinity,--these are said to have a mortal for
their father, and a Goddess for their mother. In short, rectitude
of energy in each of these circles is to be ascribed to a divine
cause.[184] Hence when the circle of sameness has dominion, the divine
cause of illumination is said to be masculine and paternal; but when
the circle of difference predominates, it is said to be maternal. Hence
too, Achilles in Homer acts with rectitude in practical affairs,[185]
and at the same time exhibits specimens of magnificent, vehement, and
divinely-inspired energy, as being the son of a Goddess. And such
is his attachment to practical virtue, that even when in Hades, he
desires a union with body, that he may assist his father. While on
the contrary, Minos and Rhadamanthus, who were heroes illuminated by
Jupiter, raised themselves from generation to true being, and meddled
with mortal concerns no further than absolute necessity required.

In the last place Proclus adds, that heroes are very properly
denominated from Love, since Love is a great dæmon: and from the
co-operation of dæmons heroes are produced. To which may also be
added, that Love originated from Plenty as the more excellent cause,
and from Poverty as the recipient and the worse cause; and heroes are
analogously produced from different genera.

Plato who was one of these heroes or demigods, was the offspring of
Apollo in the way above explained by Proclus, as we are informed by
Olympiodorus in his life of him. For he says, “It is reported that
an Apolloniacal spectre had connection with Perictione the mother of
Plato, and that appearing in the night to Aristo the father of Plato,
it commanded him not to sleep with Perictione during the time of her
pregnancy--which mandate Aristo obeyed.” The like account of the divine
origin of Plato is also given by Apuleius in his treatise on the dogmas
of Plato, and by Plutarch in the 8th book of his Symposiacs. Epimenides
likewise, Eudoxus and Xenocrates asserted that Apollo becoming
connected with Parthenis the mother of Pythagoras, and causing her to
be pregnant, had in consequence of this predicted concerning Pythagoras
by his priest.[186] And thus much concerning those undefiled souls who
were called by the ancients terrestrial dæmons, heroes and demigods,
and who descended into the regions of mortality for the benevolent
purpose of benefiting those apostate souls, who are elegantly called by
Empedocles,

    Heaven’s exiles straying from the orb of light.




                            CHAPTER XLVII.


The triple genera that are the perpetual attendants of the Gods, and
which have been unfolded in the preceding chapters, are indicated
by the following division of time, in the first hypothesis of the
Parmenides; from which division _the one_ is shown to be exempt:
“Do not the terms _it was_, _it has been_, _it did become_, seem to
signify the participation of the time past? Certainly. And do not
the terms _it will be_, _it may become_, and _it will be generated_,
signify that which is about to be hereafter? Certainly. But are not
the terms _it is_, and _it is becoming to be_, marks of the present
time? Entirely so. If then _the one_ participates in no respect of any
time, it neither ever _was_, nor _has been_, nor _did become_. Nor is
it _now generated_, nor is _becoming to be_, nor _is_, nor _may become_
hereafter, nor _will be generated_, nor _will be_. It is most true.”

The commentary of Proclus on this passage is as follows: “This division
of time accords with the multitude of the divine genera, which are
suspended from divine souls, viz. with angels, dæmons, and heroes.
And in the first place, this division proceeds to them supernally,
according to a triadic distribution into the _present_, _past_, and
_future_; and in the next place, according to a distribution into nine,
each of these three being again subdivided into three. For the monad
of souls is united to the one whole of time, but this is participated
secondarily by the multitude of souls. And of this multitude, those
participate of this whole _totally_, that subsist according to _the
past_, or _the present_, or _the future_; but those participate of
it _partially_, that are essentialized according to the differences
of these. For to each of the wholes a multitude is co-ordinated,
divided into things first, middle, and last. For a certain multitude
subsists in conjunction with that which is established conformably to
_the past_, the _summit_ of which is according to _the was_, but the
_middle_ according to _it has been_, and the _end_ according to _it
did become_. With that also which is established according to _the
present_, there is another multitude, the _principal_ part of which is
characterized by _the is_, the _middle_ by _it is generated_, and the
_end_ by _it is becoming to be_. And there is another triad with that
which subsists according to _the future_, the _most elevated_ part
of which is characterized by _the will be_, that which ranks in the
_middle_ by _it may become_, and the _end_ by _it will be generated_.
And thus there will be three triads proximately suspended from these
three totalities, but all these are suspended from their monad.

All these orders, likewise, which are distributed according to the
parts of time, energize according to the whole of time; this whole
containing in itself triple powers, one of which is _perfective_ of all
motion, the second _connects_ and _guards_ things which are governed by
it, and the third _unfolds_ divine natures into light. For, as all such
things as are not eternal, are led round in a circle, the wholeness or
the monad of time, perfects and connects their essence, and discloses
to them the united infinity of eternity, evolving the contracted
multitude which subsists in eternal natures; whence also this apparent
time, as Timæus says, unfolds to us the measures of divine periods,
perfects sensibles, and guards things which are generated in their
proper numbers. Time, therefore, possesses triple powers prior to
souls, viz. _the perfective_, _the connective_, and _the unfolding_,
according to a similitude to eternity. For eternity, possessing a
middle order in intelligibles, _perfects_ the order posterior to
itself, supplying it with union, but _unfolds into light_ that which
is prior to itself, producing into multitude its ineffable union, and
_connects_ the middle bond of intelligibles, and guards all things
intransitively through its power. Time, therefore, receiving supernally
the triple powers of eternity, imparts them to souls. Eternity,
however, possesses this triad unitedly; but time both unitedly and
distributively; and souls distributively alone. Hence, of souls, some
are characterized according to one, and others according to another
power of time; some imitating its _unfolding_, others its _perfective_,
and others its _connective_ power. Thus also with respect to the Fates,
some of these being adapted to give completion and perfection to
things, are said to sing the past, always indeed energizing, and always
singing, their songs being intellections, and fabricative energies
about the world: for _the past_ is the source of _completion_. Others
again of these are adapted to _connect_ things _present_; for they
guard the essence and the generation of these. And others are adapted
to _unfold the future_; for they lead into essence and to an end that
which as yet is not.

We may also say, since there is an order of souls more excellent than
ours divided into such as are first, such as are middle, and such
as are last, the most total of these are adapted to _the past_. For
as this comprehends in itself the present and the future, so these
souls comprehend in themselves the rest. But souls of a middle rank
are adapted to _the present_; for this was once _future_, but is not
yet _the past_. As, therefore, _the present_ contains in itself _the
future_, so these middle souls comprehend those posterior, but are
comprehended in those prior to themselves. And souls of the third order
correspond to _the future_. For this does not proceed through _the
present_, nor has become _the past_, but is _the future_ alone; just as
these third souls are of themselves alone, but through falling into
a more partial subsistence, are by no means comprehensive of others.
For they convolve the boundary according to a triadic division of the
genera posterior to the Gods.

The whole of the first triad, therefore, has _the once_, for this is
the peculiarity of _the past_, and of completion; but it is divided
into _the was_, _it was generated_, and _it did become_. Again,
therefore, of these three, _the was_ signifies the summit of the triad,
bounded according to hyparxis itself; but _it was generated_, signifies
an at-once-collected perfection; and _it did become_, an extension
in being perfected; these things being imitations of intelligibles.
For _the was_ is an imitation of _being_, _it was generated_, of
_eternity_, and _it did become_, of that which is _primarily eternal_.
For _being_ is derived to all things from the first of these; a
subsistence at once as _all_, and a _whole_ from the second; and an
_extension into multitude_ from the third.




                            CHAPTER XLVIII.


Having, therefore, unfolded to the readers the orders and
characteristic properties of the mundane Gods, and of the triple genera
that are perpetually suspended from them, I shall in the next place
present him with what Plato says, in celebration of the divinity of
the World, the great monad which comprehends all these, so far as the
whole of it is a God, consisting of a superessential unity derived from
the ineffable principle of all things, a divine intellect, a divine
soul, and a deified body. In the Timæus then, Plato celebrates the
world as a deity in the following manner; “When, therefore, that God
who is an eternally reasoning divinity cogitated about the God who at
a certain time would exist, he fabricated his body smooth and equable,
and every way from the middle equal and whole, and perfect from the
composition of perfect bodies. But placing soul in the middle of the
world, he extended it through the whole; and besides this, externally
surrounded the body of the universe with soul. And causing circle to
revolve in a circle, he established heaven (i.e. the world) one, only,
solitary nature, able through virtue to converse with itself, indigent
of nothing external, and sufficiently known and friendly to itself. And
on all these accounts the world was generated by him, a blessed God.”
The first part of this extract, as far as to the word “perfect bodies,”
is admirably elucidated by Proclus as follows:

What is here said, imitating the one intellect which comprehends the
intellection of wholes in one, collects all things into sameness,
and refers to one summit all the fabrication of the corporeal
system. It is necessary, therefore, that we should recall to our
memory what has been already asserted. It has been said then, that
the elements through analogy rendered all things in concord with
each other. That the universe was generated a whole consisting of
wholes. That it is spherical and smooth, and has itself a knowledge
of itself, and a motion in itself. Hence, it is evident that the
whole world is assimilated to [its paradigm] all-perfect animal. But
the orderly distribution according to the wholes which it contains
proceeds analogous to its second and third causes. And the number of
its elements indeed, and the unifying bond of them through analogy,
corresponds to the essence which is without colour, without figure, and
without contact;[187] for number is there. The first wholeness of the
world which adorns all things, and which consists of the wholes of the
elements, proceeds analogous to the intellectual wholeness.[188] Its
sphericity is analogous to intellectual figure.[189] Its sufficiency,
intellectual motion, and sameness of convolution, are analogous to
the God who absorbs all his offspring in himself.[190] Its animation
corresponds to its vivific cause [Rhea]. And its possession of
intellect is analogous to the demiurgic intellect; though from this all
things proceed, and from the natures prior to it, different things
being analogous to different causes. And the more excellent natures
indeed are the causes of all that proceeds from secondary principles;
but secondary principles are the causes of less numerous and less
excellent effects. For with respect to the demiurgus himself, so far as
he is _intellectual_, he produces all things intellectual; but so
far as he is _being_, he is the father of all bodies and of every
thing incorporeal; and so far as he is a God, he also gives subsistence
to matter itself. In what is now said, therefore, Plato makes a
summary repetition of every thing which the universe derives from the
intellectual Gods. And thus much concerning the whole theory.

Let us survey, however, more particularly the truth of what is now
said. When, therefore, Plato calls the demiurgus, “an eternally
reasoning being,” he makes the essence and at the same time the
intellection of him through which the world is perpetual, to be
eternal. It is requisite, likewise, to observe how he arranges the
demiurgus among beings that always exist, assigning to him an eternal
order; so that he will not be soul. For in the Laws Plato says that
soul is immortal indeed, and indestructible, but is not eternal.
Hence, it appears that every one who fancies soul is the demiurgus, is
ignorant of the difference between the eternal and the indestructible.
But _reasoning_ is significant of distributed or divided fabrication.
And the words, “who at a certain time would exist,” do not indicate
a temporal beginning, as Atticus imagined they did, but an essence
conjoined with time. For Plato says in this dialogue, “that time was
generated together with the universe,” and the world is temporal,
and time is mundane. For time and the world are consubsistent with
each other, and co-produced from the one fabrication of things. And a
_temporal ever_, may be said to be _at a certain time_, when compared
with that which is eternal, just as that which is _generatively being_,
is _non-being_, when compared with that which is _intelligibly being_.
Though the world, therefore, exists through the whole of time, yet
its being consists in _becoming to be_, and is in a part of time. But
this is the ποτε or the _at a certain time_, mentioned by Plato, and
is not a simultaneous subsistence in all time, but is always _at a
certain time_. For the eternal is always in the whole of eternity; but
the temporal in a certain time, is always differently in a different
time. Hence, the world, as with reference to an _eternally_ existing
God, is very properly called a God, who at _a certain time_ would
exist. For the former is sensible with reference to the latter, who is
intellectual. That which is sensible, therefore, is _always generated_,
but _is_ at a certain time. For it possesses existence partibly, and is
perpetually advancing into being from that which always is. For since,
as we have before observed, it derives from something else an infinite
power of existing, and that which it possesses is finite, but it is
perpetual by always receiving, the ability of existing infinitely,
being numbered in that which is finite, it is evident that it is at a
certain time; from _a certain time_ always possessing existence; and
in consequence of that which is imparted to it never ceasing, always
becoming to be;[191] but in its own nature existing at a certain time,
and having, as Plato says in the Politicus, a renovated immortality.
For subsisting in rising into existence, the whole of it does not
at once participate of the whole of being, but again and again, not
existing without an extension of being. Unless, perhaps, the expression
_at a certain time_, signifies the _whole_ of time. For the evolution
of time, as with reference to an _eternal infinity_ is ποτε _a certain
time_. And the whole of time has the same ratio to eternity, that a
part of time the ποτε has to the whole.

If, also, you are willing, it may be said after another manner, that
Plato denominates the world “a God that at a certain time would exist,”
since he has now fashioned a corporeal nature, and given subsistence
to intellect, but not yet to soul, because the world also as a God
will have a subsistence in the course of his narration. For divinity
produces at once both parts and the whole, but language divides things
that are consubsistent, generates things that are unbegotten, and
distributes eternal natures according to time. The God, therefore,
that at a certain time would exist, is that which is fashioned in the
narration of Plato, and according to which there are division and
composition. For this, also, the Pythagoric Timæus himself indicates to
those who are able to understand him, when he says in his treatise [On
the soul of the world], “Before heaven (i.e. the world) was generated
in words, there were idea and matter, and God the demiurgus.” For he
clearly manifests that he fashions in words the generation of the world.

When Plato, likewise, says that the demiurgus fabricated the body of
the world smooth and equable, this manifests the one comprehension
in the world, and its supreme aptitude to the participation of a
divine soul. But the words, “every way from the middle equal,”
exhibit the peculiarity of a spherical figure; for this is every way
equally distant according to all intervals. And the words “whole and
perfect from the composition of perfect bodies,” give to the world
a consummate similitude to all-perfect animal; for that was in all
things perfect; and also to the demiurgus himself. For as he is the
father of fathers, and the supreme of rulers, so the world is the most
perfect of perfect natures, and the most total of wholes. You may also
say, that Plato calls the world smooth, as not being in want of any
motive, or nutritive, or sensitive organs; for this had just before
been demonstrated by him. But that it is every way equal from the
middle, as having a spherical figure. And that it is whole and perfect,
as being all-perfect, and leaving nothing external to itself; for
this is properly a whole and perfect. It likewise consists of perfect
bodies, as being composed of the four elements. But Plato calls it in
the singular number a body, as being only-begotten. And thus beginning
from the only-begotten, and proceeding as far as to perfection, he
again returns to it through the above-mentioned words, imitating the
progression of the world from its paradigm, and its perfect conversion
to it.




                             CHAPTER XLIX.


In the next place, let us direct our attention to the words, “But
placing soul in the middle of the world, he extended it through the
whole; and besides this, externally surrounded the body of the universe
with soul.” Divinity, says Proclus, at once and eternally produces
all things. For according to his very being, and according to the
eternal intellection of wholes, he generates all things from himself,
supermundane and mundane beings, intellects, souls, natures, bodies,
and matter itself. And indeed, an at-once-collected subsistence in a
greater degree belongs to the demiurgic progeny, than to the solar
illumination; though in this the whole light proceeds simultaneously
with the sun. But it is evident that the sun imitating the father of
the universe through visible fabrication is inferior to eternal and
invisible production. All things, therefore, as we have said, being
produced from the invisible fabrication at once and eternally, at the
same time, the order of the effects is likewise preserved. For all
things proceed collectively together with their own proper order.
For in the producing cause, there was also an eternal intellection,
and order prior to the things that were arranged. Hence, though all
things proceed at once from one cause, yet some have a first, and
others a diminished dignity. For some things proceed in a greater, but
others in a less degree. And some are co-arranged with the demiurgus
according to union, others according to contact, and others according
to participation. For intellect is able to be connascent with intellect
through union; but soul is naturally adapted to be conjoined with
intellect; and bodies participate of it only, just as things in the
profundity of the earth participate of the splendour of the sun. All
these, therefore, subsisting in the world, viz. intellect, soul, and
body, and all these being produced at once, and at the same time, there
being an order in these proceeding from the demiurgus, language at
one time beginning supernally according to progression, ends at the
boundaries of fabrication, but at another time being incited[192] from
things last, according to conversion, recurs to the summits of the
universe, conformably to things themselves. For all things proceed, and
are converted to the cause and principle from which they proceeded; in
so doing exhibiting a certain demiurgic circle.

Plato, however, delivered to us the order of the plenitudes
(πληρωματων)[193] of the world, according to progression, in what he
before said, when the demiurgus placing intellect in soul, and soul
in body fabricated[194] the universe, but in the present passage, he
unfolds to us the order according to conversion. And in the first
place, he assumes two contraries in the universe, adds two media to
these, and unites them through analogy. Afterwards giving completion
to the world, by rendering it a whole of wholes, he surrounds it with
an intellectual [i.e. with a spherical] figure, gives it the power of
participating a divine life, and a motion imitating intellect.[195]
Always, likewise, causing the world to be more perfect by the
additions, he introduces soul into it as her proper place of abode, and
fills all things with life, but different things with a different life.
He also inserts intellect in soul, and through this conjoins her with
her fountain. For the soul of the universe participating of intellect,
is connected with intelligibles themselves. And thus he ends at the
principle from which the mundane intellect, soul and the body of the
world proceed. For giving a three-fold division to the universe, viz.
into intellect, soul, and body, he discusses in the first place the
two latter which are subordinate. For such is the mode according to
conversion. And he terminates indeed the discussion of the body of the
world, having unfolded its essence, its figure, and its motion. But the
theory of soul is connected with this, just as the body itself of the
world is suspended from a divine soul.

With respect, however, to the position of soul in the middle of the
universe, it is differently explained by the different interpreters of
Plato. For some call the centre of the earth the middle, but others
the moon, as being the isthmus of generated and divine natures. Others
again say that the sun is the middle, as being established in the place
of a heart [in the world], others the inerratic sphere, others the
equinoctial, as bounding the breadth of the universe, and others the
zodiac. And some indeed place the governing principle in the centre
of the universe, others in the moon, others in the sun, others in the
equinoctial, and others in the zodiac. And the power of the centre
testifies in favour of the first of these, since it is connective of
every circulation; the motion of the moon, in favour of the second,
since it variously changes generation; the vivific heat of the sun,
in favour of the third; the facility of the motion of the equinoctial
circle, of the fourth; and in favour of the fifth, the circulation of
the stars about the zodiac. Porphyry, however, and Jamblichus, oppose
all these interpretations, and reprobate them as understanding the
middle in a way accompanied with interval, and enclosing in a certain
part the soul of the whole world, which is every where similarly
present, which rules over all things, and leads all things by its own
motions. Of these divine men, however, Porphyry assuming the soul to
be the soul of the universe, interprets the _middle_ according
to the psychical essence; for soul is the middle of intelligibles and
sensibles. This interpretation, however, does not appear to say any
thing as with reference to the words of Plato. But if we assume this,
that the universe derives its completion from intellect, soul and
body, and that it is a psychical and intellectual animal, we shall
find in this system that soul is the middle. This, therefore, Plato
had before asserted; and now he will appear to say nothing else, than
that the soul of the world is extended through the universe, being
allotted a middle order in it. But the philosopher Jamblichus thinks
that by _soul_ we should understand the exempt, supermundane, and
liberated soul, and which has dominion over all things. For according
to him, Plato does not here speak of the mundane soul, but of the
soul which is not participated by body, and which is arranged as a
monad above all mundane souls. For the first soul is of this kind,
and the _middle_ is asserted of this, as being similarly present
to all things, because it does not belong to any body, has no manner
of habitude whatever, similarly animates all things, and is equally
distant from all things. For it is not distant from some things in
a less, and from others in a greater degree, since it is without
habitude; but it is alike distant from all things; though all things
are not after the same manner distant from it. For in its participants
there is the more and the less.

Our leader, however, [Syrianus] more aptly interprets the words of
Plato. For the soul of the world has indeed that which is supermundane
and exempt from the universe, according to which it is conjoined with
intellect, which Plato in the Phædrus, and Orpheus in his verses
concerning _Ippa_[196] denominate the head or summit of the soul.
It has also another multitude of powers proceeding from this monad,
divided about the world, and appropriately present to all the parts of
the universe. And these subsist in one way indeed about the middle, in
another way about the earth, in another about the sun, and in another
about each of the spheres. Our leader, therefore, says that all these
are comprehended in the present words of Plato, who indicates by them,
that the soul of the world in one way animates the middle, in another
the whole bulk, and that it leaves something else prior to these exempt
from the universe.

That we may not, however, carelessly attend to what is here said by
Plato, but may offer something demonstrative about the psychical
powers, it must be said, that soul by a much greater priority than body
is a vital world, and is both one and number. And by the one indeed, it
is better than every form of habitude; but by the multitude it rules
over the different parts of the universe. For in its guardian powers it
contains the centre; since from thence the whole sphere is governed, to
which also it converges. Farther still, every thing turbulent in the
world is impelled to the middle, and requires a divine guard, which
is able to arrange it, and detain it in its proper boundaries. Hence
also, theologists terminate the progressions of the highest Gods in
that place; and the Pythagoreans call the middle either the tower or
the prison of Jupiter. But in its stable and at the same time vivific
powers, it contains the sphere of the earth. In its perfective and
generative powers, the sphere of water. In its connective and motive
powers it comprehends the air. In its undefiled powers, fire. And in
its intellectual powers, the whole heaven. In these powers, likewise,
it in one way contains the lunar, in another the solar, and in another
the inerratic sphere.

Such therefore, being the animation of the world, or its participation
of soul, Plato, as it is usual with him, beginning according to
conversion from things that are last, first imparts soul to the middle,
afterwards to the universe, and in the third place leaves something
of soul external to the universe. For as he gave subsistence to body
prior to soul, and to parts prior to wholes, thus also he imparts soul
to the world, beginning from things that have an ultimate existence.
When Plato therefore delivered the order of the plenitudes of the world
according to progression, beginning supernally, he placed intellect in
soul, and soul in body. But here where he delivers the order according
to conversion, he first animates the middle, and afterwards the
universe itself. For the river of vivification proceeds as far as to
the centre; as the Chaldean oracles also assert, when speaking about
the middle of the five centres, which from on high passes entirely to
the opposite part, through the centre of the earth. For they say: “And
another fifth middle fiery centre, where a life-bearing fire descends
as far as to the material rivers.” Hence Plato beginning from those
things in which animation ends, recurs to the whole vivification,
and prior to this surveys the exempt power of the soul. We must not
therefore place the ruling part of the soul in the centre; for this is
exempt from the universe; but a certain power of it which guards the
whole order of the world. For nothing else in the universe has so much
the power of entirely subverting the whole of things, as the centre and
the power of the centre, about which the universe with measured motion
harmoniously revolves. Hence it appears to me that Plato divinely
says that the demiurgus placed _soul_ and not _the soul_ in
the middle of the universe. For these differ from each other, because
the latter establishes the whole soul in the centre, but the former a
certain power of it, and a different power in different parts.

The philosopher himself however, shortly after, when speaking of the
animation itself of the world says, “But the soul being extended from
the middle to the very extremities of the universe, and investing it
externally in a circle, gave rise to the divine commencement of an
unceasing and wise life through the whole of time.” For the words “to
be every way extended from the middle,” have the same meaning as “to
be extended from the middle to the very extremities of the universe.”
But in the latter, the soul herself illuminates from herself the
centre of the universe and the whole sphere of it by her powers; while
in the former, the demiurgus is the cause of the animation, himself
introducing the soul into the universe as into her proper place of
abode. For the same thing is effected by both, but demiurgically
indeed and intellectually by the cause, and self-motively by soul.
Now however, the philosopher delivers the bond which proceeds from
fabrication alone. For we particularly refer wholes and such things
as are good to a divine cause; but we consider partial natures, and
such things as are not good, to be unworthy of divine fabrication; and
we suspend them from other proximate causes, though these also, as
it is frequently said, subsist from divinity. Since therefore both a
divine and a partial soul have communication with bodies, the former
indeed subsisting according to boniform will, and not departing from
intelligible progressions is deific; but the latter which takes place
through a defluxion of the wings of the soul, or through audacity,
or flight, is atheistical, though the former is complicated with the
self-motive energy, and the latter with providential care. But in the
one a subsistence according to deity is apparent through the presence
of divinity; and in the other, a subsistence from soul, through the
representation of aberration.




                              CHAPTER L.


In the next place Timæus, or rather Plato adds, “And causing circle to
revolve in a circle, he established heaven (i.e. the world) one, only,
solitary nature;” on which Proclus observes as follows: The philosopher
Porphyry well interprets the meaning of circle revolving in a circle.
For it is possible, says he, for that which is not a circle to be moved
in a circle, as a stone when whirled round; and also for a circle to
be moved not in a circle, as a wheel when rolled along. But it is the
peculiarity of the world, that being circular it is moved in a circle,
through harmoniously revolving about the centre. In a still greater
degree however, the divine Jamblichus well interprets the meaning of
these words. For he says that the circle is twofold, the one being
psychical, but the other corporeal, and that the latter is moved in
the former. For this is conformable to what has been before said, and
accords with what is afterwards asserted. For Plato himself shortly
after moves the corporeal nature according to the psychical circle, and
renders the twofold circulations analogous to the periods in the soul.

Moreover, to comprehend the whole blessedness of the world in three
appellations, is most appropriate to that which subsists according to
a triple cause, viz. the final, the paradigmatic, and the demiurgic.
For of the appellations themselves, the first of them, viz. _one_,
is assumed from the final cause; for _the one_ is the same with _the
good_. But the second, viz. _only_, is assumed from the paradigmatic
cause. For the _only-begotten_ and _onlyness_ (μονωσις) were, prior
to the universe, in all-perfect animal. And the third, viz. the
_solitary_, is assumed from the demiurgic cause. For the ability of
using itself, and through itself governing the world, proceeds from
the demiurgic goodness. The world therefore is _one_, so far as it is
united, and is converted to _the one_. But it is _only_, so far as it
participates of the intelligible, and comprehends all things in itself.
And it is _solitary_, so far as it is similar to its father, and is
able to save itself. From the three however, it appears that it is a
God. For _the one_, the _perfect_, and the _self-sufficient_, are the
elements of deity. Hence, the world receiving these, is also itself a
God; being _one_ indeed, according to hyparxis; but _alone_, according
to a perfection which derives its completion from all sensible natures;
and _solitary_, through being sufficient to itself. For those that
lead a solitary life, being converted to themselves, have the hopes
of salvation in themselves. And that this is the meaning of the term
_solitary_, will be evident from the following words of Plato: “Able
through virtue to converse with itself, indigent of nothing external,
and sufficiently known and friendly to itself.” For in these words,
he clearly manifests what the solitariness is which he ascribes to
the world, and that he denominates that being solitary, who looks to
himself, to that with which he is furnished, and to his own proper
measure. For those that live in solitary places, are the saviours of
themselves, so far as respects human causes. The universe therefore is
likewise after this manner solitary, as being sufficient to itself, and
preserving itself, not through a diminution, but from an exuberance
of power; for self-sufficiency is here indicated; and as he says,
through virtue. For he alone among partial animals [such as we are] who
possesses virtue is able to associate with, and love himself with a
parental affection. But the vicious man looking to his inward baseness,
is indignant with himself and with his own essence, is astonished with
externals, and pursues an association with others, in consequence
of his inability to behold himself. On the contrary, the worthy man
perceiving himself beautiful rejoices and is delighted, and producing
in himself beautiful conceptions, gladly embraces an association
with himself. For we are naturally domesticated to the beautiful,
but hastily withdraw ourselves from deformity. Hence, if the world
possesses virtue adapted to itself, in its intellectual and psychical
essence, and in the perfection of its animal nature, looking to itself,
it loves itself, and is present with, and sufficient to itself.

It is proper therefore to assert these things to those who place
intelligibles external to intellect. For how can that which tends to
other things, and as being deficient is indigent of externals, be
blessed? Hence, if the world is through virtue converted to itself,
must not intellect do this in a much greater degree? Intellect
therefore intellectually perceives itself. And this is among the number
of things immediately known. This also deserves to be remarked, that
Plato when he gives animation to the world, directly imparts virtue to
it. For the participation of soul is immediately accompanied with the
fulness of virtue, in the being which subsists according to nature;
since the one cause of the virtues,[197] is also co-arranged with
the fountain of souls,[198] and the progression of this fountain is
conjoined with the progression of soul. For with respect to virtue,
one indeed is unical, primary and all-perfect; but another subsists
in the ruling supermundane Gods; another in the liberated Gods; and
another is mundane, through which the whole world possesses undefiled
intelligence, an undeviating life, an energy converted to itself,
and a purity unmingled with the animals which it contains. From this
virtue therefore, the world becomes known and friendly to itself. For
knowledge precedes familiarity.

Since the universe also is intellectual, an animal, and a God, so far
indeed, as it is intellectual, it becomes known to itself; but so far
as it is a God, it is friendly to itself. For union is more perfect
than knowledge. If therefore, the universe is known to itself, it is
intellectual; for that which is primarily known to itself is intellect.
And if it is friendly to itself, it is united. But that which is
united is deified; for _the one_ which is in intellect is a God.
Again therefore, you have virtue, a knowledge of, and a friendship
with itself, in the world; the first of these proceeding into it from
soul; the second from intellect; and the third from deity. Hence Plato
very properly adds, that on account of these things, the world was
generated by the demiurgus a blessed God; for the presence of soul,
the participation of intellect, and the reception of union, render the
universe a God. And the blessed God which he now mentions is the God
“who at a certain time would exist,” animated, endued with intellect,
and united. Union however is present with it according to the bond of
analogy; but much more from the one soul and the one intellect which it
participates. For through these, greater bonds, and a more excellent
union proceeded into the universe. And still beyond these unions,
divine friendship, and the supply of good, contain and connect the
whole world. For the bond which proceeds from intellect and soul is
strong, as Orpheus also says; but the union of the golden chain [i.e.
of the deific series] is still greater, and is the cause of greater
good to all things.

Moreover, felicity must likewise be assumed in a way adapted to the
universe. For since it is suspended from the paternal intellect and the
whole fabrication of things, and since it lives conformably to these
causes, it is consequently happy (ευδαιμων)[199] from them. For the
demiurgus also is denominated a dæmon by Plato in the Politicus, and a
great dæmon by Orpheus when he says,

    One the great dæmon and the lord of all.[200]

He therefore who lives according to the will of the father, and
preserves the intellectual nature which was imparted to him from thence
immutable is happy, and blessed. The first, and the all-perfect form
of felicity likewise, is that of the world. The second is that of the
mundane Gods, whom Plato in the Phædrus calls happy Gods, following the
mighty Jupiter. The third is that of the genera superior to us [viz.
the felicity of angels, dæmons and heroes]. For there is one virtue of
angels, another of dæmons, and another of the heroic genera: and the
form of felicity is triple being different according to each genus.
The fourth form of felicity is that which subsists in the undefiled
souls, who make blameless descents [into the realms of generation,]
and exert an inflexible and untamed life. The fifth is that of partial
souls [such as ours]; and this is multiform. For the soul which is an
attendant on the moon, is not similarly happy with the soul that is
suspended from the solar order; but as the form of life is different,
so likewise perfection is defined by different measures. And the last
form of felicity is that which is seen in irrational animals. For
every thing which obtains a perfection adapted to it according to
nature, is happy. For through its proper perfection, it is conjoined
to its proper dæmon, and partakes of his providential care. The forms
of felicity therefore, being so many, the first and highest must be
placed in the world, and which also is now mentioned by Plato. We must
not however wonder that he immediately calls the world a God, from its
participation of soul. For every thing is deified through that which is
proximately prior to it; the corporeal world indeed through soul; but
soul through intellect, as the Athenian guest also says; and intellect
through _the one_. Hence, intellect is divine, but not a God.
_The one_ however is no longer a God through any thing else, but
is primarily a God; just as intellect is primarily gnostic, as soul is
primarily self-motive, and as body is primarily in place.




                              CHAPTER LI.


In the last place, I shall present the reader with what Plato says in
the Timæus about the name of the world, and add to it the elucidations
of Proclus; for thus every thing pertaining to the mundane Gods, and
their great recipient the universe will have been amply, and I trust
satisfactorily discussed. Plato therefore says on this subject: “We
shall denominate the universe, _heaven_, or _the world_, or by any
other appellation in which it may especially rejoice.” These names,
says Proclus, were attended with much ambiguity with the ancients. For
some alone called the sublunary region κοσμος _kosmos, the world_,
and the region above it ουρανος _ouranos, heaven_; but others called
_heaven_ a part of _the world_. And some indeed, considered the moon
as the boundary of _heaven_; but others denominated the summits of
generation _heaven_. Thus Homer,

    Extended heaven in ether and the clouds
    Fell to the lot of Jove.

Hence Plato very properly prior to the whole theory speaks definitively
concerning these names, denominating the universe _heaven_ and
_the world_. And he calls it _heaven_ indeed, as perceiving the
things above, contemplating the intelligible, and participating an
intellectual essence; but _the world_, as always being filled and
adorned by true beings. He likewise denominates it _heaven_ as being
converted to the principles of its existence; but _the world_ as
proceeding from them. For it was generated by true beings, and is
converted to them. As however, of statues which are established
by the telestic (or mystic) art, some things are apparent[201] in
them, but others are inwardly concealed, which are symbolical[202]
of the presence of the Gods, and are known to the mystic framers of
them alone; after the same manner the universe being the statue of
the intelligible world, and perfected by the father, has some things
apparent which are indications of its divinity, but others unapparent,
which are the marks, seals, or impressions of the participation of true
being,[203] which it received from the father who gave it perfection;
in order that through these it may be eternally rooted in real essence.
The appellations also _heaven_ and _the world_ are names significant
of the apparent powers in the universe; the latter indeed, so far as
they proceed from the intelligible, but the former, so far as they are
converted to it.

It is necessary however, to know that the divine name of the abiding
power of the universe, and which is a symbol of the demiurgic seal,
according to which also it subsists in unproceeding union with
real being, is ineffable, and not vocal, and is known to the Gods
themselves. For there are appropriate names in every order of things;
divine indeed, in the Gods; but dianoetic in the subjects of the
discursive power of reason; and doxastic in the objects of opinion. And
this also Plato asserts in the Cratylus, assenting to Homer who places
one kind of names of the same things in the Gods, and another kind in
the opinions of men, as

    Gods call it Xanthus, but Scamander men.

And

    Chalcis its name with those of heav’nly birth.
    But call’d Cymindis by the sons of earth.

And in a similar manner in many other names. For as the knowledge of
the Gods is of one kind, but that of partial souls of another, so
names in the former are different from those in the latter. Divine
names however, unfold the whole essence of the things named; but
those of men only effect this partially. Plato therefore knowing
that this pre-existed in the world, omits to mention what the divine
and ineffable name of it is which is different from the apparent, and
with great caution speaks of it as a symbol of the divine impression
which the world contains. For the words, “or by any other appellation
in which it may especially rejoice,” are a latent hymn of the mundane
name so far as it is allotted an unspeakable and divine essence, in
order that it may be co-ordinate to that which is signified by him.
Hence also, divine mundane names are delivered by theurgists; some
being called by them ineffable, but others effable; and some of them
being the names of the unapparent powers in the world, but others,
of the visible elements from which it derives its completion. Plato
therefore, here delivers both the apparent and the unapparent name of
the world, the former indeed, dyadically, but the latter monadically;
for the words, “or by any other,” are significant of oneness. And
_the ineffable name_ indeed of the universe, is indicative of its
abiding in its father; the name _world_, of its progression; and
_heaven_, of its regression. But through the three, you have the
final cause, on account of which it is full of good, abiding indeed
ineffably, but proceeding perfectly, and returning to _the good_,
as to the pre-existing object of desire.




                                  THE

                         ELEMENTS OF THEOLOGY.


                            PROPOSITION I.

All multitude participates in a certain respect of _the one_.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it in no respect participates of _the one_, neither will the
whole be one whole, nor each of the many of which the multitude
consists; but there will also be a certain multitude arising from
each of these, and this will be the case to infinity. Each of
these infinites, likewise, will again be infinite multitude. For
participating in no respect of any one, neither according to the whole
of itself, nor according to each of the many which it contains, it will
be in every respect, and according to the whole, infinite. For each of
the many which you may assume, will either be one, or not one, will
either be many or nothing. But if each is nothing, that also which
consists of these will be nothing. And if each is many, each will
consist of infinites infinitely: [and this not in capacity, but in
energy]. These things, however, are impossible. For neither does any
being consist of infinites infinitely assumed; since there is not more
than the infinite; but that which consists of all is more than each.
Nor is it possible for any thing to be composed from nothing. All
multitude, therefore, participates in a certain respect of _the one_.


                            PROPOSITION II.

Every thing which participates of _the one_, is both one and not
one.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is not _the one_ itself (since it participates of _the one_)
being something else besides _the one_, it suffers, or is passive
to it according to participation, and sustains to become one. If,
therefore, it is nothing besides _the one_, it is one alone, and does
not participate of _the one_, but will be _the one itself_. But if
it is something besides _the one_, which is not _the one_, but its
participant, it is both _not one_, and _one_, not indeed such a one as
the one itself, but _one being_, as participating of _the one_. This,
therefore, is not one, nor is it that which _the one_ is. But it is
one, and at the same time a participant of _the one_. Hence, being
of itself not one, it is both one and not one, being something else
besides _the one_. And so far indeed as it abounds, it is not one, but
so far as it is passive [to the one] it is one. Every thing, therefore,
which participates of _the one_, is both one, and not one.


                           PROPOSITION III.

Every thing which becomes one, becomes so through the participation of
_the one_, and is one, so far as it suffers the participation of _the
one_.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if things which are not one become one, they doubtless become so by
a conjunction and communication with each other, and they sustain the
presence of _the one_, not being that which _the one itself_ is. Hence,
they participate of _the one_ so far as they suffer to become one. For,
if they are already one they will not become one; since that which is
does not become that which it is already. But if they become one from
nothing, i.e. from the privation of _the one_, since a certain one
is ingenerated in them, _the one itself_ is prior to them. [And this
ingenerated one must be derived from _the one itself_. Every thing,
therefore, which becomes one, becomes so through the participation of
_the one_, &c.[204]]


                            PROPOSITION IV.

Every thing which is united is different from _the one itself_.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is united, it will participate in a certain respect of
_the one_, so far as it is said to be united. That, however, which
participates of _the one_, is both one and not one. But _the one
itself_ is not both one and not one. For if this were the case, again
the one which is in it would have both these, and this would take place
to infinity, there being no _one itself_ at which it is possible to
stop; but every thing being one and not one, there will be something
united which is different from _the one_. For if _the one_ is the
same with the united, it will be infinite multitude. And in a similar
manner each of the things of which the united consists will be infinite
multitude. [Every thing, therefore, which is united is different from
_the one itself_.[205]]


                            PROPOSITION V.

All multitude is posterior to _the one_.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if multitude is prior to _the one_, _the one_ indeed will
participate of multitude, but multitude which is prior to _the one_
will not participate of _the one_, since that multitude existed prior
to the subsistence of _the one_. For it will not participate of that
which is not; because that which participates of _the one_, is one
and at the same time not one; but _the one_ will not yet subsist,
that which is first being multitude. It is, however, impossible that
there should be a certain multitude, which in no respect whatever
participates of _the one_. Multitude, therefore, is not prior to _the
one_.

But if multitude subsists simultaneously with _the one_, and they
are naturally co-ordinate with each other; for nothing of time will
prevent them being so; neither will _the one_ of itself be many, nor
will multitude be one, as being at one and the same time oppositely
divided by nature, if neither is prior or posterior to the other.
Hence, multitude of itself will not be one, and each of the things
that are in it will not be one, and this will be the case to infinity,
which is impossible. Multitude, therefore, according to its own nature,
participates of _the one_, and it will not be possible to assume any
thing of it which is not one. For not being one, it will be an infinite
consisting of infinites, as has been demonstrated. Hence, it entirely
participates of _the one_. If, therefore, _the one_ which is of itself
one, in no respect participates of multitude, multitude will be
entirely posterior to _the one_; participating indeed of _the one_, but
not being participated by _the one_.

But if _the one_ also participates of multitude, subsisting indeed as
one according to hyparxis, but as not one, according to participation,
_the one_ will be multiplied, just as multitude is united on account of
_the one_. _The one_, therefore, will communicate with multitude, and
multitude with _the one_. But things which coalesce, and communicate
in a certain respect with each other, if indeed they are collected
together by something else, that something else is prior to them. But
if they themselves collect themselves, they are not opposed to each
other. For opposites do not hasten to each other. Hence, if _the one_
and multitude are oppositely divided, and multitude so far as multitude
is not one, and _the one_ so far as one is not multitude, neither will
one of these subsisting in the other be one and at the same time two.
If, also, there is something prior to them which collects them, this
will either be one, or not one. But if it is not one, it will either be
many or nothing. It will not however be many, lest multitude should
be prior to _the one_, nor yet will it be nothing. For how can nothing
congregate? It is, therefore, one alone. For this which is the one
cannot be many, lest there should be a progression to infinity. It is,
therefore, _the one itself_, and all multitude is from _the one itself_.


                            PROPOSITION VI.

                          _Concerning Unity._

Every multitude consists either of things united, or of unities.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that each of things many will not be itself multitude alone, and
again that each part of this will not be multitude alone is evident.
But if it is not multitude alone, it is either united, or unities
(εναδες). And if, indeed, it participates of _the one_ it is united;
but if it consists of things of which that which is primarily united
consists, it will be unities. For if there is _the one itself_, there
is also that which primarily participates of it, and which is primarily
united. But this consists of unities. For if it consists of things
united, again things united consist of certain things, and this will be
the case to infinity. It is necessary, however, that what is primarily
united should consist of unities. And thus we have discovered what we
proposed at first, [viz. that every multitude consists either of things
united, or of unities.]


                           PROPOSITION VII.

          _Concerning producing causes and things produced._

Every thing productive of another is more excellent than the nature of
the thing produced.

       *       *       *       *       *

For it is either more excellent, or less excellent, or equal. Hence,
that which is produced from this, will either also itself possess a
power productive of something else, or it will be entirely unprolific.
But if it is unprolific, according to this very thing it will be
inferior to that by which it was produced. And through its inefficacy
it is unequal to its cause which is prolific, and has the power of
producing. But if it also is productive of other things, it either
likewise produces that which is equal to itself, and this in a similar
manner in all things, and all beings will be equal to each other, and
no one thing will be better than another, that which produces, always
giving subsistence in a consequent series to that which is equal to
itself; or it produces that which is unequal to itself, and thus that
which is produced, will no longer be equal to that which produces it.
For it is the province of equal powers to produce equal things. The
progeny of these, however, will be unequal to each other, if that which
produces indeed, is equal to the cause prior to itself, but the thing
posterior to it is unequal to it. Hence, it is not proper that the
thing produced should be equal to its producing cause.

Moreover, neither will that which produces ever be less than that which
is produced by it. For if it imparts essence to the thing produced, it
will also supply it with essential power. But if it is productive of
all the power which that posterior to it possesses, it will also be
able to produce itself such as that posterior nature is. And if this
be the case it will also make itself[206] more powerful. For impotency
cannot hinder, productive power being present, nor a defect of will;
since all things naturally aspire after good. Hence, if it is able to
render another thing more perfect, it will also perfect itself before
it perfects that which is posterior to itself. Hence, that which is
produced, is not equal to, nor more excellent than, its producing
cause. The producing cause, therefore, is in every respect better than
the nature of the thing produced.


                           PROPOSITION VIII.

     _Concerning the first good, which is called_ the good itself.

That which is primarily good, and which is no other than _the good
itself_ is the leader of all things that in any way whatever
participate of good.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if all beings aspire after good, it is evident that what is
primarily good is beyond beings. For if it is the same with some one
being, either being and _the good_ are the same, and this particular
being will no longer be desirous of good, since it is that to which
it is passive, [i.e. since it is _the good_]. For that which aspires
after any thing is indigent of that after which it aspires, and is
different from it. And [if some one being and _the good_ are the same]
being indeed will participate, and that which is participated in being
will be _the good_. Hence, _the good_ is a certain good inherent in a
certain participant, and after which the participant alone aspires,
but is not that which is simply good, and which all beings desire. For
this is the common object of desire to all beings. But that which is
inherent in a certain thing, pertains to that alone which participates
of it. Hence, that which is primarily good, is nothing else than good.
For whatever else you may add to it, you will diminish by the addition
_the good_, and will make it to be a certain good, instead of that
which is simply good. For that which is added not being _the good_, but
something less than it will by its own essence diminish _the good_.


                            PROPOSITION IX.

           _Concerning that which is sufficient to itself._

Every thing which is sufficient to itself, either according to essence,
or according to energy, is more excellent than that which is not
sufficient to itself, but has the cause of its perfection suspended
from another cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if all beings naturally aspire after good, and one thing supplies
well-being from itself,[207] but another is indigent of something
else, the one indeed will have the cause of good present, but the
other separate and apart. By how much the nearer, therefore, the
former is to that which supplies the object of desire [i.e. to _the
good_], by so much the more excellent will it be than that which is
indigent of a separate cause, and externally receives the perfection
of its hyparxis, or its energy. For since that which is sufficient to
itself is both similar and diminished, it is more similar to _the good
itself_ [than that which is not self-sufficient]. It is diminished
indeed through participating of _the good_, and because it is not
primarily _the good_. Yet it is in a certain respect allied to it, so
far as it is able to possess good from itself. But to participate, and
to participate through another, are more remote from that which is
primarily good, and which is nothing else than good.


                            PROPOSITION X.

Every thing which is sufficient to itself is inferior to that which is
simply good.

       *       *       *       *       *

For what else is a thing sufficient to itself, than that which from
itself and in itself possesses good? But this is now full of good, and
participates of it, but is not that which is simply good. For that is
better than participation and plenitude, as has been demonstrated.
If, therefore, that which is sufficient to itself, fills itself with
good, that from which it fills itself, will be more excellent than
the self-sufficient, and will be above self-sufficiency. And neither
will that which is simply good be indigent of any thing. For it does
not aspire after any thing else; since by aspiring after it would be
deficient of good. Nor is that which is simply good sufficient to
itself. For thus it would be full of good, and would not be primarily
the good.


                            PROPOSITION XI.

                          _Concerning Cause._

All beings proceed from one first cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

For either there is not any cause of beings, or the causes of all
finite things are in a circle, or the ascent is to infinity, and one
thing is the cause of another, and the pre-subsistence of essence
will in no respect stop. If, however, there is no cause of beings,
there will neither be an order of things second and first, of things
perfecting and perfected, of things adorning and adorned, of things
generating and generated, and of agents and patients, nor will there
be any science of beings. For the knowledge of causes is the work of
science, and we are then said to know scientifically, when we know the
causes of things.[208]

But if causes revolve in a circle, the same things will be prior and
posterior, more powerful and more imbecil. For every thing which
produces is better than the nature of that which is produced. It makes,
however, no difference to conjoin cause to effect, and to produce from
cause, through many, or through fewer media. For cause will be more
excellent than all the intermediate natures of which it is the cause.
And by how much the more numerous the media, by so much greater is the
causality of the cause.

And if the addition of causes is to infinity, and there is always again
another cause prior to another, there will be no science of any being.
For there is not a knowledge of any thing infinite. But causes being
unknown, neither will there be a science of the things consequent to
the causes. If, therefore, it is necessary that there should be a cause
of beings, and causes are distinct from the things caused, and there
is not an ascent to infinity, there is a first cause of beings, from
which as from a root every thing proceeds; some things indeed being
nearer to, but others more remote from it. For that it is necessary
there should be one principle has been demonstrated;[209] because all
multitude subsists posterior to _the one_.


                           PROPOSITION XII.

The principle and first cause of all beings is _the good_.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if all things proceed from one cause, [as has been above
demonstrated] it is requisite to call that cause either _the good_,
or that which is more excellent than _the good_. But if it is more
excellent than _the good_, whether is any thing imparted by it to
beings, and to the nature of beings, or nothing? And if indeed nothing
is imparted by it an absurdity will ensue. For we shall no longer
preserve it in the order of cause; since it is every where requisite
that something should be present from cause to things caused,[210] and
especially from the first cause from which all things are suspended,
and on account of which every being exists. But if something is
imparted by it to beings, in the same manner as there is by _the good_,
there will be something better than goodness in beings imparted to
them by the first cause. For being more excellent than, and above _the
good_, it can never bestow on secondary natures any thing subordinate
to that which is imparted by the nature posterior to itself.[211] But
what can be more excellent than goodness? Since we say that the more
excellent itself is that which participates of a greater good. Hence,
if that which is not good cannot be said to be more excellent than,
it must entirely be secondary to _the good_. If, likewise, all beings
aspire after _the good_, how is it any longer possible that there
should be something prior to this cause? For if they also aspire after
that which is prior to _the good_, how can they especially aspire after
_the good_? But if they do not aspire after it, how is it possible that
things which proceed from it should not desire the cause of all? Hence,
if it is _the good_ from which all beings are suspended, _the good_ is
the principle and first cause of all things.


                           PROPOSITION XIII.

Every good has the power of uniting its participants, and every union
is good; and _the good_ is the same with _the one_.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if _the good_ is preservative of all beings, (on which account
also it is desirable to all things) but that which is preservative
and connective of the essence of every thing, is _the one_; for all
things are preserved by _the one_, and dispersion removes every
thing from essence;--if this be the case, _the good_ will cause
those things to which it is present, to be one, and will connect and
contain them according to union. And if _the one_ is collective and
connective of beings, it will perfect every thing by its presence.
Hence, therefore, it is good to all things to be united. If, however,
union is of itself good, and good has the power of uniting, the simply
good, and the simply one are the same, uniting and at the same time
benefiting beings. Hence it is that those things which after a manner
fall off from _the good_, are at the same time also deprived of the
participation of _the one_. And those things which become destitute
of _the one_, being filled with separation, are after the same manner
likewise deprived of _the good_. Hence, goodness is union, and union is
goodness, and _the one_ is that which is primarily good.


                           PROPOSITION XIV.

   _Concerning the immoveable and self-motive principle, or cause._

Every being is either immoveable or moved. And if moved, it is either
moved by itself, or by another. And if indeed it is moved by itself,
it is self-motive; but if by another, it is alter-motive. Every thing
therefore, is either immoveable, or self-motive, or alter-motive.

       *       *       *       *       *

For it is necessary since there are alter-motive natures, that there
should also be that which is immoveable, and that the self-motive
nature should subsist between these. For if every thing alter-motive
is moved in consequence of being moved by another thing, motions will
either be in a circle, or they will proceed to infinity.[212] But
they will neither be in a circle, nor have an infinite progression,
since all beings are bounded by the principle of things and that which
moves is better than that which is moved. Hence there will be something
immoveable which first moves.[213] But if this be the case, it is also
necessary that there should be something which is self-motive. For
if[214] all things should stop, what will that be which is first moved?
It cannot be that which is immoveable;[215] for it is not naturally
adapted to be moved; nor that which is alter-motive; for that is
moved by something else. It remains therefore, that the self-motive
nature is that which is primarily moved. For it is this also which
conjoins alter-motive natures to that which is immoveable, being in
a certain respect a middle, moving and at the same time being moved.
For of these, the immoveable moves only, but the alter-motive is moved
only. Every thing therefore, is either immoveable, or self-motive, or
alter-motive.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things likewise, it is evident, that of things which are
moved, the self-motive nature is the first; but that of things which
move the immoveable is the first.


                            PROPOSITION XV.

  _Concerning an incorporeal essence, and what the peculiarity of it
                                 is._

Every thing which is converted to itself is incorporeal.

       *       *       *       *       *

For no body is naturally adapted to revert to itself. For if that
which is converted to any thing is conjoined with that to which it
is converted, it is evident that all the parts of the body which is
converted to itself, will be conjoined with all the parts. For this
it is for a thing to be converted to itself, when both that which is
converted, and that to which it is converted, become one. This however
is impossible in body, and in short, in all partible things. For the
whole of that which is partible is not conjoined with the whole, on
account of the separation of the parts, some of which are situated
differently from others. No body therefore, is naturally adapted to
revert to itself, so as that the whole may be converted to the whole.
Hence if there is any thing which has the power of reverting to itself,
it is incorporeal and impartible.


                           PROPOSITION XVI.

Every thing which is converted to itself, has an essence separate from
all body.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it was inseparable from any body whatever, it would not have a
certain energy separate from body.[216] For thus energy would be more
excellent than essence; since the latter indeed would be indigent of
bodies, but the former would be sufficient to itself, and would not be
in want of bodies: If therefore any thing is essentially inseparable
from body, it is also in a similar manner inseparable according to
energy, or rather it is in a still greater degree inseparable. But
if this be the case, it will not revert to itself. For that which is
converted to itself being something different from body, has an energy
separate from body, and not either through, or together with body,
since the energy, and that to which the energy is directed, are not
at all in want of body. Hence, that which is converted to itself, is
entirely separate from bodies.


                           PROPOSITION XVII.

Every thing which moves itself primarily, is convertive to itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it moves itself, and its motive energy is directed to itself,
that which moves, and that which is moved are at the same time one. For
it either moves in a part but is moved in a part, or the whole moves
and is moved, [or the whole moves, but a part is moved, or[217]] the
contrary. But if one part indeed, is that which moves, and another part
is that which is moved, it will not be essentially self-motive, since
it will consist of things which are not self-motive, but which appear
indeed to be so, yet are not so essentially.

If however, the whole moves, but the part is moved, or the contrary,
there will be a certain part in both which according to one, moves and
at the same time is moved.[218] And this is that which is primarily
self-motive. If however, one and the same thing moves and is moved,
it will have the energy of moving to itself, being motive of itself.
But it is converted to that towards which it energizes. Every thing
therefore which primarily moves itself, is converted to itself.


                          PROPOSITION XVIII.

Every thing which imparts existence to others, is itself that primarily
which it communicates to the natures that are supplied by it with
existence.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it gives existence, and makes the communication from its own
essence, that which it gives is subordinate to its own essence [by
the 7th Proposition]. But that which it is, it is in a greater and
more perfect degree; since every thing which gives subsistence to a
certain thing, is better than and not the same with it. For it is
primarily, but the other is secondarily that which it is. For it is
necessary either that each should be the same, and that there should
be one definition of both, or that there should be nothing common and
the same in both, or that the one should subsist primarily, but the
other secondarily. If however indeed, there is the same definition of
both, the one will no longer be cause, but the other effect; nor will
the one subsist essentially, but the other by participation; nor will
the one be the maker, but the other the thing made. But if they have
nothing which is the same, the one will not give subsistence to the
other by its very being, in consequence of communicating nothing to
the existence of the other. Hence, it remains that the one should be
primarily that which it gives, but that the other should be secondarily
that to which existence is given; the former supplying the latter from
its very being.


                           PROPOSITION XIX.

Every thing which is primarily inherent in a certain nature of beings,
is present to all the beings that are arranged according to that
nature, and this conformably to one reason, and after the same manner.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is not present to all of them after the same manner, but to
some and not to others, it is evident that it was not primarily in
that nature, but that it is in some things primarily, and in others
secondarily, that sometimes participate of it. For that which at one
time exists, but at another time does not, does not exist primarily,
nor of itself. But it is adventitious, and is imparted from some other
place to the things in which it is thus inherent.


                            PROPOSITION XX.

The essence of soul is beyond all bodies, the intellectual nature
is beyond all souls, and _the one_ is beyond all intellectual
hypostases.

       *       *       *       *       *

For every body is moveable by something else, but is not naturally
adapted to move itself, but by the presence of soul is moved of itself,
lives on account of soul, and when soul is present, is in a certain
respect self-moveable, but when it is absent is alter-moveable, as
deriving this nature from soul which is allotted a self-moveable
essence. For to whatever nature soul is present, to this it imparts
self-motion. It is however, by a much greater priority that which it
imparts by its very being. Hence, it is beyond bodies, which become
self-moveable by participation as being essentially self-moveable.

Again however, soul which is moved from itself, has an order secondary
to the immoveable nature, which subsists immoveable according to
energy. Because of all the natures that are moved, the self-moveable
essence is the leader; but of all that move, the immoveable is the
leader. If therefore soul being moved from itself, moves other things,
it is necessary that prior to it, there should be that which moves
immoveably. But intellect moves being immoveable, and energizing
always with an invariable sameness of subsistence. For soul on account
of intellect participates of perpetual intellectual energy, just as
body on account of soul possesses the power of moving itself. For if
perpetual intellection was primarily in soul, it would be inherent
in all souls, in the same manner as the self-motive power. Hence,
perpetual intellection is not primarily in soul. It is necessary
therefore, that prior to it, there should be that which is primarily
intellective. And hence, intellect is prior to souls.

Moreover, _the one_ is prior to intellect. For intellect though it
is immoveable yet is not _the one_; for it intellectually perceives
itself, and energizes about itself. And of _the one_ indeed, all
beings in whatever way they may exist, participate; but all beings
do not participate of intellect. For those beings to whom intellect
is present by participation, necessarily participate of knowledge;
because intellectual knowledge is the principle and first cause of the
gnostic energy. _The one_ therefore, is beyond intellect; and there
is no longer any thing else beyond _the one_. For _the one_ and _the
good_ are the same. But _the good_, as has been demonstrated, is the
principle of all things.


                           PROPOSITION XXI.

               _That intellect is not the first cause._

Every order beginning from a monad, proceeds into a multitude
co-ordinate to the monad, and the multitude of every order is referred
to one monad.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the monad having the relation of a principle, generates a multitude
allied to itself. Hence one series, and one whole order has a decrement
into multitude from the monad. For there would no longer be an order,
or a series, if the monad remained of itself unprolific. But multitude
is again referred to the one common cause of all co-ordinate natures.
For that in every multitude which is the same, has not its progression
from one of those things of which the multitude consists. For that
which subsists from one alone of the many, is not common to all, but
eminently possesses the peculiarity of that one alone. Hence, since
in every order there is a certain communion, connexion, and sameness,
through which some things are said to be co-ordinate, but others of a
different order, it is evident that sameness is derived to every order
from one principle.[219] In each order, therefore, there is one monad
prior to the multitude, which imparts one ratio and connexion to the
natures arranged in it, both to each other, and to the whole.

For let one thing be the cause of another, among things that are under
the same series: but that which ranks as the cause of the one series,
must necessarily be prior to all in that series, and all things must
be generated by it as co-ordinate, not so that each will be a certain
particular thing, but that each will belong to this order.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things it is evident that both unity and multitude are
inherent in the nature of body; that one nature has many natures
co-suspended from it; and that many natures proceed from the one nature
of the universe. It follows also, that the order of souls originates
from one first soul, and proceeds with diminution into the multitude of
souls. That in the intellectual essence also, there is an intellectual
monad; and that a multitude of intellects proceeds from one intellect,
and is converted to it. That a multitude of unities likewise originates
from _the one_ which is prior to all things; and that there is an
extension of these unities to _the one_. Hence, after the first
one there are unities; after the first intellect, there are intellects;
after the first soul there are souls; and after total nature, there are
natures.


                           PROPOSITION XXII.

Every thing which subsists primarily and principally in each order is
one, and is neither two, nor more than two, but is only begotten.

       *       *       *       *       *

For, if it be possible, let there be two things which thus subsist;
since there will be the same impossibility if there are more than two;
or let that which subsists primarily consist of both these. But if
indeed it consists of both, it will again be one, and there will not be
two things that are first. And if it be one of the two, each will not
be first. Nor if both are equally primary, will each have a principal
subsistence. For if one of them is primary, but this is not the same
with the other, what will it be in that order? For that subsists
primarily, which is nothing else than that which it is said to be. But
each of these being different is, and at the same time is not that
which it is said to be.

If, therefore, these differ from each other, but they do not primarily
differ so far as they are that which they are said to be; for this
primarily suffers that which is the same; both will not be first, but
that of which both participating, are said to subsist primarily.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things it is evident, that what is primarily being is one
alone, and that there are not two primary beings, or more than two;
that the first intellect is one alone, and that there are not two first
intellects; and that the first soul is one. This is also the case with
every form, such as the primarily beautiful, and the primarily equal.
And in a similar manner in all things. Thus also, with respect to the
form of animal, and the form of man, the first of each is one; for the
demonstration is the same.


                          PROPOSITION XXIII.

                 _Concerning the Imparticipable._[220]

Every imparticipable gives subsistence from itself to things which
are participated. And all participated hypostases are extended to
imparticipable hyparxes.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that which is imparticipable having the relation of a monad, as
subsisting from itself, and not from another, and being exempt from
participants, generates things which are able to be participated.
For either[221] it remains of itself barren, and possesses nothing
honourable; or it gives something from itself. And that which receives
indeed from it participates, but that which is given subsists in a
participated manner. But every thing which is something belonging to
a certain thing by which it is participated,[222] is secondary to
that which is similarly present to all things, and which fills all
things from itself. For that which is in one thing is not in others.
But that which is similarly present to all things, in order that it
may illuminate all things, is not in one thing, but is prior to all
things. For it is either in all things, or in one of all, or it is
prior to all. But that indeed which is in all things being distributed
into all, will again require another thing which may unite that which
is distributed. And all things will no longer participate of the same
thing, but this of one thing, and that of another, the one being
divided. But if it is in one of all things, it will no longer be common
to all, but to one thing. Hence if it is common to things able to
participate, and is common to all, it will be prior to all. But this is
imparticipable.


                           PROPOSITION XXIV.

Every thing which participates is inferior to that which is
participated; and that which is participated is inferior to that which
is imparticipable.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that which participates, being imperfect prior to participation,
but becoming perfect through participation, is entirely secondary to
that which is participated, so far as it is perfect by participating.
For so far as it was imperfect, it is inferior to that which it
participates, which makes it to be perfect. That however which is
participated since it belongs to a certain thing, and not to all
things, is again allotted an hyparxis subordinate to that which is
something belonging to all things, and not to a certain thing. For
the latter is more allied to the cause of all; but the former is less
allied to it.

The imparticipable, therefore, is the leader of things which are
participated; but the latter are the leaders of participants. For, in
short, the imparticipable is one prior to the many; but that which is
participated in the many, is one and at the same time not one; and
every thing which participates is not one, and at the same time one.


                           PROPOSITION XXV.

                       _Concerning the Perfect._

Every thing perfect proceeds to the generation of those things which it
is able to produce, imitating the one principle of all.

       *       *       *       *       *

For as that on account of its own goodness, unically gives subsistence
to all beings; for _the good_ and _the one_ are the same, so that the
boniform is the same with the unical; thus also those things which
are posterior to the first, on account of their perfection, hasten
to generate beings inferior to their own essence. For perfection is
a certain portion of _the good_, and the perfect, so far as it is
perfect, imitates _the good_. But _the good_ gives subsistence to all
things. So that the perfect likewise, is productive according to nature
of those things which it is able to produce. And that indeed which is
more perfect, by how much the more perfect it is, by so much the more
numerous are the progeny of which it is the cause. For that which is
more perfect, participates in a greater degree of _the good_. It is,
therefore, nearer to _the good_. But this being the case, it is nearer
to the cause of all. And thus, it is the cause of a greater number of
effects. That, however, which is more imperfect, by how much the more
imperfect it is, by so much the less numerous are the effects of which
it is the cause. For being more remote from that which produces every
thing, it gives subsistence to fewer effects. For to that which gives
subsistence to, or adorns, or perfects, or connects, or vivifies, or
fabricates, all things, that nature is more allied which produces a
greater number of each of these; but that is more remote which produces
a less number of each.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things it is evident, that the nature which is most remote
from the principle of all, is unprolific, and is not the cause of
any thing. For if it generated a certain thing, and had something
posterior to itself, it is evident that it would no longer be most
remote, but that which it produced would be more remote than itself,
from the principle of all things, but it would be nearer to productive
power, and besides[223] this, would imitate the cause which is
productive of all beings.


                           PROPOSITION XXVI.

Every cause which is productive of other things, itself abiding in
itself, produces the natures posterior to itself, and such as are
successive.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it imitates _the one_, but that immoveably gives subsistence to
things posterior to itself, every thing which produces will possess in
a similar manner the cause of productive energy. But _the one_ gives
subsistence to things immoveably. For if through motion, the motion
will be in it, and being moved, it will no longer be _the one_, in
consequence of being changed from _the one_. But if motion subsists
together with it, it will also be from _the one_, and either there will
be a progression to infinity, or _the one_ will produce immoveably;
and every thing which produces will imitate the producing cause of
all things. For every where, from that which is primarily, that which
is not primarily derives its subsistence; so that the nature which is
productive of certain things originates from that which is productive
of all things. Hence every producing cause produces subsequent
natures from itself. And while productive natures abide in themselves
undiminished, secondary natures are produced from them. For that which
is in any respect diminished, cannot abide such as it is.


                          PROPOSITION XXVII.

Every producing cause, on account of its perfection, and abundance of
power, is productive of secondary natures.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it produced not on account of the perfect, but through a
defect according to power, it would not be able to preserve its own
order immoveable. For that which imparts existence to another thing
through defect and imbecility, imparts subsistence to it, through its
own mutation and change in quality. But every thing which produces
remains such as it is, and in consequence of thus remaining, that
which is posterior to it[224] proceeds into existence. Hence, being
full and perfect, it gives subsistence to secondary natures immoveably
and without diminution, it being that which it is, and neither being
changed into them, nor diminished. For that which is produced, is not a
distribution into parts of the producing cause; since this is neither
appropriate to the generating energy, nor to generating causes. Nor
is it a transition. For it does not become the matter of that which
proceeds; since it remains such as it is, and that which is produced
is different from it. Hence that which generates is firmly established
undiminished; through prolific power multiplies itself; and from itself
imparts secondary hypostases.


                          PROPOSITION XXVIII.

Every producing cause gives subsistence to things similar to itself,
prior to such as are dissimilar.

       *       *       *       *       *

For since that which produces is necessarily more excellent than
that which is produced, they can never be simply the same with each
other, and equal in power. But if they are not the same and equal, but
different and unequal, they are either entirely separated from each
other, or they are both united and separated. If, however, they are
entirely separated, they will not accord with each other, and no where
will that which proceeds from a cause sympathize with it. Hence neither
will one of these participate of the other, being entirely different
from it. For that which is participated, gives communion to its
participant, with reference to that of which it participates. Moreover,
it is necessary that the thing caused should participate of its cause,
as from thence possessing its essence.

But if that which is produced, is partly separated from and partly
united to its producing cause, if indeed, it suffers each of these
equally, it will equally participate and not participate. So that after
the same manner, it will both have essence and not have it from the
producing cause. And if it is more separated from than united to it,
the thing generated will be more foreign than allied to that by which
it is generated, will be more unadapted than adapted to it, and be more
deprived of, than possess sympathy with it. If, therefore, the things
which proceed from causes are allied to them according to their very
being, have sympathy with them, are naturally suspended from them, and
aspire after contact with them, desiring good, and obtaining the object
of their desire through the cause of their existence,--if this be the
case, it is evident that things produced are in a greater degree united
to their producing causes, than separated from them. Things, however,
which are more united, are more similar than dissimilar to the natures
to which they are especially united. Every producing cause, therefore,
gives subsistence to things similar to itself prior to such as are
dissimilar.


                           PROPOSITION XXIX.

Every progression is effected through a similitude of secondary to
first natures.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if that which produces, gives subsistence to similars prior to
dissimilars, the similitude derived from the producing causes will
give subsistence to the things produced. For similars are rendered
similar through similitude, and not through dissimilitude. If,
therefore, progression in its diminution preserves a [certain] sameness
of that which is generated with that which generates, and exhibits
that which is posterior to the generator such in a secondary degree,
as the generator is primarily, it will have its subsistence through
similitude.


                           PROPOSITION XXX.

Every thing which is produced from a certain thing without a medium,
abides in its producing cause, and proceeds from it.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every progression is effected, while primary natures remain
permanent, and is accomplished through similitude, similars being
constituted prior to dissimilars,--if this be the case, that which is
produced will in a certain respect abide in its producing cause. For
that which entirely proceeds, will have nothing which is the same with
the abiding cause, but will be perfectly separated from it, and will
not have any thing common with and united to it. Hence it will abide
in its cause, in the same manner as that also abides in itself. If,
however, it abides, but does not proceed, it will in no respect differ
from its cause, nor will it, while that abides, be generated something
different from it. For if it is something different it is separated and
apart from its cause. If, however, it is apart, but the cause abides,
it will proceed from the cause, in order that while it abides, it may
be separated from it. So far therefore, as that which is produced has
something which is the same with the producing[225] cause, it abides
in it; but so far as it is different, it proceeds from it. Being,
however, similar, it is in a certain respect at once both the same and
different. Hence, it abides, and at the same time proceeds, and it is
neither of these without the other.


                           PROPOSITION XXXI.

Every thing which proceeds from a certain thing essentially, is
converted to that from which it proceeds.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it should proceed indeed, but should not return to the cause
of this progression, it would not aspire after its cause. For every
thing which desires is converted to the object of its desire. Moreover,
every thing aspires after good, and to each thing the attainment of it
is through the proximate cause. Every thing, therefore, aspires after
its cause. For well-being is derived to every thing from that through
which its existence is derived. But appetite is first directed to that
through which well-being is derived. And conversion is to that to which
appetite is first directed.


                          PROPOSITION XXXII.

All conversion is effected through the similitude of the things
converted to that to which they are converted.

       *       *       *       *       *

For every thing which is converted, hastens to be conjoined with its
cause,[226] and aspires after communion and colligation with it. But
similitude binds all things together, just as dissimilitude separates
and disjoins all things. If, therefore, conversion is a certain
communion and contact, but all communion and all contact are through
similitude,--if this be the case, all conversion will be effected
through similitude.


                          PROPOSITION XXXIII.

Every thing which proceeds from a certain thing and is converted to it,
has a circular energy.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it reverts to that from which it proceeds, it conjoins the end
to the beginning, and the motion is one and continued; one motion being
from that which abides, but the other being directed to the abiding
cause. Hence all things proceed in a circle from causes to causes;
greater and less circles being continually formed of conversions, some
of which are to the natures [immediately] placed above the things that
are converted, but others are to still higher natures, and so on as far
as to the principle of all things. For all things proceed from this
principle, and are converted to it.


                          PROPOSITION XXXIV.

Every thing which is converted according to nature, makes its
conversion to that, from which also it had the progression of its
proper hypostasis.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is converted according to nature, it will have an essential
desire of that to which it is converted. But if this be the case, the
whole being of it is suspended from that to which it makes an essential
conversion, and it is essentially similar to it. Hence also it has a
natural sympathy with, as being allied to the essence of it. If this,
however, be the case, either the being of both is the same, or the
one is derived from the other, or both are allotted similitude from a
certain other one. But if the being of both is the same, how is the one
naturally converted to the other? And if both are from a certain one,
it will be according to nature for both to be converted to that one. It
remains, therefore, that the one must derive its being from the other.
But if this be the case, the progression will be from that to which the
conversion is according to nature.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things, therefore, it is evident that intellect is the
object of desire to all things, that all things proceed from intellect,
and that the whole world though it is perpetual possesses its essence
from intellect. For it is not prevented from proceeding from intellect
because it is perpetual. For neither because it is always arranged is
it not converted to intellect, but it always proceeds, is essentially
perpetual, and is always converted, and indissoluble according to order.


                           PROPOSITION XXXV.

Every thing caused, abides in, proceeds from, and returns, or is
converted to, its cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it alone abided, it would in no respect differ from its cause,
being without separation and distinction from it. For progression
is accompanied with separation. But if it alone proceeded, it would
be unconjoined and deprived of sympathy with its cause, having no
communication with it whatever. And if it were alone converted, how can
that which has not its essence from the cause, be essentially converted
to that which is foreign to its nature? But if it should abide and
proceed, but should not be converted, how will there be a natural
desire to every thing of well-being, and of good, and an excitation to
its generating cause? And if it should proceed and be converted, but
should not abide, how being separated from its cause will it hasten to
be conjoined with it? For it was unconjoined prior to its departure;
since if it had been conjoined, it would entirely have abided in it.
But if it should abide and be converted, but should not proceed, how
can that which is not[227] separated be able to revert to its cause?
For every thing which is converted resembles that which is resolved
into the nature from which it is essentially divided. It is necessary
however, either that it should abide alone, or be converted alone, or
alone proceed, or that the extremes should be bound to each other, or
that the medium should be conjoined with each of the extremes, or that
all should be conjoined. Hence it remains that every thing must abide
in its cause, proceed from, and be converted to it.


                          PROPOSITION XXXVI.

Of all things which are multiplied according to progression, the first
are more perfect than the second, the second than those posterior to
them, and after the same manner successively.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if progressions separate productions from their causes, and there
are diminutions of things secondary with respect to such as are first,
it follows that first natures in proceeding, are more conjoined
with their causes, being [as it were,] germinations from them. But
second natures are more remote from their causes, and in a similar
manner such as are successive. Things however, which are nearer and
more allied to their causes, are more perfect. For causes are more
perfect than things caused. But things which are more remote are more
imperfect, being dissimilar to their causes.


                          PROPOSITION XXXVII.

Of all things which subsist according to conversion, the first are more
imperfect than the second, and the second than those that follow; but
the last are the most perfect.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if conversions are effected in a circle, and conversion is directed
to that from which progression is derived, but progression is from
that which is most perfect, hence conversion is directed to the most
perfect. And if conversion first begins from that in which progression
terminates, but progression terminates in that which is most imperfect,
conversion will begin from the most imperfect. Hence in things which
subsist according to conversion, such as are most imperfect are the
first, but such as are most perfect, the last.


                         PROPOSITION XXXVIII.

Every thing which proceeds from certain numerous causes, is converted
through as many causes as those are through which it proceeds, and
all conversion is through the same things as those through which
progression is effected.

       *       *       *       *       *

For since each of these takes place through similitude, that indeed
which has a transition immediately from a certain thing, is also
immediately converted to it. For the similitude here is without a
medium. But that which requires a medium in proceeding, requires also
a medium according to conversion. For it is necessary that each should
be effected with reference to the same thing. Hence the conversion will
be first to the medium, and afterwards to that which is better than
the medium. Through such things therefore as being is derived to each
thing, through so many well-being also is derived, and vice versa.


                          PROPOSITION XXXIX.

Every being is either alone essentially converted, or vitally, or also
gnostically.

       *       *       *       *       *

For either it alone possesses being from its cause, or life together
with being, or it likewise receives from thence a gnostic power. So far
therefore as it alone _is_, it makes an essential conversion, but
so far as it lives, a vital, and so far as it likewise knows, a gnostic
conversion. For in such a way as it proceeded from its cause, such also
is the mode of its conversion to it, and the measures of its conversion
are defined by the measures according to progression. Desire therefore
is to some things according to being alone, this desire being an
aptitude to the participation of causes; but to others it is according
to life, being a motion to more excellent natures; and to others, it is
according to knowledge, being a co-sensation of the goodness of causes.


                            PROPOSITION XL.

Of all things which proceed from another cause, those which exist from
themselves, and which are allotted a self-subsistent essence, are the
leaders.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every thing which is sufficient to itself, either according to
essence, or according to energy, is more excellent than that which is
suspended from another cause; but that which produces itself, since it
produces the being of itself, is sufficient to itself with respect to
essence; but that which is alone produced by another is not sufficient
to itself; and the self-sufficient is more allied to _the good_; but
things more allied and similar to their causes, subsist from cause
prior to such as are dissimilar;--this being the case, things which
are produced by themselves, and are self-subsistent, are more ancient
than those which proceed into existence from another cause alone. For
either there will be nothing self-subsistent, or _the good_ is a thing
of this kind, or the first things that subsist from _the good_. But
if there is nothing self-subsistent, there will not in reality be in
any thing self-sufficiency. Nor will it be in _the good_, since that
being _the one_ is better than self-sufficiency. It is also _the good
itself_, and not that which possesses _the good_. But if _the good_ was
self-subsistent, in consequence of itself producing itself, it will
not be _the one_. For that which proceeds from _the one_ is not _the
one_. And it would proceed from itself, if it was self-subsistent; so
that _the one_, would at the same time be one and not one. Hence, it is
necessary that the self-subsistent should be posterior to the first.
And it is evident that it will be prior to things which alone proceed
from another cause. For it has a more principal subsistence than these,
and is more allied to _the good_, as has been demonstrated.


                           PROPOSITION XLI.

Every thing which is in another is alone produced by another; but every
thing which is in itself is self-subsistent.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that which is in another thing and is indigent of a subject, can
never be generative of itself. For that which is naturally adapted to
generate itself, does not require another seat, because it is contained
by itself, and is preserved in itself apart from a subject. But that
which abides, and is able to be established in itself, is productive
of itself, itself proceeding into itself, and being connective of
itself. And thus it is in itself, as the thing caused in its cause.
For it is not in itself, as in place, or as in a subject. For place is
different from that which is in place, and that which is in a subject
is different from the subject. But this which is in itself is the same
with that in which it is inherent; for it is self-subsistent. And it
is in such a manner in itself, as that which is from a cause is in the
cause.


                           PROPOSITION XLII.

Every thing self-subsistent is convertive to itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it proceeds from itself, it will also make a conversion to
itself. For to that from which progression is derived, to that a
conversion co-ordinate to the progression is directed. For if it alone
proceeded from itself, but having proceeded was not converted to
itself, it would never aspire after its proper good, and that which
it is able to impart to itself. Every cause however is able to impart
to that which proceeds from it,[228] together with the essence which
it gives, well-being conjoined with this essence. Hence that which
is self-subsistent will impart this to itself. This therefore is the
proper good to that which is self-subsistent. And hence this will not
be the object of desire to that which is not[229] converted to itself.
But not desiring this, it will not obtain it, and not obtaining it,
it will be imperfect, and not sufficient to itself. If, however,
self-sufficiency and perfection pertain to any thing, they must pertain
to that which is self-subsistent. Hence it will obtain its proper good,
and will be converted to itself.


                          PROPOSITION XLIII.

Every thing which is convertive to itself is self-subsistent.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is converted to itself according to nature, it is perfect in
the conversion to itself, and will possess essence from itself. For to
every thing, essential progression is from that to which conversion
according to nature is directed. If therefore, it imparts well-being to
itself, it will likewise undoubtedly impart being to itself, and will
be the lord of its own hypostasis. Hence, that which is able to revert
to itself is self-subsistent.


                           PROPOSITION XLIV.

Every thing which is convertive to itself according to energy, is also
converted to itself essentially.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is capable of being converted to itself in energy, but is
without conversion in its essence, it will be more excellent according
to energy than according to essence, the former being convertive,
but the latter without conversion. For that which depends on itself,
is better than that which alone depends on another. And that which
has a power of preserving itself, is more perfect than that which is
alone preserved by another. If therefore, it is convertive to itself
according to the energy proceeding from essence,[230] it will also
be allotted a convertive essence, so that it will not alone energize
towards itself, but will depend on itself, and will be contained,
connected, and perfected by itself.


                           PROPOSITION XLV.

Every thing self-subsistent is unbegotten.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is generated, because generated indeed, it will be imperfect
of itself, and will be indigent of perfection from another. Because,
however, it produces itself, it is perfect and sufficient to itself.
For every thing generated is perfected by another which imparts
generation to it not yet[231] existing. For generation is a path from
the imperfect to its contrary the perfect. But if any thing produces
itself, it is always perfect, being always present with the essence
of itself, or rather being inherent in that which is perfective of
essence.


                           PROPOSITION XLVI.

Every thing self-subsistent is incorruptible.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it should be corrupted, it would desert itself, and would be
without itself. This however is impossible. For being one thing, it is
at the same time cause and the thing caused. But every thing which is
corrupted, departing from the cause of itself is corrupted. For so far
as it adheres to that which contains, connects and preserves it, it is
connected and preserved. But that which is self-subsistent never leaves
its cause, because it does not desert itself; for it is the cause of
itself. Every thing therefore self-subsistent is incorruptible.


                          PROPOSITION XLVII.

Every thing self-subsistent, is impartible and simple.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is partible, being self-subsistent, it will constitute itself
partible,[232] and the whole will be converted to itself, and all
will be in all itself. This however is impossible. Hence that which
is self-subsistent is impartible. But it is also simple. For if a
composite, one thing in it will be less, but another more excellent,
and the more will be derived from the less excellent, and the less
from the more excellent, if the whole proceeds from itself. Farther
still, it would not be sufficient to itself, being indigent of the
elements of itself of which it consists. Every thing therefore, which
is self-subsistent, is simple.


                          PROPOSITION XLVIII.

 _Concerning the perpetual, in order to demonstrate that the world is
                              perpetual._

Every thing which is not perpetual, is either a composite, or subsists
in another.

       *       *       *       *       *

For either it is dissoluble into those things of which it consists, and
is entirely composed from the things into which it is dissolved, or
it is indigent of a subject, and leaving the subject it departs into
non-entity. But if it is simple in itself, it will be indissoluble, and
incapable of being dissipated.


                           PROPOSITION XLIX.

Every thing self-subsistent is perpetual.

       *       *       *       *       *

For there are two modes according to which it is necessary a thing
should not be perpetual; the one arising from composition, and the
other from a subsistence in something else [as in a subject]. That
which is self-subsistent however, is neither a composite, but simple,
nor in another, but in itself. Hence it is perpetual.


                            PROPOSITION L.

Every thing which is measured by time, either according to essence, or
according to energy, is generation, so far as it is measured by time.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is measured by time, it will be adapted to it to be, or to
energize in time; and the _was_ and the _will be_, which differ from
each other, pertain to it. For if the _was_ and the _will be_ were the
same according to number, it would suffer nothing by time proceeding,
and always having one part prior, and another posterior. If therefore
the _was_ and the _will be_ are different, that which is measured by
time is becoming to be [or rising into existence], and never _is_,[233]
but proceeds together with time, by which it is measured, existing in
a tendency to being.

It likewise does not stop in the same state of being, but is always
receiving another and another _to be_, just as _the now_ in time is
always another and another, through the progression of time. Hence
it is not a simultaneous whole; for it subsists in a dispersion of
temporal extension, and is co-extended with time. This however is
to possess being in non-being. For that which is becoming to be is
not that which is become. Such a kind of being therefore as this is
generation.


                            PROPOSITION LI.

Every thing self-subsistent, is essentially exempt from the natures
which are measured by time.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if that which is self-subsistent is unbegotten, it will not
according to existence be measured by time. For generation is
conversant with the nature which is measured by time. Hence nothing
self-subsistent has its being in time.


                           PROPOSITION LII.

Every thing eternal is a whole which subsists at once. And whether
it has its essence alone eternal, it will possess the whole at once
present, nor will it have _this_ thing pertaining to itself now
subsisting, but _that_ afterwards which as yet is not; but as
much as is possible it now possesses the whole without diminution,
and without extension. Or whether it has its energy as well as its
essence at once present, it possesses this also collectively, abiding
in the same measure of perfection, and as it were, fixed immoveably and
without transition according to one and the same boundary.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if the eternal, as the name denotes, is perpetual being, but to be
sometimes,[234] and to subsist in becoming to be, are different from
perpetual being, it is not proper that it should have one thing prior
and another posterior. For if it had, it would be generation, and not
being. But where there is neither prior nor posterior, nor was and
will be, but alone _to be_, and this a whole, there every thing
subsists at once that which it is. The same thing also takes place with
respect to the energy of that which is eternal.


                              COROLLARY.

From this it is evident that eternity is the cause to wholes of
their existence as wholes, since every thing which is eternal either
according to essence, or according to energy, has the whole of its
essence or energy present with itself.


                           PROPOSITION LIII.

              _Concerning Eternity and Eternal Natures._

Eternity subsists prior to all eternal natures, and time exists prior
to every thing which subsists according to time.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every where the natures which are participated are prior to
their participants, and imparticipables are prior to participated
natures, it is evident that the eternal is one thing, the eternity
which is in the eternal, another, and eternity itself, another. And
the first of these indeed subsists as a participant, the second as a
thing participated, and the third as an imparticipable. That also which
is in time is one thing; for it is a participant. The time which is
in this is another thing; for it is participated. And the time prior
to this is another thing; for it is imparticipable. Every where also,
that which is imparticipable is in all things the same. But that which
is participated is in those things only by which it is participated.
For there are many eternal, and many temporal natures in all of which
eternity subsists according to participation. The time also which is
in temporal natures subsists in a distributed manner; but the time
which they participate is indivisible. And there is one time prior to
both these. Eternity itself likewise is an eternity of eternities, and
time itself is a time of times; and they give subsistence, the one to
participated eternity, but the other to participated time.


                           PROPOSITION LIV.

Every eternity is the measure of eternal natures, and every time is the
measure of things in time; and these are the only two measures of life
and motion in beings.

       *       *       *       *       *

For every thing which measures, either measures according to a part,
or it measures the whole at once when it is adapted to that which is
measured. That which measures, therefore, according to the whole is
eternity; but that which measures according to parts is time. Hence,
there are only two measures, the one of things eternal, but the other
of things in time.


                            PROPOSITION LV.

Every thing which subsists according to time, either subsists through
the whole of time, or has its hypostasis once in a part of time.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if all progressions are through similitude, and things more
similar to first natures subsist in union with them prior to such
as are dissimilar, but it is impossible for things which are
generated in a part of time to be conjoined with eternal natures,
(for as being generated they differ from first natures which are
self-subsistent,[235] and as existing once, they are separated from
things which always exist, but the media between these, are such things
as are partly similar and partly dissimilar to them)--this being the
case, the medium between things which are once generated, and those
that exist always, is either that which is always becoming to be, or
that which is once, or that which is not truly being. It is however
impossible it should be that which once only truly is. And that which
is once not truly being is the same with that which is becoming to be.
Hence the medium is not that which is once only. It remains, therefore,
that the medium between both is that which is always becoming to be,
being conjoined indeed with the worse of the two through becoming to
be, but through subsisting always, imitating an eternal nature.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things it is evident that perpetuity is twofold, the one
indeed being eternal, but the other subsisting according to time.
The one also being a stable, but the other a flowing perpetuity. And
the one indeed having its being collected, and the whole subsisting
at once, but the other diffused, and expanded according to temporal
extension. And the one being a whole of itself, but the other
consisting of parts, each of which is separate, according to prior and
posterior.


                           PROPOSITION LVI.

Every thing which is produced by secondary natures, is produced in a
greater degree by prior and more causal natures, by whom such as are
secondary were also produced.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if that which is secondary has the whole of its essence from that
which is prior to it, its power of producing is also derived from
thence; for powers in producing causes are essentially productive,
and give completion to the essence of them. But if it is allotted the
power of producing from a superior cause, it will possess from that
its existence as the cause of things of which it is the cause, and
its power of giving subsistence to other things will be measured from
thence. If, however, this be the case, the things proceeding from it
are effects through that which is prior to it. For the one perfects a
cause, and the other the thing caused. But if this be the case, the
thing caused is from thence rendered such as it is.

Moreover, that it is also in a greater degree perfected from thence
is evident. For if that which is first gives to that which is second
the cause of producing, it will primarily possess this cause; and on
this account that which is secondary generates, receiving from thence
a secondary generative power. If, however, the one becomes productive
through participation, but the other in a way superior to participation
and primarily, that will be in a greater degree a cause, which imparts
generative power to another thing proximate to its own nature.


                           PROPOSITION LVII.

Every cause both energizes prior to the thing caused, and gives
subsistence to a greater number of effects posterior to it.

       *       *       *       *       *

For so far as it is cause, it is more perfect and more powerful than
that which is posterior to it, and in consequence of this is the cause
of a greater number of effects. For it is the province of a greater
power to produce more, of an equal power to produce equal, and of a
less power to produce a less number of effects. And the power which
is able to effect greater things among similars, is also capable of
effecting such as are less. But that which is able to effect such as
are less, is not necessarily capable of producing such as are greater.
If, therefore, the cause is more powerful, it is productive of more
numerous effects.

Moreover, such effects as the thing caused is able to produce, the
cause is in a greater degree able to produce. For every thing which is
produced by secondary natures, is in a greater degree produced by such
as are prior and more causal. The cause, therefore, gives subsistence
together with the thing caused to such effects as the thing caused is
naturally adapted to produce. But if likewise it produces prior to
it, it is indeed evident that it energizes prior to the thing caused,
according to the energy which is productive of it. Every cause,
therefore, energizes prior to the thing caused, and together with it,
and posterior to it, gives subsistence to other things.


                              COROLLARY.

Hence, it is evident, that of such things as soul is the cause,
intellect also is the cause; but that soul is not also the cause
of such things as intellect is the cause. But intellect energizes
prior to soul. And such things as soul imparts to secondary natures,
intellect also imparts in a greater degree. Likewise, when soul no
longer energizes, intellect imparts by illumination the gifts of
itself to those things to which soul does not impart herself. For that
which is inanimate, so far as it participates of form, participates of
intellect, and the production of intellect. Moreover, of such things as
intellect is the cause, _the good_ also is the cause; but not vice
versa. For the privations of forms subsist from _the good_; since
all things are from thence. But intellect being form, does not give
subsistence to privation.


                          PROPOSITION LVIII.

Every thing which is produced by many, is more compounded than that
which is produced by fewer causes.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every cause imparts something to that which proceeds from
it, more numerous causes will impart a greater number of gifts, but
less numerous causes a less number. Hence, of participants some will
consist of a greater number of things, but others, of a less number,
of which each participates, some indeed through a progression from a
greater number of causes, but others from a less. Those, however, which
proceed from a greater number of causes are more compounded, but those
from a less number of the same causes, are more simple. Every thing,
therefore, which is produced by a greater number of causes, is more
compounded, but that which is produced by a less number is more simple.
For the more compounded participates of those things of which the more
simple participates, but the contrary to this is not true.


                           PROPOSITION LIX.

Every thing which is essentially simple, is either better or worse than
composite natures.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if such beings as are the extremes of things are produced by fewer
and more simple causes, but such as are in the middle, from a greater
number of causes, the latter indeed will be composites, but of the
former, some are more simple according to that which is better, but
others according to that which is worse. That the extremes, however,
are produced by fewer causes is evident, because such natures as are
higher begin to produce prior to such as are subordinate, and extend
beyond them, to things to which subordinate natures do not proceed
through a diminution of power. For on this account also, the last of
things, [i.e. matter] is most simple, as well as the first of things,
because it proceeds from the first alone. With respect to simplicity,
however, one kind subsists according to that which is better than all
composition, but another according to that which is worse. And there is
the same reasoning in all things.


                            PROPOSITION LX.

Every thing which is the cause of a greater number of effects, is
better than that which is allotted a power of producing a less number,
and which produces the parts of those things to the wholes of which the
other gives subsistence.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if the one is the cause of a less, but the other of a greater
number of effects, but the former are parts of the latter, that which
gives subsistence to a greater number of effects, will produce all that
the other produces; but not vice versa. Hence the former of these two
is more powerful and more comprehensive. For as that which proceeds is
to that which proceeds, so is one productive power to another, when
assumed with reference to each other. For that which is able to effect
a greater number of things, possesses a greater and more total power.
But this is nearer to the cause of all things. That however, which is
nearer to this cause, is in a greater degree good, just as the cause
of all is _the good_ itself. Hence, that which is the cause of
a greater number of effects, is essentially more excellent than that
which produces a less number.


                           PROPOSITION LXI.

Every power which is impartible is greater, but when divided is less.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is divided it proceeds into multitude. And if this be the
case, it becomes more remote from _the one_. But in consequence of
this it is able to effect a less number of things, through departing
from _the one_, and the unity which contains it, and will be
imperfect, since the good of every thing consists in union.


                           PROPOSITION LXII.

Every multitude which is nearer to _the one_, is less in quantity
than things more remote from it, but is greater in power.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that which is nearer to is more similar to _the one_. But _the
one_ gives subsistence to all things, without having any multitude in
itself. Hence that which is more similar to it, being the cause of a
greater number of effects, since _the one_ is the cause of all things,
has more the form of unity, and is more impartible, because that is
_one_. As therefore, that which is less multiplied, is more allied to
_the one_, so likewise as being allied to the cause of all things, it
is productive of a greater number of effects. Hence it is more powerful.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things it is evident, that there are more corporeal natures
than souls; more souls than intellectual natures; and more intellects
than divine unities. And there is the same reasoning in all things.


                          PROPOSITION LXIII.

Every thing which is imparticipable gives subsistence to two-fold
orders of participated natures, one indeed in things which sometimes
participate, but the other in things which always and connascently
participate.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that which is always participated, is more similar to the
imparticipable than that which is sometimes participated. Hence,
before the imparticipable establishes that which is sometimes, it
will establish that which is always participable; and which by being
participated differs from that which is posterior to it, but by _the
always_ is more allied and more similar to the imparticipable. Nor
are there alone things which are sometimes participated; for prior to
these are the natures which are always participated, through which
these also are bound to imparticipables according to a certain well
ordered progression. Nor are there alone things which are sometimes
participated. For these possessing an inextinguishable power, since
they are always, are prolific of other things which are sometimes
participated, and as far as to these the diminution proceeds.


                              COROLLARY.

From hence it is evident that of the unions proceeding from _the
one_, and which illuminate beings, some are always, but others
sometimes participated. Intellectual participations, likewise, are in
a similar manner two-fold, as also are the animations of souls, and
the participations of other forms. For beauty, similitude, permanency,
and sameness, being imparticipable, are participated by natures which
always participate, and secondarily by those that sometimes participate
according to the same order.


                           PROPOSITION LXIV.

Every monad which ranks as a principle, gives subsistence to a two-fold
number; one indeed of self-perfect hypostases, but the other of
illuminations which possess their hypostasis in other things.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if progression is according to diminution, through things
appropriate to producing causes, perfect natures will proceed from the
all-perfect, and through these as media, imperfect natures will proceed
in a well-ordered progression, so that some indeed will be self-perfect
hypostases, but others will be imperfect. And these latter will become
the forms of participants. For being imperfect, they will be indigent
of subjects in their very nature. But the self-perfect hypostases will
produce things which participate of themselves. For being perfect,
they will indeed fill these from themselves, and establish them in
themselves. But they will require nothing of inferior natures to their
own subsistence. Self-perfect hypostases, therefore, through their
separation into multitude, are indeed diminished with respect to their
principal monad; but through their self-perfect hyparxis, they are
in a certain respect assimilated to it. But imperfect hypostases, in
consequence of subsisting in other things, are remote from that which
subsists from itself, and through their imperfection are separated from
that which perfects all things. Progressions, however, are through
similars, as far as to natures which are entirely dissimilar. Every
monad, therefore, which ranks as a principle, gives subsistence to a
two-fold number.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things it is evident, that of the unities, some are
self-perfect proceeding from _the one_, but others are illuminations
of unions. And with respect to intellects, that some of them are
self-perfect essences, but others belong to animated natures, being
only the images of souls. And thus, neither is every union a God, but
this is true of a self-perfect unity alone, nor is every intellectual
peculiarity an intellect, but an essential peculiarity alone [is
entitled to this appellation], nor is every illumination of soul a
soul, but there are also images of souls.


                           PROPOSITION LXV.

Every thing which has any subsistence whatever, either subsists
according to cause, so as to have the form of a principle, or according
to hyparxis, or according to participation, after the manner of an
image.

       *       *       *       *       *

For either that which is produced is seen in that which produces, as
pre-existing in cause, because every cause antecedently comprehends in
itself the thing caused, being that primarily which the thing caused is
secondarily. Or that which produces is seen in that which is produced.
For the latter participating of the former, exhibits in itself
secondarily that which the producing cause is primarily. Or each thing
is beheld in its own order, and is neither seen in the cause nor in the
effect. For the cause subsists more excellently than that which exists
[out of the cause]. But that which is in the effect is less excellent
than that which exists out of the cause [but is not in any thing else].
It is, however, necessary there should be that which after this manner
_is_. But every thing subsists according to hyparxis in its own
order.


                           PROPOSITION LXVI.

All beings with reference to each other, are either wholes, or parts,
or the same, or different.

       *       *       *       *       *

For either some of then comprehend, but the rest are comprehended, or
they neither comprehend, nor are comprehended. And they either suffer
something which is the same, as participating of one thing, or they are
separated from each other. But if they comprehend, they will be wholes,
and if they are comprehended, parts. If also many things participate
of one thing, they are the same according to this one. But if they are
alone many things, so far as they are many they will be different from
each other.


                          PROPOSITION LXVII.

Every wholeness (ολοτης) is either prior to parts, or consists of
parts, or is in a part.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the form of each thing is either surveyed in its cause, and we
call that which subsists in its cause a whole prior to parts. Or it
is seen in the parts which participate of it; and this in a two-fold
respect. For it is either seen in all the parts together, and this is
a whole consisting of parts, any part of which being absent diminishes
the whole. Or it is seen in each of the parts, so that the part also
becomes according to participation a whole; which makes the part to
be a whole partially. The whole, therefore, which is according to
hyparxis consists of parts. But the whole which is prior to parts is
according to cause. And the whole which is in a part is according to
participation. For this also according to an ultimate diminution is a
whole, so far as it imitates the whole which consists of parts, when
it is not any casual part, but is capable of being assimilated to the
whole, of which the parts also are wholes.


                          PROPOSITION LXVIII.

Every whole which is in a part, is a part of that whole which consists
of parts.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is a part, it is a part of a certain whole. And it is either
a part of the whole which it contains, according to which it is said
to be a whole in a part. But thus it will be a part of itself, the
part will be equal to the whole, and each will be the same. Or it is a
part of a certain other whole. And if of some other, it is either the
only part of that, and thus again, it will in no respect differ from
the whole, being one part of one thing. Or it is a part in conjunction
with another part. For of every whole the parts are more than one, and
that will be a whole from many parts, of which it consists. And thus
the whole which is in a part, is a part of the whole which consists of
parts.


                           PROPOSITION LXIX.

Every whole which consists of parts, participates of the wholeness
which is prior to parts.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it consists of parts, the whole is passive [i.e. the whole
participates of another whole]. For the parts becoming one, are passive
to a whole on account of their union, and the whole subsists in parts
which are not wholes. But the imparticipable subsists prior to every
thing which is participated. The imparticipable wholeness, therefore,
subsists prior to that which is participated. Hence, there is a certain
form of wholeness, prior to the whole which consists of parts, which
is not passive to a whole, but is wholeness itself, and from which the
wholeness consisting of parts is derived. For the whole indeed, which
consists of parts, subsists in many places, and in many things, in
various ways. It is, however, necessary that there should be a monad
essentially of all totalities. For neither is each of these wholes
genuine, since it is indigent of parts that are not wholes, of which
it consists. Nor is the whole which is in a certain thing capable of
being the cause of wholeness to all other things. Hence, that which is
the cause to all wholes of their being wholes, is prior to parts. For
if this also consisted of parts, it would be a certain whole, and not
simply whole. And again, this would be from another whole, and so on,
to infinity; or it will subsist on account of that which is primarily a
whole, and which is not a whole from parts, but is a wholeness.


                           PROPOSITION LXX.

Every thing which is more total among principal causes, illuminates
participants, prior to partial natures, and when these fail, still
continues to impart its illuminations.

       *       *       *       *       *

For it begins its energy upon secondary natures prior to that which is
posterior to it, and is present in conjunction with the presence of it.
When likewise that which is posterior to it no longer energizes, it is
still present, and that which is more causal continues to energize.
And this not only in different subjects, but likewise in each of the
natures that sometimes participate. Thus it is necessary, for instance,
that being should be first generated, afterwards animal, and afterwards
man. And man, indeed, is not, if the rational power is absent, but
there is still animal, breathing and sentient. And again, life failing,
being remains. For though a thing does not live, yet it has existence.
And there is a similar reasoning in all things.

The cause, however, of this is, that the more causal nature being more
efficacious, energizes on the thing caused[236] prior [to that which
is less causal]. For the thing caused participates first of that which
is more powerful. And that which is secondary again energizing, that
which is more powerful energizes with it. Because every thing which
the secondary nature produces, that which is more causal produces
likewise in conjunction with it. When the former also fails, the
latter is still present. For the communication of the more powerful
cause, operating in a greater degree, leaves that which participates
it, posterior to the energy of the less powerful cause. For through
the communication of the secondary nature, it corroborates its own
illumination.


                           PROPOSITION LXXI.

All things which among principal causes possess a more total and higher
order in their effects, according to the illuminations proceeding
from them, become in a certain respect subjects to the communications
of more partial causes. And the illuminations indeed, from higher
causes, receive the progressions from secondary causes; but the latter
are established in the former. And thus some participations precede
others, and some representations extend after others, beginning from
on high, to the same subject, more total causes having a prior energy,
but such as are more partial, supplying their participants with their
communications, posterior to the energies of more total causes.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if more causal natures energize prior to such as are secondary on
account of exuberance of power, and are present with those that have
a more imperfect aptitude, and illuminate them also; but things more
subordinate, and which are second in order, are supplied from such as
are more causal,--it is evident that the illuminations of superior
natures antecedently comprehend that which participates of both these,
and give stability to the communications of things subordinate. But
these illuminations of superior causes, employ the resemblances
of subordinate natures as foundations, and operate on that which
participates of them, the superior causes themselves having a prior
energy.


                          PROPOSITION LXXII.

All things which in their participants have the relation of a subject,
proceed from more perfect and total causes.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the causes of a greater number of effects, are more powerful and
total, and are nearer to _the one_ than the causes of fewer
effects. But the natures which give subsistence to such things as are
antecedently the subjects of others, are among causes the sources of a
greater number of effects.


                              COROLLARY.

From hence it is evident why matter which derives its subsistence from
_the one_, is of itself destitute of form. And why body, though it
participates of being, is of itself without the participation of soul.
For matter being the subject of all things proceeds from the cause of
all. But body being the subject of animation, derives its subsistence
from that which is more total than soul, and participates after a
certain manner of being.


                          PROPOSITION LXXIII.

Every whole is at the same time a certain being, and participates of
being, but not every being is a whole.[237]

       *       *       *       *       *

For either being and whole are the same, or the one is prior, but
the other posterior. If, however, a part, so far as it is a part, is
being (for a whole is from parts which have a being), yet it is not
of itself also a whole. Being, therefore, and whole are not the same.
For if this were the case, a part would be a non-entity. But if a part
was a non-entity, the whole would have no existence. For every whole
is a whole of parts, either as existing prior to them [and therefore
causally containing them in itself], or as subsisting in them. But the
part not existing, neither is it possible for the whole to exist. If,
however, whole is prior to being, every being will immediately be a
whole. Again, therefore, there will not be a part. This, however, is
impossible. For if the whole is a whole, being the whole of a part,
the part also being a part, will be the part of the whole. It remains,
therefore, that every whole indeed is being, but that not every being
is a whole.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things, it is evident that being which has a primary
subsistence is beyond wholeness. For the one indeed, viz. being, is
present with a greater number of things; since _to be_ is present
with parts, so far as they _are_ parts. But the other, viz.
wholeness, is present with a less number of things. For that which
is the cause of a greater number of effects is more excellent; but
the cause of a less number is of a subordinate nature, as has been
demonstrated.


                          PROPOSITION LXXIV.

Every form is a certain whole; for it consists of many things, each of
which gives completion to the form. But not every whole is a form.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a particular[238] thing is a whole and also an individual, so
far it is an individual, but neither of them is a form. For every
whole consists of parts; but form is that which may be divided into
individual forms. Whole, therefore, is one thing, and form another. And
the one is present with many things, but the other with a few. Hence,
whole is above the forms of beings.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things it is evident that whole has a middle order between
being and forms. And hence it follows that being subsists prior to
forms, and that forms are beings, but that not every being is form.
Whence also, in effects, privations are in a certain respect beings,
but are no longer forms, and in consequence of the unical power
of being, they also receive a certain obscure representation of
being.[239]


                           PROPOSITION LXXV.

Every cause which is properly so called, is exempt from its effect.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is in the effect, it either gives completion to it, or is in
a certain respect indigent of it in order to its existence, and thus it
will be more imperfect than the thing caused. For being in the effect,
it is rather a concause than a cause, and is either a part of that
which is generated, or an instrument of the maker. For that which is
a part in the thing generated, is more imperfect than the whole. The
cause also which is in the effect, is an instrument of generation to
the maker, being unable to define of itself the measures of production.
Every cause, therefore, which is properly so denominated, if it is more
perfect than that which proceeds from it, imparts to its effect the
measure of generation, and is exempt from instruments and elements, and
in short, from every thing which is called a concause.


                          PROPOSITION LXXVI.

Every thing which is generated from an immoveable cause, has a
immutable hyparxis. But every thing which is generated from a moveable
cause, has a mutable hyparxis.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if that which makes is entirely immoveable, it does not produce
from itself that which is secondary through motion, but by its very
being. If, however, this be the case, it has that which proceeds from
it concurrent with its own essence. And if this also be the case, it
will produce as long as it exists. But it exists always, and therefore
it always gives subsistence to that which is posterior to itself.
Hence, this is always generated from thence, and always is, conjoining
with _the ever_ according to energy of the cause, its own ever
according to progression. If, however, the cause is moved, that also
which is generated from it will be essentially mutable. For that which
has its being through motion, changes its being when its moveable
cause[240] is changed. For if, though produced from motion, it should
itself remain immutable, it would be better than its producing cause.
This, however, is impossible. It will not, therefore, be immutable.
Hence, it will be mutable, and will be essentially moved, imitating the
motion of that which gave it subsistence.


                          PROPOSITION LXXVII.

Every thing which is in capacity proceeds from that which is in energy.
And that which is in capacity, proceeds into energy. That also which
is in a certain respect in capacity, so far as it is in capacity, is
the offspring of that which is in a certain respect in energy. But that
which is all things in capacity, proceeds from that which is all things
in energy.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that which is in capacity is not naturally adapted to produce
itself into energy, because it is imperfect. For if being imperfect
it should become the cause to itself of perfection, and this in
energy, the cause will be more imperfect than that which is produced
by it. Hence, that which is in capacity, so far as it is in capacity,
will not be the cause to itself of a subsistence in energy. For on
this hypothesis, so far as it is imperfect, it would be the cause of
perfection; since every thing which is in capacity, so far as it is in
capacity, is imperfect, but that which is in energy is perfect. Hence,
if that which was in capacity becomes in energy, it will have its
perfection from something else. And this will either be in capacity;
but thus again the imperfect will be generative of the perfect; or
it will be in energy, and either something else, or this which was
in capacity will be that which becomes in energy. But if something
else which is in energy produces, operating according to its own
peculiarity, it will not by being in capacity make that which is in
another to be in energy; nor will this which is now made be in energy,
unless it becomes this so far as it was in capacity. It remains,
therefore, that from that which is in energy, that which is in capacity
must be changed into energy.


                         PROPOSITION LXXVIII.

Every power is either perfect or imperfect.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the power which is prolific of energy is perfect. For it makes
other things to be perfect through its own energies. That, however,
which is perfective of other things is in a greater degree perfect, as
being more self-perfect. But the power which is indigent of another
that pre-exists in energy, according to which indigence it is something
in capacity, is imperfect. For it is indigent of the perfection which
is in another, in order that by participating of it, it may become
perfect. Hence, such a power as this is of itself imperfect. So that
the power of that which is in energy is perfect, being prolific of
energy. But the power of that which is in capacity is imperfect, and
obtains perfection from the power which is in energy.


                          PROPOSITION LXXIX.

Every thing which is generated, is generated from a two-fold power.[241]

       *       *       *       *       *

For it is requisite that the thing generated should possess aptitude
and an imperfect power. And that which makes being in energy[242] that
which the thing generated is in capacity, antecedently comprehends a
perfect power. For all energy proceeds from inherent power. For if that
which makes did not possess power, how could it energize, and produce
something else? And if that which is generated did not possess power
according to aptitude, how could it be generated? For that which makes
or acts, makes or acts in that which is able to suffer, but not in any
casual thing, and which is not naturally adapted to suffer from the
agent.


                           PROPOSITION LXXX.

Every body is naturally adapted of itself to suffer; but every thing
incorporeal to act. And the former indeed is essentially inefficacious,
but the latter is impassive. That which is incorporeal, however,
suffers through its communion with body; just as bodies are able to act
through the participation of incorporeals.

       *       *       *       *       *

For body, so far as body, is alone divisible, and through this becomes
passive, being entirely partible, and this to infinity. But that which
is incorporeal, being simple, is impassive. For neither is that which
is impartible, capable of being divided, nor can that be changed in
quality which is not compounded. Either, therefore, nothing will be
effective, or this must be affirmed of an incorporeal nature, since
body, so far as body, does not act, because it is alone liable to be
divided, and to suffer. For every thing which acts has an effective
power; so that body, so far as it is body, will not act, but so far as
it contains in itself a power of acting. Hence, when it acts, it acts
through the participation of power. Moreover, incorporeal natures when
they are inherent in bodies, participate of passions, being divided
together with bodies, and enjoying their partible nature, though
according to their own essence they are impartible.


                          PROPOSITION LXXXI.

Every thing which is participated in a separable manner, is present
with its participant by a certain inseparable power which it inserts in
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is itself present with the participant in a separate manner,
and is not in it, as if it possessed its subsistence in it, a certain
medium between the two is necessary, connecting the one with the other,
and which is more similar to that which is participated, and subsists
in the participant. For if this medium is separable, how can it be
participated by the participant, since the participant neither contains
the medium, nor any thing proceeding from it? A power, therefore,
and illumination proceeding from that which is separable into the
participant conjoins both. Hence, one of these will be that through
which the participation is effected, another will be that which is
participated, and another that which participates.


                          PROPOSITION LXXXII.

Every thing incorporeal, which is converted to itself, when it is
participated by other things, is participated in a separable manner.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if in an inseparable manner, the energy of it would not be separate
from its participant, as neither would its essence. If, however,
this were the case, it would not be converted to itself. For being
converted, it will be separate from its participant, each being
different from the other. If, therefore, it is able to be converted
to itself, it will be participated in a separable manner, when it is
participated by other things.


                         PROPOSITION LXXXIII.

Every thing which has a knowledge of itself, is entirely converted to
itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

For knowing itself, it is evident that it is converted to itself in
energy. For that which knows and that which is known are one. And the
knowledge of itself is directed to itself as to that which is known.
This knowledge also as pertaining to that which knows is a certain
energy; but it is the knowledge of itself directed to itself, because
it is gnostic of itself. Moreover, that it is converted to itself
essentially, if it is so in energy, has been demonstrated. For every
thing which by energizing is converted to itself, has also an essence
verging to, and subsisting in itself.


                          PROPOSITION LXXXIV.

Every thing which always is, possesses an infinite power.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if its hypostasis is never-failing, the power also according to
which it is that which it is, and is able to exist, is infinite. For
the power of existing being finite, it will some time or other fail.
But this failing, the existence also of that which possesses it will
fail, and it will no longer be that which always is. It is necessary,
therefore, that the power of that which always is, and which connects
and contains it essentially, should be infinite.


                          PROPOSITION LXXXV.

Every thing which is always becoming to be, or rising into existence,
(αει γινομενον) possesses an infinite power of becoming to be.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is always rising into existence, the power of generation in
it is never-failing. For if this power was finite, it would cease in
an infinite time. But the power of becoming to be ceasing, that which
is rising into being according to this power would cease, and thus it
would no longer be always becoming to be.[243] It is, however, supposed
to be always becoming to be. Hence, it possesses an infinite power of
rising into existence.


                          PROPOSITION LXXXVI.

Every thing which is truly being (οντως ον) is infinite, neither
according to multitude, nor according to magnitude, but according to
power alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

For every infinite, is either in discrete, or in continued quantity,
or in power. But that which always is, is infinite, as having an
inextinguishable life, a never-failing hyparxis, and an undiminished
energy. That which is eternally being, however, is neither infinite
on account of magnitude; for that which is truly being is without
magnitude, being self-subsistent; since every thing self-subsistent is
impartible and simple. Nor is it infinite on account of multitude; for
it has in the most eminent degree the form of _the one_, as being
arranged most near, and being most allied to it. But it is infinite
according to power. Hence, it is also impartible and infinite. And by
how much the more it is one and impartible, by so much the more is it
infinite. For the power which is divided, becomes imbecil and finite,
and powers which are entirely divided, are in every respect finite. For
ultimate powers, and which are most remote from _the one_, are in
a certain respect finite, on account of their distribution into parts.
But first powers, on account of their impartibility, are infinite.
For a separation into parts divulses and dissolves the power of every
thing. But impartibility compressing and contracting that which it
contains, renders it never-failing, and undiminished in itself.

Moreover, infinity, according to magnitude, and also according to
multitude, is entirely a privation and falling off from impartibility.
For that which is finite is most near to the impartible, but the
infinite is most remote from it, entirely departing from _the
one_. Hence, that which is infinite according to power, is not
infinite either according to multitude or magnitude, since infinite
power subsists in conjunction with impartibility. But the infinite
either in multitude or magnitude, is most remote from the impartible.
If, therefore, that which is truly being was infinite either in
magnitude or multitude, it would not possess infinite power. It does,
however, possess infinite power; and therefore is not infinite either
according to multitude, or according to magnitude.


                         PROPOSITION LXXXVII.

Every thing eternal indeed is being, but not every being is eternal.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the participation of being is present in a certain respect with
generated natures,[244] so far as each of these is not that which in
no respect is. But if that which is generated is not entirely deprived
of being, it is in a certain respect being. The eternal, however, is
in no respect whatever present with generated natures, and especially
not with such of these as do not even participate of the perpetuity
which subsists according to the whole of time. Moreover, every thing
eternal always is. For it participates of eternity, which imparts to
the natures by which it is participated to be always that which they
are. Being, therefore, is participated by a greater number of things
than eternity. And hence being is beyond eternity. For by those natures
by whom eternity is participated, being is also participated. But not
every thing which participates of being, participates also of eternity.


                         PROPOSITION LXXXVIII.

Every thing[245] which is truly being, is either prior to eternity, or
in eternity, or participates of eternity.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that there is true being prior to eternity has been demonstrated.
But true being is also in eternity. For eternity possesses the _always_
in conjunction with _being_. And that which participates of eternity,
has both the _always_ and _being_, according to participation.
Eternity, however, possesses the _always_ primarily, but _being_
according to participation. But being itself is primarily being.


                          PROPOSITION LXXXIX.

Every thing which is primarily being consists of bound and infinity.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it possesses infinite power, it is evident that it is
infinite, and on this account consists from the infinite. If also it
is impartible, and has the form of _the one_, through this, it
participates of bound. For that which participates of unity is bounded.
Moreover, it is impartible, and therefore possesses infinite power.
Hence every thing which is truly [or primarily] being consists of bound
and infinity.


                            PROPOSITION XC.

The first bound, and the first infinity subsist by themselves prior to
every thing which consists of bound and the infinite.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if beings which subsist by themselves, are prior to those which are
_certain_ beings, as being common to all essences, and principal
causes, and not the causes of certain, but in short of all beings, it
is necessary that the first bound, and the first infinity should be
prior to that[246] which consists of both these. For the bound in that
which is mixed [or the first being,] participates of infinity, and
the infinite participates of bound. But of every thing, that which is
the first, is nothing else than that which it is. It is not therefore
proper that the first infinite should have the form of bound, or that
the first bound should have the form of infinity. These therefore
subsist primarily prior to that which is mixed.


                           PROPOSITION XCI.

Every power is either finite or infinite. But every finite power
indeed derives its subsistence from infinite power. And infinite power
subsists from the first infinity.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the powers which have an existence at a certain time, are finite,
falling from the infinity of existing always. But the powers of eternal
beings are infinite, never deserting their own hyparxis.


                           PROPOSITION XCII.

Every multitude of infinite powers, is suspended from one first
infinity, which does not subsist as a participated power, nor in things
which are endued with power, but subsists by itself, not being the
power of a certain participant, but the cause of all beings.

       *       *       *       *       *

For though the first being possesses power, yet it is not power itself.
For it has also bound. But the first power is infinity. For infinite
powers are infinite, through the participation of infinity. Infinity
itself therefore, will be prior to all powers, through which being
also possesses infinite power, and all things participate of infinity.
For infinity is not the first of things [or the ineffable principle of
all] since that is the measure of all things, being _the good_ and _the
one_. Nor is infinity being. For this is infinite, but not infinity.
Hence infinity subsists between that which is first and being, and is
the cause of all infinite powers, and of all the infinity that is in
beings.


                          PROPOSITION XCIII.

Every infinite which is in [true] beings, is neither infinite to the
natures that are above beings, nor is it infinite to itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that by which each thing is infinite, by this also it exists
uncircumscribed. But every thing which is in [true] beings, is bounded
by itself, and by all the things prior to it. It remains therefore,
that the infinite which is in [true] beings, is infinite to subordinate
natures alone, above which it is so expanded in power, as to be
incomprehensible by all of them. For in whatever manner they may extend
themselves towards this infinite, yet it has something[247] entirely
exempt from them. And though all things enter into it, yet it has
something occult, and incomprehensible by secondary natures. Though
likewise it evolves the powers which it contains, yet it possesses
something on account of its union insurmountable, contracted, and
surpassing the evolution of beings. Since however, it contains and
bounds itself, it will not be infinite to itself, nor much less to the
natures situated above it, since it has a portion of the infinity which
is in them. For the powers of more total natures are more infinite, in
consequence of being more total, and having an arrangement nearer to
the first infinity.


                           PROPOSITION XCIV.

Every perpetuity is indeed a certain infinity, but not every infinity
is perpetuity.

       *       *       *       *       *

For there are many infinites which have the infinite not on account
of _the always_, such for instance, as the infinity according
to magnitude, the infinity according to multitude, and the infinity
of matter. And whatever else there may be of the like kind, which is
infinite, either because it cannot be passed over, or through the
indefiniteness of its essence. That perpetuity however is a certain
infinity[248] is evident. For that which never fails is infinite. But
this is that which always has its hypostasis inexhaustible. Infinity
therefore, is prior to perpetuity. For that which gives subsistence to
a greater number of effects, and is more total, is more causal. Hence,
the first infinity is beyond eternity, and infinity itself is prior to
eternity.


                           PROPOSITION XCV.

Every power which is more single, is more infinite than that which is
multiplied.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if of powers the first infinity is nearest to _the one_,
that power which is more allied to _the one_, is in a greater
degree infinite than that which recedes from it. For being multiplied
it loses the form of _the one_, in which while it remained, it
possessed a transcendency with respect to other powers, being connected
and contained through its impartibility. For in partible natures
themselves, the powers when congregated, are united,[249] but when
divided, they are increased in number, and become obscured.


                           PROPOSITION XCVI.

The power which is infinite of every finite body, is incorporeal.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it were corporeal, if this body indeed is finite,[250] the
infinite will be contained in the finite. But if the body is infinite,
it will not be power so far as it is body. For if so far as it is body
it is finite, but power is infinite, it will not be power so far as
it is body. Hence, the power which is infinite in a finite body is
incorporeal.


                          PROPOSITION XCVII.

In each series of things, every cause which has the relation of a
leader, imparts to the whole series the peculiarity of itself; and that
which the cause is primarily, the series is according to diminution.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is the leader of the whole series, and all co-ordinate
natures are co-arranged with reference to it, it is evident that it
imparts to all that the series contains the one idea according to which
they are arranged in that series. For either all things partake of
similitude to this cause without a cause, or that which is the same
in all is derived from it. But the former of these is impossible. For
that which is without a cause is also fortuitous. But the fortuitous
can never take place in things in which there is order, connection,
and an invariable sameness of subsistence. From the cause therefore,
which ranks as a leader, every series receives the peculiarity of the
hypostasis of that cause. But if from it, it is evident that this
is accompanied with a diminution and decrement adapted to secondary
natures. For either the peculiarity exists similarly in the leader,
and the natures that are secondary, and how in this case can the
former be the leader, but the latter be allotted an hypostasis after
the leader? Or it exists dissimilarly. And if this be the case, it is
evident that sameness is derived to the multitude from one thing, but
not vice versa. And the illustrious peculiarity of the series which is
primarily in one thing [or the leader,] is secondarily in the multitude
[suspended from the leading cause].


                          PROPOSITION XCVIII.

Every separate cause is at one and the same time every where and no
where.

       *       *       *       *       *

For by the communication of its own power it is every where. For this
is a cause which replenishes the natures that are naturally adapted
to participate of it, rules over all secondary beings, and is present
to all things by the prolific progressions of its illuminations.
But by an essence unmingled with things in place, and by its exempt
purity, it is no where. For if it is separate, it is established above
all things. In a similar manner also, it is in no one of the natures
inferior to itself. For if it was alone every where, it would not
indeed be prevented from being a cause, and from subsisting in all its
participants. But it would not be prior to all of them in a separate
manner. If also it was no where without being every where, it would
not indeed be prevented from being prior to all things, and from being
nothing pertaining to subordinate natures. But it would not be in all
things, as causes are naturally adapted to be in their effects,[251]
by the abundant and unenvying communications of themselves. In order
therefore, that existing as a cause, it may be in all things that are
able to partake of it, and that being separate in itself, it may be
prior to all the natures that are filled by it, it is every where, and
at the same time no where.

And it is not indeed partly every where and partly no where. For thus
it would be divulsed and separate from itself, if one part of it was
every where in all things, but another was no where, and prior to all
things. But the whole of it is every where, and in a similar manner no
where. For the things which are able to participate of it, meet with
the whole of it, and find the whole present with themselves, that at
the same time being wholly exempt from them. For the participant does
not place this separate cause in itself, but participates of it as much
as it is capable of receiving. Nor in the communication of itself does
it become contracted by the multitude of the participations of it; for
it is separate. Nor do its participants participate of it defectively;
for that which imparts is every where.


                           PROPOSITION XCIX.

Every imparticipable, so far as it is imparticipable, does not derive
its subsistence from another cause. But it is itself the principle and
cause of all its participants. And thus every principle in each series
is unbegotten.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is imparticipable in its own proper series, it is allotted
the principality, and does not proceed from other things. For it
would no longer be the first, if it received this peculiarity,
according to which it is imparticipable, from something else.[252]
But if it is inferior to other things, and proceeds from them, it
does not proceed from them so far as it is imparticipable, but so
far as it participates. For of the things from which it originates,
it doubtless participates, and it is not primarily the things of
which it participates. Hence, it is not from a cause so far as it is
imparticipable. For so far as it is from a cause it participates, and
is not imparticipable. But so far as it is imparticipable, it is the
cause of things that are participated, and is not itself a participant
of other things.


                            PROPOSITION C.

Every series of wholes is extended to an imparticipable cause and
principle. But all imparticipables are suspended from the one principle
of all things.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if each series suffers something which is the same [or a certain
sameness,] there is something in each which is the leader, and the
cause of this sameness. For as all beings are from unity, so every
series is from unity. But again, all imparticipable monads are referred
to _the one_; because all of them are analogous to _the one_. So far
therefore, as they also suffer something which is the same through
an analogy to _the one_, so far a reduction of them to _the one_ is
effected. And so far indeed, as all of them are from _the one_, no
one of these is a principle. But so far as each is imparticipable,
so far each is a principle. Hence, being the principles of certain
things, they are suspended from the principle of all things. For that
is the principle of all things of which all things participate. All
things however alone entirely participate of the first; but of other
things not all, but certain things participate. Hence also that [i.e.
the ineffable] is simply the first, but other things are firsts with
reference to a certain thing, but simply are not firsts.


                            PROPOSITION CI.

Imparticipable intellect is the leader of all things that participate
of intellect, imparticipable life of all things that participate of
life, and imparticipable being of all things that participate of
being. But of these, being is prior to life, but life is prior to
intellect.

       *       *       *       *       *

For because in each series of beings, imparticipables are prior to
things which are participated, it is necessary that intellect should
be prior to intellectuals, that life should be prior to vital natures,
and that being itself should be prior to beings. Because however,
that which is the cause of a greater number of effects, precedes that
which is the cause of a less number, hence, among these, being will
be the first; for it is present with all things to which life and
intellect are present. For every thing that lives and participates of
intelligence necessarily _is_; but not vice versa. For many beings
neither live, nor energize intellectually.[253] But life is the second.
For all things that participate of intellect, participate also of life,
but not vice versa. For many things live indeed, but are left destitute
of knowledge. And intellect is the third. For every thing which is in
any manner whatever gnostic, also lives and is. If therefore being is
the cause of a greater number of effects, but life of a less number,
and intellect of still fewer effects, being is the first, life the
second, and intellect the third.


                           PROPOSITION CII.

All beings which exist in any manner whatever, consist of bound and the
infinite through that which is primarily being. But all living beings
are motive of themselves through the first life. And all gnostic beings
participate of knowledge, through the first intellect.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if that which is imparticipable in each series imparts its own
peculiarity to all the natures under the same series, it is evident
that the first being also imparts to all things bound, and at the same
time infinity, since it is itself primarily mixed from these. Life also
imparts to all things the motion which it possesses in itself. For
life is the first progression and motion from the stable hypostasis of
being. And intellect imparts knowledge to all things. For the summit
of all knowledge is in intellect. And intellect is the first gnostic
nature.


                           PROPOSITION CIII.

All things are in all, but appropriately in each.

       *       *       *       *       *

For in being there is life and intellect; and in life, being and
intellection; and in intellect being and life. But in intellect
indeed, all things subsist intellectually, in life vitally, and in
being, all things are truly beings. For since every thing subsists
either according to cause, or according to hyparxis, or according to
participation; and in the first, the rest are according to cause; in
the second, the first is according to participation, but the third,
according to cause; and in the third, the natures prior to it are
according to participation;--this being the case, life and intellect
have a prior or causal subsistence in being. Since however, each thing
is characterized according to hyparxis, and neither according to cause
(for cause pertains to other things, i.e. to effects) nor according
to participation (for a thing derives that elsewhere of which it
participates,)--hence in being there is truly life and intellection,
essential life, and essential intellect. And in life, there is being
indeed according to participation, but intellection according to cause.
Each of these however, subsist there vitally. For the hyparxis is
according to life. And in intellect, life and essence subsist according
to participation, and each of these subsists there intellectually. For
knowledge is the essence and the life of intellect.


                           PROPOSITION CIV.

Every thing which is primarily eternal, has both its essence and its
energy eternal.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it primarily participates of the perpetuity of eternity, it
does not partially participate of it, but entirely. For either it
participates of it in energy, but not in essence. This however is
impossible; since in this case, energy would be more excellent than
essence. Or it participates of it according to essence, but does not
participate of it according to energy. In this case however, that which
is primarily eternal, and that which primarily participates of time
will be the same. And time indeed, will primarily measure the essence
of certain things, but eternity which is more excellent than all time,
will not measure the essence of any thing, if that which is primarily
eternal, is not essentially contained by eternity. Hence every thing
which is primarily eternal, has both an eternal essence and energy.


                            PROPOSITION CV.

Every thing immortal is perpetual; but not every thing perpetual is
immortal.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if the immortal is that which always participates of life, but
that which always participates of life, participates also of being,
and that which always lives, always is,--hence, every thing immortal
is perpetual. But the immortal is that which is unreceptive of death,
and always lives. And the perpetual is that which is unreceptive of
non-being, and always is. If however, there are many beings more and
less excellent than life, which are unreceptive of death, but exist
always;--if this be the case, not every thing which is perpetual is
immortal. That however, there are many beings not immortal, that exist
always, is evident. For there are certain beings indeed, which are
destitute of life, but which exist always, and are indestructible. For
as being is to life, so is the perpetual to the immortal. For the life
which cannot be taken away is immortal, and the being which cannot be
taken away is perpetual. But being is more comprehensive than life, and
therefore the perpetual is more comprehensive than the immortal.[254]


                           PROPOSITION CVI.

The medium of every thing which is entirely eternal both in essence and
energy, and of every thing which has its essence in time, is that which
is partly indeed eternal, and partly is measured by time.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that which has its essence comprehended by time, is entirely
temporal. For by a much greater priority, this will be allotted a
temporal energy. But that which is entirely temporal, is in every
respect dissimilar to that which is entirely eternal. But all
progressions are through similars. Hence there is something between
these. The medium therefore, is either that which is eternal in
essence, but temporal in energy, or vice versa. This latter however, is
impossible. For energy would be more excellent than essence. It remains
therefore, that the medium is the former of these.


                           PROPOSITION CVII.

Every thing which is partly eternal, and partly temporal, is at one and
the same time being and generation.

       *       *       *       *       *

For every thing eternal is being, and that which is measured by time
is generation. So that if the same thing participates of time and
eternity, yet not according to the same, it will be both being and
generation.


                              COROLLARY.

From these things it is evident, that generation indeed, having a
temporal essence, is suspended from that which partly partakes of
being, and partly of generation, participating at once of eternity
and time. But this is suspended from that which is in every respect
eternal. And that which is in every respect eternal, is suspended from
being which is prior to the eternal.


                          PROPOSITION CVIII.

Every thing which is partial in each order, is able to participate in
a twofold respect of the monad which is in the proximately superior
order, viz. either through its own wholeness or through that which is
partial in the superior order, and co-ordinate with the thing according
to an analogy to the whole series.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if conversion is to all things through similitude, that which is
partial in an inferior order, is dissimilar to that which is monadic
and a whole in a superior order. And in short, is as that which is
partial, to a whole, and as one order to another. But a partial nature
is similar to a whole of the same series, through a communion of
peculiarity, and to the proximately superior co-ordinate peculiarity
through an analogous subsistence. It is evident, therefore, that
through these media a conversion from one to the other is effected, as
through similars to that which is similar.[255] For the one is similar
as the partial to that which is partial, but the other as that which
is the appropriate of the same series. But the whole of the superior
series is dissimilar in both these respects.


                           PROPOSITION CIX.

Every[256] partial intellect participates of the unity which is above
intellect and the first, both through the intellect which ranks as a
whole, and through the partial unity which is co-ordinate with this
partial intellect. Every partial soul, likewise, participates of the
intellect which is a whole, through the soul which ranks as a whole,
and through a partial intellect. And every partial nature of body
participates of the soul which is a whole through the wholeness of
nature, and a partial soul.

       *       *       *       *       *

For every thing partial participates of the monad which is in a
superior order, either through its proper wholeness, or through that
which is partial in that order, and which is co-ordinate to the thing.


                            PROPOSITION CX.

Of all the things that are arranged in each series, such as are first,
and are conjoined with their monad, are able to participate of the
natures which are proximately established in the superior series,
through analogy. But such as are more imperfect and remote from their
proper principle, are not naturally adapted to enjoy these natures.

       *       *       *       *       *

For because such things as are first, are allied to those in a
superior series, being allotted a better and more divine nature in
the order to which they belong, but such things as are more imperfect
proceed further from their principle, and are allotted a secondary and
ministrant, but not a primary and leading progression in the whole
series;--this being the case, the former are necessarily connascently
conjoined to the things in a superior order; but the latter are
unadapted to be conjoined with them. For all things are not of an
equal dignity, though they may belong to the same order. For there is
not one and the same ratio in all. But all things proceed from their
proper monad, as from one, and with reference to one thing. Hence, they
are not allotted the same power. But some things are able to receive
proximately the participations[257] of superior natures; while others
being dissimilar to them by proceeding to a greater distance from their
principles, are deprived of a power of this kind.


                           PROPOSITION CXI.

Of every intellectual series, some things are divine intellects,
receiving the participations of the Gods; but others are intellects
alone. And of every psychical series, some things are intellectual
souls, suspended from their proper intellects; but others are souls
alone. Of all corporeal natures, likewise, some have souls supernally
presiding over them, but others are natures alone, destitute of the
presence of souls.

       *       *       *       *       *

For of each series, not the whole genus is adapted to be suspended
from that which is prior to itself, but that which is more perfect
in it, and sufficient to be connascent with superior natures.
Neither, therefore, is every intellect suspended from deity, but
those intellects only which are supreme and most single. For these
are allied to the divine unities. Nor do all souls participate of
participable intellect,[258] but such only as are most intellectual.
Nor do all corporeal natures enjoy the presence of soul, and of the
soul which is participated, but those only that are more perfect, and
possess in a greater degree the form of reason. And this is the mode of
demonstration in all things.


                           PROPOSITION CXII.

Of every order those things that are first, have the form of the
natures prior to them.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the highest genera in each order, are conjoined through similitude
to the natures placed above them,[259] and through the connexion and
coherence of the progression of wholes. Hence, such as the superior
natures are primarily, such also is the form which these highest
genera are allotted, and which is allied to the nature of those in the
superior order. They are also such according to the peculiarity of
subsistence as are the natures prior to them.


                          PROPOSITION CXIII.

Every divine number is unical.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if a divine number has a precedaneous cause, viz. _the one_,
just as an intellectual number has intellect, and a psychical number
soul, and if multitude is every where analogous to its cause, it is
evident that a divine number is unical, since _the one_ is God. But
this follows, since _the one_ and _the good_ are the same. For _the
good_ and God are the same. For that beyond which there is nothing,
and after which all things aspire, is God. And also that from which
all things proceed, and to which all things tend. But this is good. If
therefore, there is a multitude of Gods, the multitude is unical. But
that there is, is evident. For every principal cause is the leader of
an appropriate multitude which is similar and allied to the cause.


                           PROPOSITION CXIV.

Every God is a self-perfect unity, and every self-perfect unity is a
God.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if the number of unities is twofold, as has been before
demonstrated, and some are self-perfect, but others are illuminations
from the self-perfect unities, and if a divine number is allied to and
connatural with _the one_ and _the good_, the Gods are self-perfect
unities. And vice versa, if there is a self-perfect unity it is a God.
For as unity is in the most eminent degree allied to _the one_, and the
self-perfect to _the good_, so likewise according to both these the
self-perfect participates of the divine peculiarity and is a God. But
if a God was a unity, yet not a self-perfect unity, or a self-perfect
hypostasis, yet not a unity, he would be arranged in another order, on
account of the mutation of the peculiarity.[260]


                           PROPOSITION CXV.

Every God is superessential, supervital, and superintellectual.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if each is a self-perfect unity, but neither being, life, or
intellect is a unity, but that which is united, it is evident that
every God is beyond each of these. For if these differ from each other,
but all are in all, each of these being all will not be one only.
Farther still, if the first God is superessential, but every God is of
the series of the first, so far as a God, each will be superessential.
But that the first God is superessential,[261] is evident. For essence
is not the same with unity, nor is to exist the same thing as to be
united. If, however, these are not the same, either the first God is
both these, and in this case he will not be one only, but something
else besides _the one_, and will participate of unity, but will not be
_the one itself_; or he is one of these. But if indeed he is essence,
he will be indigent of _the one_. It is, however, impossible that _the
good_, and _the first_ should be indigent. Hence, he is one alone; and
therefore superessential. But if each thing imparts the peculiarity of
that which it is primarily to the whole series [of which it is the
leader], hence, every divine number is superessential; since every
principal cause produces similars prior to dissimilars. If, therefore,
the first God is superessential, all the Gods will be superessential.
For they will be entirely similar [to the first]. Since, however, they
are also essences, they will be produced from the first essence, as the
monads of essences.


                           PROPOSITION CXVI.

Every deity except _the one_ is participable.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that _the one_ is imparticipable is evident, since if it were
participated, and on this account pertained to something else, it would
no longer be similarly the cause of all things; both of such as are
prior to beings, and of beings themselves. But that the other unities
are participated, we shall thus demonstrate. For if there is another
imparticipable unity after the first, in what does it differ from _the
one_? For either it subsists after the same manner as that; and how
in this case is the one the second, but the other first? Or it does
not subsist after the same manner. And thus one of these will be _the
one itself_, but the other _one_ and _not one_. This _non-one_ also,
if it is no hypostasis whatever, will be _one_ alone. But if it is a
certain other hypostasis besides _the one_, in this case _the one_
will be participated by the _non-one_. And that will be a self-perfect
one, which conjoins the non-one with _the one_. So that again God will
be this [viz. the one] so far as he is God. But that which is non-one
will subsist in the participation of _the one_. Every unity, therefore,
which subsists after _the one_ is participable, and every God is
participable.


                          PROPOSITION CXVII.

Every God is the measure of beings.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every God is unical, he defines and measures all the multitude
of beings. For all multitudes being in their own nature indefinite, are
bounded through _the one_. But that which is one being [or being
characterized by _the one_] measuring and terminating the natures
with which it is present, leads into bound that which according to its
own power is not bounded. For the one being has the form of _the
one_ by participation.

But that which is uniform, or has the form of the one, recedes from
indefiniteness and infinity. And by how much the more uniform it is,
by so much the less[264] is it indefinite, and without measure. Every
multitude of beings, therefore, is measured by the divine unities.


                          PROPOSITION CXVIII.

Every thing which is in the Gods pre-exists in them according to
their peculiarities. And the peculiarity of the Gods is unical and
superessential. Hence, all things are contained in them unically and
superessentially.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every thing subsists in a three-fold manner, viz. either
according to cause, or according to hyparxis, or according to
participation, but the first number of all things is the divine number,
nothing will be in the Gods according to participation, but all things
will subsist in them either according to hyparxis, or according to
cause. Such things, however, as they antecedently comprehend, as being
the causes of all things, they antecedently comprehend in a manner
appropriate to their own union. For every thing which is the leader of
secondary natures causally, contains the cause of things subordinate,
in a way naturally adapted to itself. All things, therefore, are in the
Gods unically and superessentially.


                           PROPOSITION CXIX.

Every God subsists according to superessential goodness, and is good
neither according to participation, nor according to essence, but
superessentially; since habits and essences are allotted a secondary
and manifold order from the Gods.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if the first God is _the one_ and _the good_, and so far as he is
_the one_, he is also _the good_, and so far as _the good, the one_, if
this be the case, every series of the Gods has the form of _the one_,
and the form of _the good_, according to one peculiarity, and each of
the Gods is not a unity and goodness according to any thing else. But
each so far as he is a unity, so far he is a goodness, and so far as he
is a goodness, so far he is a unity. So far also as the Gods posterior
to the first God proceed from the first, they have the form of _the
good_, and the form of _the one_, since the first is _the one_ and
_the good_. But so far as all of them are Gods, they are unities and
goodnesses. As, therefore, _the one_ of the Gods is superessential, so
likewise is their goodness, since it is nothing else than _the one_.
For each of them is not any thing else than _the good_, but is good
alone; as neither is each any thing else than _the one_, but is one
alone.


                           PROPOSITION CXX.

Every God possesses in his own hyparxis a providential inspection of
the whole of things. And a providential energy is primarily in the Gods.

       *       *       *       *       *

For all other things which are posterior to the Gods, energize
providentially through the participation of them. But providence
is connascent with the Gods. For if to impart good to the subjects
of providential energy, is the prerogative of the providential
peculiarity, but all the Gods are goodnesses, either they do not impart
themselves to anything, and thus nothing will be good in secondary
natures. And whence will that be derived which subsists according
to participation, except from those natures that primarily possess
peculiarities? Or if they do impart themselves, they impart good, and
in consequence of this providentially attend to all things. Providence,
therefore, subsists primarily in the Gods. For where is the energy
which is prior to intellect, except in superessential natures? But
providence (προνοια), as the name signifies, is an energy prior to
intellect (ενεργεια εστι προ νου). The Gods, therefore, from being
Gods, and from being goodnesses, provide for all things, and fill all
things with the goodness which is prior to intellect.


                           PROPOSITION CXXI.

Every divine nature has indeed for its hyparxis goodness, but possesses
a power which is unsubdued and at once incomprehensible by all
secondary natures.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it providentially attends to the whole of things, there is in
it a power which has dominion over the subjects of its providential
energy; through which being unsubdued and uncircumscribed by all
things, divine natures fill all things with, and subject all things to
themselves. For every thing of a ruling nature, which is the cause of
other things, and has dominion over them, rules through abundance of
power, and predominates according to nature.

The first power, therefore, is in the Gods, not indeed having dominion
over some things, but not over others, but equally comprehending in
itself according to cause the powers of all beings, this power neither
being essential, nor much less unessential; but being connascent
with the hyparxis of the Gods, and superessential. Moreover, the
boundaries of all knowledge, presubsist uniformly in the Gods. For
through divine knowledge, which is exempt from the whole of things,
all other knowledge has a subsistence; this knowledge neither being
intellectual, nor much less, being a certain knowledge posterior to
intellect, but being established according to the divine peculiarity
above intellect. Whether, therefore, there is a divine knowledge, this
knowledge is occult and uniform [or has the form of _the one_].
Or whether there is a power uncircumscribed by all things, this power
is in a similar manner comprehensive of all things. Or whether there
is a divine goodness, this goodness defines the hyparxis of the Gods.
For if all things are in the Gods, knowledge, power, and goodness are
also in them. But their hyparxis is characterized by that which is most
excellent, and their hypostasis also is according to that which is
best. But this is goodness.


                          PROPOSITION CXXII.

Every thing divine provides for secondary natures, and is exempt from
the subjects of its providential care, providence neither relaxing
the unmingled and unical transcendency of that which is divine, nor a
separate union abolishing providence.

       *       *       *       *       *

For divine beings abiding in their unical nature, and in their own
hyparxis, fill all things with the power of themselves. And every
thing which is able to participate of them, enjoys the good which
it is capable of receiving, according to the measures of its proper
hypostasis; divine natures, in the mean time, illuminating beings
with good, by their very essence, or rather prior to essence. For
that which is divine being nothing else than goodness, it supplies
all things with an unenvying abundance of good, by its very being,
not making a distribution according to a reasoning process; but other
things receiving indeed according to their desert, and divine natures
according to their hyparxis. Neither, therefore, in providing for other
things, do they receive a habitude, or alliance with the subjects of
their providential care. For they benefit all things by being that
which they are. But every thing which makes by its very essence, makes
without habitude, and with an unrestrained energy. For habitude is
an addition to essence. Hence also it is preternatural. Nor being
separate, do they withdraw their providential care. For thus they
would subvert, which it is not lawful to say, their own hyparxis, the
peculiarity of which is goodness. For it is the province of goodness
to extend itself to every thing which is able to participate of it.
And the greatest of all things is not that which is boniform, but that
which is beneficent. Either, therefore, no being will possess this
beneficent nature, or the Gods will possess it prior to beings. For it
is not possible that a greater good should be present with the natures
that are good by participation, but a less good with those that are
primarily good.


                          PROPOSITION CXXIII.

Every thing divine is itself indeed, on account of its superessential
union, ineffable and unknown to all secondary natures; but it is
comprehended and known by its participants. Hence, _that which is
first_, is alone perfectly unknown, as being imparticipable.

       *       *       *       *       *

For all knowledge which subsists through reasoning and language,
pertains to beings, and in beings possesses the apprehension of
truth. For it comes into contact with conceptions, and subsists in
intellections. But the Gods are beyond all beings. Neither, therefore,
is that which is divine doxastic, or the object of opinion, nor is it
dianoëtic, nor intelligible. For every being is either sensible, and
on this account doxastic, or truly existing being, and on this account
intelligible, or it is between these, subsisting as _being_ and
at the same time _generation_, and on this account is dianoëtic.
If, therefore, the Gods are superessential, and subsist prior to
beings, there is neither any opinion of them, nor science and dianoia,
nor intellection. But the nature of their peculiarities is known by
the beings that are suspended from them. And this by a necessary
consequence. For the differences of participants are co-divided
conformably to the peculiarities of the participated natures. And
neither does every thing participate of every thing; for there is no
co-ordination of things perfectly dissimilar. Nor does any casual thing
participate of that which is casual. But that which is kindred is
conjoined to that which is kindred, and proceeds from that to which it
is allied.


                          PROPOSITION CXXIV.

Every God knows partible natures impartibly, temporal natures, without
time, things which are not necessary, necessarily, mutable natures,
immutably; and in short, all things in a manner more excellent than the
order of the things known.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every thing which is with the Gods, is with them according
to their peculiarity, it is evident that the knowledge in the Gods
of things inferior, will not subsist according to the nature of the
inferior things, but according to the exempt transcendency of the
Gods. Hence, their knowledge of multiplied and passive natures, will
be uniform and impassive. If, therefore, the object of knowledge is
partible, divine knowledge will be impartible. If the objects that are
known are mutable, the knowledge of the Gods will be immutable; if they
are contingent, they will be known by the Gods necessarily; and if they
are indefinite, definitely. For that which is divine, does not receive
knowledge from subordinate beings, in order that thus the knowledge may
be such as is the nature of the thing known. But subordinate beings
become indefinite about the definite nature of the Gods, are changed
about their immutability, receive passively that which is impassive
in them, and temporally that which in them is without time. For it is
possible for subordinate to be surpassed by more excellent natures; but
it is not lawful for the Gods to receive any thing from beings inferior
to themselves.


                           PROPOSITION CXXV.

Every God, from that order from which he began to unfold himself
into light, proceeds through all secondary natures, always indeed
multiplying and dividing the communications of himself, but preserving
the peculiarity of his own hypostasis.

       *       *       *       *       *

For progressions being effected through diminution, first natures are
every where after a manner multiplied into the decrements of secondary
natures. But these proceeding according to a similitude to their
producing causes receive their orderly distribution, so that the whole
of that which proceeds is after a manner the same with, and different
from, that which abides; through its diminution indeed, appearing to
be different, but through continuity with its cause, not departing
from sameness with it. But such as that which abides is among first,
such is that which proceeds, among secondary natures; and thus an
indissoluble communion of the series is preserved. Each of the Gods,
therefore, is unfolded into light appropriately, in the orders in which
he makes his evolution. But he proceeds from thence, as far as to the
last of things, through the generative power of first natures. He is
always, however, multiplied according to a progression from unity into
multitude. But he preserves sameness in the progression, through the
similitude of the things that proceed to the leader and primary cause
of each series.


                          PROPOSITION CXXVI.

Every God who is nearer to _the one_ is more total, but the God who is
more remote from it is more partial.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the God, who is the cause of a greater number of effects, is nearer
to that which produces all things; but he who is the cause of a less
number is more remote from it. And he indeed, who is the cause of a
greater number of effects, is more total; but he who is the cause of
a less number, is more partial. And each indeed, is a unity; but the
one is greater, and the other less in power. The more partial Gods
also are generated from the more total; the latter not being divided,
for they are unities; nor changed in quality, for they are immoveable;
nor multiplied by habitude, for they are unmingled. But they generate
secondary progressions from themselves, which are the decrements of the
natures prior to them, through abundance of power.


                          PROPOSITION CXXVII.

Every thing divine, is especially primarily simple, and on this account
most sufficient to itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that it is indeed simple, is evident from its union; since every
thing divine is most unical. But a thing of this kind is transcendently
simple. That it is also most sufficient to itself, may be learnt by
considering that a composite nature is indigent, if not of other things
to which it is external, yet of those things of which it is composed.
But that which is most simple and unical, and which establishes itself
in _the good_, is most sufficient to itself. Such, however, is every
thing divine. Neither, therefore, is it indigent of other things,
existing as goodness itself, nor of things requisite to composition,
because it is unical.


                         PROPOSITION CXXVIII.

Every God, when participated by natures nearer to himself, is
participated without a medium; but when participated by natures
more remote from himself, the participation is through a less or
greater[265] number of media.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the former through their alliance being uniform, are immediately
able to participate of the divine unities; but the latter through their
diminution, and extension into multitude, require other things which
are more united, in order that they may participate of the unities
themselves, and not of things united. For united multitude subsists
between unity itself and divided multitude; being indeed able[266]
to coalesce with unity, but allied in a certain respect to divided
multitude, through the representation of multitude.


                          PROPOSITION CXXIX.

Every divine body is divine through a deified soul. But every soul
is divine through a divine intellect. And every intellect is divine
through the participation of a divine unity. And unity indeed is of
itself a God; intellect is most divine; soul is divine; but body is
deiform. For if every number of the Gods is above intellect, but
participations are effected through kindred and similar natures, the
impartible essence will primarily participate of the superessential
unities. But the nature which comes into contact with generation will
participate of them secondarily. And generation in the third place.
Each of these likewise participates of them through the proximately
superior natures. And the peculiarity of the Gods indeed proceeds, as
far as to the last of things, in its participants; but through media
allied to itself. For unity indeed imparts the transcendent power
of itself to the first intellect, among divine natures, and causes
this intellect to be like itself according to unical multitude. But
through intellect it is also present with soul, conjoining soul with
intellect and co-inflaming it [with divine fire], when this intellect
is participable. And through the echo[267] of soul, imparting also to
body its own peculiarity, if it is a body which participates something
of soul. And thus body becomes not only animated and intellectual,
but also divine. For it receives life indeed and motion from soul;
but indissoluble permanency from intellect; and divine union from
participated unity.[268] For each of these imparts its own hyparxis to
the subsequent natures.


                           PROPOSITION CXXX.

In every divine order, such things as are first, are in a greater
degree exempt from the natures proximately arranged under them, than
these latter are from things subsequent. And secondary natures in a
greater degree adhere to their proximate superiors, than following
natures to these.

       *       *       *       *       *

For by how much more unical and total any thing is, by so much the
more is it allotted a greater transcendency with respect to subsequent
natures. And by how much the more diminished it is according to power,
by so much the more is it connascent with the natures posterior to
itself. And more elevated natures indeed are more united with their
more principal causes; but inferior natures are less united with
them. For it is the province of a greater power to be more exempt
from subordinate, and to be more united to better natures. As on the
contrary, it is the province of a diminution of power, to recede
in a greater degree from more excellent, and to be co-passive with
subordinate natures. And this happens to secondary, but not to first
natures, in every order of things.


                          PROPOSITION CXXXI.

Every God begins his own energy from himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

For he first exhibits the peculiarity of his presence with secondary
natures, in himself; because he imparts himself to other things also
according to his own exuberant plenitude. For neither is deficiency
adapted to the Gods, nor fulness alone. For every thing deficient is
imperfect, and not being itself perfect, it is impossible it should
make another thing to be perfect. But that which is full is alone
sufficient to itself, and is not yet prepared to communicate. It is
necessary, therefore, that the nature which fills other things, and
which extends to other things the communications of itself should be
super-plenary or exuberantly full. Hence, if a divine nature fills all
things from itself with the good which it contains in itself, it is
exuberantly full. And if this be the case, establishing first in itself
the peculiarity which it imparts to others, it will extend to them the
communications of super-plenary goodness.


                          PROPOSITION CXXXII.

All the orders of the Gods are bound in union by a medium.

       *       *       *       *       *

For all the progressions of beings are effected through similars;
and much more will the orders of the Gods possess an indissoluble
continuity, as subsisting uniformly, and being defined according to
_the one_, which is the principal cause of their existence. The
decrements, therefore, are produced unitedly, and alone according to
the similitude in beings of secondary to first natures. And this,
because the hyparxis of the Gods much more consists in union than the
subsistence of beings. All the divine genera, therefore, are bound
together by appropriate media; and first natures do not proceed into
progressions perfectly different without a medium, but through the
genera common to each, from which they proceed, and of which they are
immediately the causes. For these congregate the extremes into one
union, being spread under some things connascently, but proximately
exempt from others. And they preserve the well-ordered generation of
divine natures.


                         PROPOSITION CXXXIII.

Every God is a beneficent unity or an unific (ενοποιος) goodness; and
each, so far as a God, possesses this hyparxis. The first God, however,
is simply good, and simply one. But each posterior to the first, is a
certain goodness, and a certain unity.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the divine peculiarity distinguishes the unities and goodnesses of
the Gods, so that each according to a certain peculiarity of goodness,
such as that of perfecting, or connectedly-containing, or defending,
benefits all things. For each of these is a certain good, but not every
good. But the first God pre-establishes a unical cause. Hence, that is
_the good_, as giving subsistence to all goodness. For all the
hyparxes of the Gods, are not together equal to _the one_; so
great a transcendency is the first God allotted with respect to the
multitude of the Gods.


                          PROPOSITION CXXXIV.

Every divine intellect, intellectually perceives indeed, as intellect,
but energizes providentially as a God.

       *       *       *       *       *

For it is the illustrious prerogative of intellect to know beings, and
to have its perfection in intellections. But it is the province of a
God to energize providentially, and to fill all things with good. This
communication, however, and replenishing with good, is accomplished
through the union of the replenishing natures with the causes prior to
themselves; which intellect, also imitating, passes into sameness with
intelligibles. A divine intellect, therefore, so far as it energizes
providentially, is a God; providence being established in an energy
prior to intellect. Hence, as a God it imparts itself to all things;
but as intellect it is not present with all things. For a divine nature
extends to things into which the intellectual peculiarity does not
proceed. For beings which are without intellect desire to energize
providentially, and to participate of a certain good. But this is
because all things indeed do not aspire after intellect, not even all
such as are able to participate of it. All things, however, aspire
after good, and hasten to obtain it.


                          PROPOSITION CXXXV.

Every divine unity is participated by some being immediately, or
without a medium; and every deified nature is extended to one divine
unity. As many also as are the participated unities, so many are the
participating genera of beings.

       *       *       *       *       *

For neither two or more unities are participated by one being. For
since the peculiarities in the unities are different, must not that
which is connascent with each be different also, since contact is
effected through similitude? Nor is one unity participated in a divided
manner by many beings. For many beings are unadapted to be conjoined
with unity, and as _beings_ they are unconjoined with the unity which
is prior to beings, and as _many_, they are separated from unity. It
is necessary, however, that the thing which participates should be
partly similar to that which is participated, and partly different and
dissimilar. Since, therefore, that which participates is something
belonging to beings, but unity is superessential, and according to
this they are dissimilar; it is necessary that the participant should
be one, in order that according to this, it may be similar to _the
one_ which is participated, though of these, the latter is one in such
a manner as to be unity, but the former, so as to be passive to _the
one_, and to be united through the participation of unity.


                          PROPOSITION CXXXVI.

Every God who is more total, and arranged nearer to the first, is
participated by a more total genus of beings. But the God who is more
partial, and more remote from the first, is participated by a more
partial genus of beings. And as being is to being, so is one divine
unity to another.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if unities are as many in number as beings, and vice versa, and
one unity is participated by one being, it is evident that the order
of beings proceeds according to the order of the unities, being
assimilated to the order prior to beings. And more total beings indeed
are connascent with more total unities; but more partial beings
with more partial unities. For if this were not the case, again
similars would be conjoined with dissimilars, and there would not
be a distribution according to desert. These things, however, are
impossible. Since from thence the one, and an appropriate measure are
luminously imparted to all things, and from these proceed. Much more,
therefore, will there be an order of participation in these, similars
being suspended as much as possible from similars.


                         PROPOSITION CXXXVII.

Every unity in conjunction with _the one_ gives subsistence to the
being which participates of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

For _the one_, as it gives subsistence to all things, so likewise it
is the cause of the participated unities, and of beings suspended
from these unities. But the unity belonging to every being produces
the peculiarity which shines forth in that particular being. And _the
one_ indeed is the cause of existence simply; but unity is the cause
of alliance, because it is connascent with _the one_. Hence, unity is
that which of itself defines the being which participates of it, and
essentially exhibits in itself a superessential peculiarity. For every
where, from that which is primary that which is secondary is that which
it is. If, therefore, there is a certain superessential peculiarity
of deity, this also belongs to the being which participates of it
superessentially.


                         PROPOSITION CXXXVIII.

Of all the deified natures which participate of the divine peculiarity,
the first and highest is _being itself_.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if being is beyond intellect and life, as has been demonstrated,
and if it is also after _the one_ the cause of the greatest number
of effects, being will be the highest deified nature. For it is more
single than life and intellect, and is on this account entirely more
venerable. But there is not any thing else prior to it except _the
one_. For prior to unical multitude what else can there be except
_the one_? But being is unical multitude as consisting of bound
and infinity. And in short, the superessential one[269] is prior
to essence. Since also in the illuminations which are imparted to
secondary natures, _the one_ alone extends beyond being. But being
is immediately posterior to _the one_. For that which is being in
capacity, but is not yet being, is nevertheless according to its own
nature one. And that which follows the being that is in capacity is
now being in energy. Hence, in the principles of things, non-being is
immediately beyond being, as something more excellent, and no other
than _the one itself_.


                          PROPOSITION CXXXIX.

All things which participate of the divine unities, originate indeed
from being, but end in a corporeal nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

For being is the first of participants, but body the last; for we say
that there are divine bodies. For the highest of all the genera of
bodies, souls and intellects, are attributed to the Gods, that in every
order, things analogous to the Gods may connect and preserve secondary
natures, and that each number may be a whole, containing all things
in itself, according to the whole which is in a part, and possessing
prior to other things the divine peculiarity. The divine genus,
therefore, subsists corporeally, psychically, and intellectually. And
it is evident that all these are divine according to participation.
For that which is primarily divine subsists in the unities. Hence, the
participants of the divine unities originate indeed from being, but end
in a corporeal nature.


                           PROPOSITION CXL.

All the powers of divine natures, having a supernal origin, and
proceeding through appropriate media, extend as far as to the last of
things, and to places about the earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

For neither does any thing intercept these powers, and exclude them
from being present with all things. For they are not in want of
places and intervals, on account of their unrestrained transcendency
with respect to all things, and a presence every where unmingled.
Nor is that which is adapted to participate of them, prohibited from
participation. But as soon as any thing is prepared for participation,
they also are present, neither then approaching, nor prior to this
being absent, but always possessing an invariable sameness of
subsistence. If, therefore, any terrene nature is adapted to the
participation of these divine powers, they are present with it, and
fill all things with themselves. And indeed they are in a greater
degree present with superior natures. But they are present with those
of a middle nature, according to the order which they possess. And
with such natures as are last, they are present in an ultimate degree.
From on high, therefore, they extend themselves as far as to the last
of things. Hence also, in last natures there are representations of
such as are first, and _all things sympathize with all_;[270]
secondary indeed, pre-existing in first natures, but first natures
presenting themselves to the view in such as are second. For every
thing subsists in a three-fold manner, either according to cause, or
according to hyparxis, or according to participation.


                           PROPOSITION CXLI.

Every providence of the Gods is twofold, one indeed being exempt from
the natures for which it provides, but the other being co-arranged with
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

For some divine essences indeed, according to hyparxis, and the
peculiarity of their order, are entirely expanded above the illuminated
natures. But others being of the same order, provide for things
subordinate that are of the same co-ordination; these also imitating
the providential energy of the exempt Gods, and desiring to fill
secondary natures with the good which they are able to impart.


                          PROPOSITION CXLII.

The Gods are present with all things after the same manner, but all
things are not after the same manner present with the Gods. But every
thing participates of their presence according to its own order and
power. And this is accomplished by some things uniformly, but by others
manifoldly; by some things eternally, but by others according to time;
and by some things incorporeally, but by others corporeally.

       *       *       *       *       *

For it is necessary that the different participation of the same
things, should become different, either from the participant, or from
that which is participated. But every thing divine always possesses
the same order, and is without habitude to, and unmingled with all
things. It remains therefore, that the mutation must subsist from the
participants, and that in these that which is not invariably the same
must be found, and that at different times they are differently present
with the Gods. Hence, the Gods being present with all things with
invariable sameness, all things are not after the same manner present
with them. But other things are present with them as far as they are
able, and according to the manner in which they are present they enjoy
their illuminations. For the participation is according to the measure
of the presence of the divinities.


                          PROPOSITION CXLIII.

All inferior natures fail before the presence of the Gods, though that
which participates of them may be adapted to participation. Every thing
foreign indeed from divine light becomes far removed from it. But all
things are illuminated at once by the Gods.

       *       *       *       *       *

For divine natures are always more comprehensive and more powerful
than the things which proceed from them. But the inaptitude of the
participants, becomes the cause of the privation[271] of divine
illumination. For this inaptitude obscures it by its own imbecility.
And this being obscured, something else appears to receive dominion,
not according to its own power, but according to the imbecility of
the participant, which seems to rise against the divine form of the
illumination.


                          PROPOSITION CXLIV.

All beings, and all the distributions of beings, extend as far in their
progressions, as the orders of the Gods.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the Gods produce beings in conjunction with themselves, nor is any
thing able to subsist, and to receive measure and order external to the
Gods, [or beyond their influence.] For all things are perfected through
their power, and are arranged and measured by the Gods. Prior therefore
to the last genera in beings, the Gods pre-exist, who also adorn these
genera, and impart to them life, formation and perfection, and convert
them to _the good_. In a similar manner also, the Gods are prior
to the middle and first genera of beings. And all things are bound and
rooted in the Gods, and through this cause are preserved. But when any
thing apostatizes from, and becomes destitute of the Gods, it entirely
departs into non-entity and vanishes, in consequence of being perfectly
deprived of those natures by which it was contained.


                           PROPOSITION CXLV.

The peculiarity of every divine order pervades through all secondary
natures, and imparts itself to all the subordinate genera of beings.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if beings proceed as far as the orders of the Gods extend, in every
genus of beings, there is a supernally-illuminated peculiarity of the
divine powers. For every thing receives from its proximate appropriate
cause, the peculiarity according to which that cause is allotted its
subsistence. I say for instance, if there is a certain cathartic or
purifying deity, there is also a purification in souls, in animals, in
plants, and in stones. And in a similar manner, if there is a guardian,
a convertive, a perfective, and a vivific power. And a stone indeed
participates of the divine cathartic power in a corporeal manner only.
But a plant participates it still more clearly according to life. An
animal possesses this form according to impulse; the rational soul
rationally; intellect, intellectually; and the Gods superessentially
and unically. The whole series also has the same power from one divine
cause. And there is the same mode of reasoning with respect to the
peculiarities of the other divine powers. For all things are suspended
from the Gods. And different natures are illuminated by different
Gods; every divine series extending as far as to the last of things.
And some things indeed are suspended from the Gods immediately, but
others through a greater or less number of media. But _all things are
full[272] of Gods_. And whatever any thing naturally possesses, it
derives from the Gods.


                          PROPOSITION CXLVI.

The ends of all the divine progressions are assimilated to their
principles, preserving a circle without a beginning and without an end,
through conversion to their principles.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every thing that has proceeded, is converted to the proper
principle from which it proceeded, much more will total orders
having proceeded from their summit be again converted to it. But
the conversion of the end to the beginning, renders the whole order
one, definite, and converging to itself, and exhibiting through the
convergency, that which has the form of _the one_ in the multitude.


                          PROPOSITION CXLVII.

The summits of all the divine orders are assimilated to the ends of the
natures [proximately] situated above them.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is necessary that there should be an uninterrupted connection
of the divine progression, and that each order should be bound together
by appropriate media, it is necessary that the summits of secondary
should be conjoined with the terminations of first orders. But this
contact is through similitude. Hence there will be a similitude of the
principles of an inferior, to the ends of a [proximately] superior
order.


                         PROPOSITION CXLVIII.

Every divine order is united to itself in a three-fold manner, from the
summit which is in it, from its middle, and from its end.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the summit possessing a power which is most single, transmits union
to all the series, and unites the whole of it supernally abiding in
itself. But the middle extending to both the extremes, binds together
the whole order about itself; transmitting indeed, the gifts of primary
divine natures, but extending the powers of such as are last, and
inserting communion in all of them, and a conjunction with each other.
For thus the whole order becomes one, from natures that replenish
and those that are filled, converging to the middle as to a certain
centre. And the end again returning to the beginning, and recalling
the proceeding powers, imparts similitude and convergency to the whole
order. And thus the whole order is one through the unific power of
primary natures, through the connexion existing in the middle, and
through the conversion of the end to the principle of the progressions.


                          PROPOSITION CXLIX.

Every multitude of the divine unities is bounded according to number.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if this multitude is most near to _the one_ it will not be
infinite. For the infinite is not connascent with, but foreign from
_the one_. Indeed, if multitude is of itself, or in its own nature,
separated from _the one_, it is evident that infinite multitude is
perfectly destitute of it. Hence it is powerless, and inefficacious.
The multitude of the Gods therefore, is not infinite. Hence it has the
form of _the one_ and is finite, and is more finite than every other
multitude. For it is nearer to _the one_ than all other multitude. If
therefore the principle of things was multitude, it would be necessary
that what is nearer to the principle should be a greater multitude than
what is more remote from it. For that which is nearer to any thing is
more similar to it. Since however, that which is first is _the one_,
the multitude which is conjoined with it, is a less multitude than that
which is more remote from it. But the infinite is not a less, but is
the greatest possible multitude.


                            PROPOSITION CL.

Every thing which proceeds in the divine orders, is not naturally
adapted to receive all the powers of its producing cause. Nor in
short, are secondary natures able to receive all the powers of the
natures prior to themselves, but the latter have certain powers exempt
from things in an inferior order, and incomprehensible by the beings
posterior to themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if the peculiarities of the Gods differ from each other, those of
the subordinate pre-exist in the superior divinities; but those of
the superior being more total, are not in the subordinate. But more
excellent natures impart indeed some things to their progeny, but
antecedently assume others in themselves, in an exempt manner. For it
has been demonstrated that those Gods who are nearer to _the one_
are more total; and those more remote from it more partial. But if the
more total have powers comprehensive of the more partial, those that
have a secondary and more partial order, will not comprehend the power
of the more total Gods. In the superior therefore, there is something
incomprehensible and uncircumscribed by the inferior orders. For
each of the divine orders is truly infinite.[273] Nor is that which
is infinite, as has been demonstrated,[274] infinite to itself, nor
much less to things above itself, but to all the natures posterior
to itself. But infinite in these last is incapacity. The infinite
however, is incomprehensible by those natures to which it is infinite.
Subordinate natures therefore, do not participate of all the powers
which more excellent natures antecedently comprehend in themselves.
For the latter are incomprehensible by the former. Hence things of a
secondary nature, from their more partial subsistence, will neither
possess all the powers of more excellent beings, nor will they possess
the powers which they do contain after the same manner as superior
natures, on account of that infinity through which the latter transcend
the former.


                           PROPOSITION CLI.

Every thing paternal in the Gods is of a primary nature, and is
pre-established in the rank of _the good_, according to all the
divine orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

For it produces the hyparxes of secondary natures, and total powers
and essences, according to one ineffable transcendency. Hence also it
is denominated paternal, in consequence of exhibiting the united and
boniform power of _the one_, and the cause which gives subsistence
to secondary natures. And according to each order of the Gods, the
paternal genus ranks as the leader, producing all things from itself,
and adorning them, as being arranged analogous to _the good_. And of
divine fathers, some are more total, but others are more partial, just
as the orders themselves of the Gods, differ by the more total, and the
more partial, according to the reason of cause. As many therefore, as
are the progressions of the Gods, so many also are the differences of
fathers. For if there is that which is analogous to _the good_ in every
order, it is necessary that there should be the paternal in all the
orders, and that each order should proceed from the paternal union.


                           PROPOSITION CLII.

Every thing which is generative in the Gods, proceeds according to
the infinity of divine power, multiplying itself, proceeding through
all things, and transcendently exhibiting the never-failing in the
progressions of secondary natures.

       *       *       *       *       *

For to multiply things which proceed, and to produce things into
progeny, from the occult comprehension in causes, of what else is it
the prerogative, than of the infinite power of the Gods, through which
all divine natures are filled with prolific good? For every thing which
is full produces other things from itself according to a super-plenary
power. The domination of power therefore is the peculiarity of
generative deity, which multiplies the powers of the things generated,
and renders them prolific, and excites them to generate and give
subsistence to other things. For if every thing imparts the appropriate
peculiarity which it possesses primarily to other things, every thing
which is prolific will impart progression, and will adumbrate the
infinity which is the primary leader of wholes, from which every
generative power proceeds, and which in an exempt manner pours forth
the ever-flowing progressions of divine natures.


                          PROPOSITION CLIII.

[Every thing which is perfect in the Gods,[275]] is the cause of divine
perfection.

       *       *       *       *       *

For as the hypostases of beings are of one kind, but those of
superessential natures of another, so likewise with respect to
perfections, those of the Gods themselves according to hyparxis, are
different from those of beings, which are secondary and posterior to
them. And the former indeed, are self-perfect and primary, because
_the good_ subsists primarily in them; but the latter possess
perfection according to participation. Hence the perfection of the Gods
is one thing, and that of deified natures is another. The perfection
however, which is primarily in the Gods, is not only the cause of
perfection to deified natures, but also to the Gods themselves. For
if every thing so far as it is perfect, is converted to its proper
principle, that which is the cause of all divine conversion, is the
perfective genus of the Gods.


                           PROPOSITION CLIV.

Every thing which is of a guardian nature in the Gods, preserves every
thing in its proper order, and is uniformly exempt[276] from secondary,
and established[277] in primary natures.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if a guard immutably preserves the measure of the order of every
thing, and connectedly contains all the natures that are guarded
in their appropriate perfection, it will impart to all things a
transcendency exempt from subordinate beings, and will firmly establish
each thing unmingled, in itself, existing as the cause of undefiled
purity to the natures that are guarded, and fixing them in superior
beings. For every thing is perfect which adheres to primary natures,
but is in itself alone, and is expanded above things subordinate.


                           PROPOSITION CLV.

Every thing vivific in the Gods is [a generative cause, but every
generative cause is not vivific.[278]]

       *       *       *       *       *

For a generative is more total than a vivific cause, and is nearer to
the principle of all things. For generation manifests a cause which
produces beings into multitude. But vivification represents to us
the deity who is the supplier of all life. If therefore the former
multiplies the hypostases of beings, but the latter gives subsistence
to the progressions of life,--if this be the case, as being is to life,
so is the generative order to the vivific series. The former therefore,
will be more total, and the cause of a greater number of effects, and
will on this account be nearer to the principle of all things.


                           PROPOSITION CLVI.

Every cause of purity is comprehended in the guardian order. But on
the contrary, not every thing of a guardian order is the same with the
purifying genus.

       *       *       *       *       *

For purity imparts to all the Gods the unmingled with things inferior,
and the undefiled in the providence of secondary natures. But a
guardian power also effects this, and contains all things in itself,
and firmly inserts them in superior natures. The guardian therefore is
more total than the purifying genus. For in short, the peculiarity of
the guardian power, is to preserve the order of every thing the same
with reference to itself, and to the natures prior and posterior to
itself. But the peculiarity of purity is to keep more excellent natures
exempt from such as are subordinate. These powers however primarily
subsist in the Gods. For it is necessary that there should be one cause
preceding that which is in all things, and in short, it is requisite
that there should be uniform measures of all good, and that these
should be comprehended by the Gods according to cause. For there is no
good in secondary natures which does not pre-exist in the Gods. [Hence
in the divinities purity is likewise a primary good, guardianship, and
every thing of this kind.[279]]


                          PROPOSITION CLVII.

Every paternal cause is the supplier of being to all things, and
gives subsistence to the hyparxes of beings. But every thing which
is fabricative of the production of form, exists prior to composite
natures, and precedes their order, and division according to number,
and is also of the same co-ordination with the paternal cause, in the
more partial genera of things.

       *       *       *       *       *

For each of these belongs to the order of bound; since hyparxis also,
number and form, have all of them the nature of bound. Hence, in this
respect they are co-ordinate with each other. But the demiurgic or
fabricative cause indeed, produces fabrication into multitude. And
the uniform, or that which has the form of _the one_ supplies
the progressions of beings. And the former indeed, is the artificer
of form, but the latter produces essence. So far therefore, as these
differ from each other, viz. form and being, so far also does the
paternal differ from the demiurgic cause. But form is a _certain_
being.[280] Hence the paternal cause is more total and causal, and is
beyond the demiurgic genus, in the same manner as being is beyond form.


                          PROPOSITION CLVIII.

Every elevating cause in the Gods, differs both from a purifying cause,
and from the convertive genera.

       *       *       *       *       *

For it is evident that this cause also has necessarily a primary
subsistence in the Gods; since all the causes of total good pre-exist
in the divinities. But it subsists prior to the purifying cause. For
the one liberates from things of a subordinate nature, but the other
conjoins with more excellent natures. The elevating however, has a
more partial order than the convertive cause. For every thing which
converts, [is converted either to itself, or to that which is more
excellent than itself.[281]] But the energy of the elevating cause
is characterized by a conversion to that which is more excellent, as
leading that which is converted to a superior and more divine cause.


                           PROPOSITION CLIX.

Every order of the Gods consists of the first principles, bound and
infinity. But one order is in a greater degree derived from bound, and
another from infinity.

       *       *       *       *       *

For every order proceeds from both these, because the communications
of first causes pervade through all secondary natures. But in some
things bound predominates in the mixture [of bound and infinity,] and
in others infinity. And thus the genus which has the form of bound has
its completion, in which the prerogatives of bound have dominion. This
too is the case with the genus which has the form of the infinite, and
in which the properties of infinity predominate.


                           PROPOSITION CLX.

                        _Concerning Intellect._

Every divine intellect is uniform, or has the form of _the one_,
and is perfect. And the first intellect subsists from itself, and
produces other intellects.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is a God it is filled with divine unities, and is uniform.
But if this be the case, it is also perfect, being full of divine
goodness. And if this be admitted, it is likewise primarily intellect,
as being united to the Gods. But being primarily intellect, it also
gives an hypostasis to other intellects. For all secondary natures
obtain their hyparxis from such as have a primary subsistence.


                           PROPOSITION CLXI.

Every thing which is truly being, and is suspended from the Gods, is
divine and imparticipable.

       *       *       *       *       *

For since that which is truly being, is the first of the natures
that participate of the divine union, it likewise fills intellect
from itself. For intellect is being, as replete with being, and is
therefore a divine intelligible. And so far indeed as it is deified
it is divine, but as filling intellect, and being participated by
it, it is intelligible. Intellect also is being, on account of that
which is primarily being. But that which is primarily being itself is
separate from intellect; because intellect is posterior to being. But
imparticipables subsist prior to things which are participated. Hence
being which subsists by itself and is imparticipable, is prior to
the being which is conjoined with intellect. For it is intelligible,
not as co-arranged with intellect, but as perfecting intellect in an
exempt manner, because it imparts being to it, and fills it with truly
existing essence.


                          PROPOSITION CLXII.

Every multitude of unities which illuminates truly existing being, is
occult and intelligible; occult indeed, as being conjoined with unity;
but intelligible,[282] as participated by being.

       *       *       *       *       *

For all the Gods are denominated from the things which are suspended
from them; because from these it is possible to know their different
hypostases, which are [of themselves] unknown. For every thing divine
is of itself ineffable and unknown, as being connascent with the
ineffable one. From the difference, however, of the participants
it happens that the peculiarities of divine natures become known.
The unities, therefore, which illuminate truly existing being are
intelligible; because being, truly so called, is a divine intelligible,
and imparticipable, subsisting prior to intellect. For this would
not be suspended from the first Gods, unless they also possessed a
primary hypostasis, and a power perfective of other Gods; since, as
participants are to each other, so likewise are the hyparxes of the
things that are participated.


                          PROPOSITION CLXIII.

Every multitude of unities which is participated by imparticipable[283]
intellect, is intellectual.

       *       *       *       *       *

For as intellect is to truly existing being, so are these unities to
the intelligible unities. Since, therefore, the latter which illuminate
being,[284] are intelligible, hence, the former which illuminate a
divine and imparticipable intellect, are intellectual. Yet they are not
intellectual in such a way, as if they subsisted in intellect, but as
causally existing prior to intellect, and generating intellect.


                          PROPOSITION CLXIV.

Every multitude of unities which is participated by every
imparticipable soul, is supermundane.

       *       *       *       *       *

For because imparticipable soul is primarily above the world, the Gods
also which are participated by it are supermundane, having the same
analogy to the intellectual and intelligible Gods, which soul has
to intellect, and intellect to truly existing being. As, therefore,
every soul is suspended from intellect, and intellect is converted
to the intelligible, thus also the supermundane are suspended from
the intellectual, in the same manner as the intellectual from the
intelligible Gods.


                           PROPOSITION CLXV.

Every multitude of unities which is participated by a certain [sensible
body is mundane.]

       *       *       *       *       *

For it illuminates the parts of the world, through intellect and soul
as media.[285] For intellect is not present with any mundane body
without soul, nor are deity and soul conjoined without a medium; since
participations are through similars. Intellect itself also according
to its intelligible summit, participates of unity. These unities,
therefore, are mundane, as giving completion to the whole world, and as
deifying visible bodies. For each of these is divine, not on account
of soul; for soul is not primarily a God. Nor on account of intellect;
for intellect is not the same with _the one_. But each of these
visible bodies, is animated indeed on account of soul, and moved of
itself. But it possesses a perpetual sameness of subsistence, and is
moved in the most excellent order, on account of intellect. It is,
however, divine on account of union. And if it possesses a providential
power, it possesses it through this cause.


                          PROPOSITION CLXVI.

Every intellect is either imparticipable or participable. And if
participable, it is either participated by supermundane, or by mundane
souls.

       *       *       *       *       *

For imparticipable intellect having the first order, is the leader of
every multitude of intellects. But of participable intellects, some
illuminate supermundane and imparticipable soul, but others the mundane
soul. For the mundane multitude is not immediately derived from the
imparticipable; since progressions are through similars. But that which
is separate from the world, is more similar to the imparticipable, than
that which is divided about it. Nor has a supermundane multitude alone
a subsistence, but there are also mundane intellects; since there is
likewise a mundane multitude of Gods, and the world itself is animated,
and at the same time intellectual. The participation also of the
supermundane Gods by mundane souls, is through mundane intellects as
the media.


                          PROPOSITION CLXVII.

Every intellect intellectually perceives itself. But the first
intellect indeed, perceives itself alone; and in this, intellect
and the intelligible are one in number. But each of the subsequent
intellects, perceives itself, and the natures prior to itself. And the
intelligible to each of these,[286] is partly that which it is, and
partly that from which it is derived.

       *       *       *       *       *

For every intellect, either[287] intellectually perceives itself, or
that which is above, or that which is posterior to itself. But if
indeed it perceives that which is posterior to itself, it will through
intellect be converted to that which is less excellent than itself;
and thus will not know that to which it is converted, as not being in
itself, but external to itself. But it will only know the image of this
thing, as being generated in itself from it. For it knows that which it
possesses, and the manner in which it is affected, but not that which
it does not possess, and by which it is not affected.

But if it perceives that which is above itself, if indeed, this is
accomplished through the knowledge of itself, it will at one and the
same time both know itself and that superior nature. But if it knows
that alone, it will be ignorant of itself, though it is intellect. In
short, by knowing that which is prior to itself, it will know that it
is a cause, and will also know the things of which it is the cause.
For if it is ignorant of these, it will likewise be ignorant of that
which is the cause of them; not knowing that which produces what it
produces, by its very being, and what the things are which it does
produce. Hence, by knowing the things of which it is the cause, it will
also know itself, as deriving its subsistence from thence. By knowing,
therefore, that which is prior to itself, it will likewise entirely
know itself. Hence, if there is a certain intelligible intellect,
this by knowing itself, will also know the intelligible, being
itself intelligible. But each of the intellects posterior to this,
will intellectually perceive the intelligible which is in itself, and
at the same time that which is prior to itself. Hence, in intellect
there is the intelligible, and in the intelligible intellect. But one
intellect is the same with the intelligible; and another is the same
with the intelligible which is in itself, but is not the same with the
intelligible prior to itself. For that which is simply intelligible is
one thing, and the intelligible in that which intellectually perceives
is another.


                         PROPOSITION CLXVIII.

Every intellect knows in energy that which it intellectually perceives,
and it is not the peculiarity of one part of it to perceive, and of
another to perceive that it perceives.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is intellect in energy, and perceives itself as not any
thing different from the object of intellectual perception, it
will know itself, and see itself. But seeing that which perceives
intellectually, and knowing that which sees, it will know that it
is intellect in energy. But knowing this, it will know that it
perceives intellectually, and will not alone know the objects of its
intellection. Hence, it will at once both know the intelligible, and
that it intellectually perceives it, and by intellection it will be
intellectually perceived by itself.


                          PROPOSITION CLXIX.

Every intellect has its essence, power and energy in eternity.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it intellectually perceives itself, and intellect is the same
with the intelligible, intelligence also is the same with intellect
and the intelligible. For being the medium between that which
intellectually perceives, and the object of intellectual perception,
and these being the same, intelligence also will be the same with both.
Moreover, that the essence of intellect is eternal, is evident.[288]
For the whole of it subsists at once. And this being the case,
intelligence also will be eternal, since it is the same with the
essence of intellect. But if intellect is eternal,[289] it will not be
measured by time, neither according to its being, nor its energy. But
these subsisting with invariable sameness, the power also of intellect
will be eternal.


                           PROPOSITION CLXX.

Every intellect at once intellectually perceives all things. But
imparticipable intellect indeed, _simply_ perceives all things.
And each of the intellects posterior to it perceives all things
[according to one].

       *       *       *       *       *

[For if][290] every intellect establishes its essence in eternity, and
together with its essence its energy, it will intellectually perceive
all things at once. For to every thing which is not established in
eternity, the successive objects of its perception subsist according to
parts. For every thing which is successive, is in time; the successive
consisting of prior and posterior, but the whole of it not existing at
once. If therefore all intellects similarly perceive all things,[291]
they will not differ from each other. For if they perceive all things
similarly,[292] they are similarly all things, since they are the
very things which they intellectually perceive. But being similarly
all things, one intellect will not be imparticipable, and another
not. For their essences are the same things as the objects of their
intellection; since the intellection of each is the same with the
being of each, and each is both intellection and essence. It remains
therefore, either that each intellect does not similarly perceive all
things, but one thing, or more than one, but not all things at once;
or that it perceives all things according to one.[293] To assert
however, that each intellect does not perceive all things, is to make
intellect to be ignorant of some particular being. For if it suffers
transition in its energy, and intellectually perceives, not at once,
but according to prior and posterior, at the same time possessing an
immoveable nature, it will be inferior to soul, which understands all
things in being moved, [or in a mutable energy]; because intellect
on this hypothesis, will only understand one thing by its permanent
energy. It will therefore understand all things according to one. For
it either intellectually perceives all things, or one thing, or all
things according to the one of intellection. For in all intellects
indeed, there is always an intellectual perception of all things; yet
so as to bound all things in one of all. Hence there is something
predominant in intellection, and the objects of intellection; since all
things are at once understood as one, through the domination of one,
which characterizes all things with itself.


                          PROPOSITION CLXXI.

Every intellect is an impartible essence.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is without magnitude, incorporeal, [and immoveable, it
is impartible. For every thing][294] which in any way whatever is
partible, is either partible on account of magnitude, or multitude, or
on account of energies which are borne along with the flux of time. But
intellect is eternal according to all things, and is beyond bodies, and
the multitude which is in it is united. It is, therefore, impartible.
That intellect also is incorporeal, is manifest from its conversion to
itself. For no body is converted to itself. But that it is eternal,
the identity of its energy with its essence evinces. For this has been
before demonstrated. And that the multitude in it is united is evident
from the continuity of intellectual multitude with the divine unities.
For these are the first multitude; but intellects are next to these.
Hence, though every intellect is a multitude, yet it is an united
multitude. For prior to that which is divided, that which is collected
into profound union, and is nearer to _the one_, subsists.


                          PROPOSITION CLXXII.

Every intellect is proximately the producing cause of beings perpetual
and immutable according to essence.

       *       *       *       *       *

For every thing which is produced by an immoveable cause, is immutable
according to essence. But immoveable intellect being all things
eternally, and abiding in eternity, produces by its very being that
which it produces. If however it always is, and is invariably the same,
it always produces, and after the same manner. Hence, it is not the
cause of things which sometimes have existence, and at other times not,
but it is the cause of things which always exist.


                         PROPOSITION CLXXIII.

Every intellect is intellectually both the things which are prior and
posterior to itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

For it is those things which are posterior to itself, according
to cause, but those things which are prior to itself, according
to participation. Yet it is still intellect, and is allotted an
intellectual essence. [Hence it defines] all things [according to
its essence];[295] both such as are according to cause, and such
as are according to participation. For every thing participates of
more excellent beings in such a way as it is naturally adapted to
participate, and not according to their subsistence. For otherwise,
they would be similarly participated by all things. Participations
therefore, are according to the peculiarity and power of the
participants. Hence in intellect, the natures prior to it subsist
intellectually. But intellect is likewise intellectually the things
posterior to itself. For it does not consist of its effects, nor does
it contain these, but the causes of these in itself. But intellect is
by its very being the cause of all things. And the very being of it
is intellectual. Hence it contains intellectually the causes of all
things. So that every intellect possesses all things intellectually,
both such as are prior, and such as are posterior to it. As therefore,
every intellect contains intelligibles intellectually, so likewise it
contains sensibles intellectually.


                          PROPOSITION CLXXIV.

Every intellect gives subsistence to things posterior to itself, by
intellection, and its fabrication consists in intellection, and its
intellection or intelligence, in fabrication.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if intelligible and intellect are the same, the essence also of
every intellect will be the same with the intellection in itself. But
it produces that which it produces by essence, and produces according
to the very being, which it is. By intellection therefore, it will
produce the things which are produced. For in intellect, being and
intellection are both of them one. For intellect is the same with every
being which it contains. If therefore, it makes by its very being, but
its very being is intellection, it makes by intellection. Intelligence
also which is in energy, consists in intellection. But this is the same
with the essence of intellect. And the essence of intellect consists
in producing. For that which produces immoveably, [always possesses]
its very being [in producing. The intelligence of intellect therefore
consists in fabrication or production.[296]]


                          PROPOSITION CLXXV.

Every intellect is primarily participated by those natures which are
intellectual, both according to essence, and according to energy.

       *       *       *       *       *

For it is necessary that it should either be participated by these,
or by other natures, which possess indeed an intellectual essence,
but do not always energize intellectually. It is however impossible
that it should be participated by the latter of these. For the
energy of intellect is immoveable. And hence, the natures by which
it is participated, always participate of intellectual energy, which
always causes the participants of it to be intellectual. For that
which possesses its energy in a certain part of time, is unadapted to
be conjoined with an eternal energy. But that which has perfection
according to the whole of time, is the medium between every eternal
energy, and that which is perfect in a certain time, as well in the
mutations of energy, as in essences. For progressions are never
effected without a medium, but through kindred and similar natures,
both according to hypostases, and the perfections of energies. After
a similar manner therefore, every intellect is primarily participated
by those beings that are able to perceive intellectually, according to
the whole of time, and who always energize intellectually, though their
intellection is in time, and is not eternally in energy.


                              COROLLARY.

From this therefore, it is evident that it is impossible for the soul
which sometimes perceives intellectually and sometimes does not, to
participate proximately of intellect.


                          PROPOSITION CLXXVI.

All intellectual forms are in each other, and each is at the same time
separate and distinct from the rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every intellect is impartible, and the multitude which is in it
is united through intellectual impartibility, all things in it will be
in one, impartibles will be united to each other, and all intellectual
forms will pervade through all. But if all intellectual forms subsist
immaterially and incorporeally, they are unconfused with each other
and separate, and each preserving its own purity, remains that which
it is. The peculiar participation however of each participating in
a separate manner, manifests the unconfused nature of intellectual
forms. For unless the forms which are participated were distinguished
separate from each other, the participants of each of them would not
participate in a separate manner, but in the subordinate natures
[i.e. in the participants] there would be, in a much greater degree,
an indistinct confusion, these being according to their order of an
inferior condition. For whence would there be a separation of these, if
the natures which give subsistence to, and perfect them, were without
distinction, and were confused together? But again the impartible
hypostasis, and uniform essence of that which contains forms, evinces
their united nature. For things which have their hyparxis in the
impartible and the uniform, are impartibly in the same thing. For how
can you divide the impartible and _the one_? Hence, they have a
simultaneous subsistence, and are in each other, each wholly pervading
through the whole of each, in a manner unaccompanied with interval.
For that which comprehends them is not extended with interval, nor is
one of them in this thing, but another elsewhere, as in that which has
interval; but every thing is at once in the impartible and in one. So
that all intellectual forms are in each other, and are in each other
unitedly, and at the same time each is distinctly apart from each.


                              COROLLARY.

But if some one, in addition to these demonstrations, should require
also examples, let him direct his attention to the theorems which exist
in one soul. For all these are in the same essence, which is truly
without magnitude,[297] and are united to each other. For that which is
without magnitude, does not locally contain the things which are in it,
but the natures which it contains are united and separated, impartibly
and without interval. For the soul genuinely produces all things, and
each apart from each, attracting nothing from the rest, which, unless
they were always separated according to habit, would not be separated
by the energy of the soul.


                         PROPOSITION CLXXVII.

Every intellect being a plenitude of forms, one indeed, is
comprehensive of more total, but another of more partial forms. And
the superior intellects contain in a more total manner, such things
as those posterior to them contain more partially. But the inferior
intellects contain more partially, such things as those that are prior
to them contain more totally.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the superior intellects employ greater powers, having more the form
of _the one_ than secondary intellects. But the inferior intellects
being more multiplied, diminish the powers which they contain.
For things that are more allied to _the one_, being contracted in
quantity, surpass the natures that are posterior to them. And on the
contrary, things more remote from _the one_, as they are increased
in quantity, are inferior to the natures that are nearer to _the
one_. Hence the superior intellects, being established according to a
greater power, but being less in multitude, produce a greater number
of effects, according to power, through fewer things according to the
quantity of forms. But the intellects posterior to them produce fewer
effects through a greater number of things, according to a defect
of power.[298] If therefore, the former produce a greater number of
effects, through fewer things, the forms in them are more total. And if
the latter produce fewer effects, through a greater number of things,
the forms in them are more partial.


                              COROLLARY.

Hence it happens that the natures which are generated from superior
intellects according to one form, are produced [in a divided manner
from secondary intellects[299]] according to many ideas. And again,
those natures which are produced by inferior intellects through many
and distinct forms, are produced by superior intellects through fewer,
but more total forms. And that indeed which is a whole and common,
accedes supernally to all its participants. But that which is divided
and peculiar accedes from secondary intellects. Hence secondary
intellects, by the more partial separation of peculiarities, accurately
and subtly distinguish the formations of primary intellects.


                         PROPOSITION CLXXVIII.

Every intellectual form gives subsistence to eternal natures.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every intellectual form is eternal and immoveable, it is
essentially the cause of immutable and eternal hypostases, but not
of such as are generated and corrupted. So that every thing which
subsists according to an intellectual form is an eternal intellectual
nature. For if all forms produce things posterior to themselves by
their very being, but their essence possesses an invariable sameness of
subsistence, the things produced by them will also be invariably the
same, and will be eternal. Hence, neither the genera which subsist from
a formal cause, according to a certain time, nor corruptible natures
so far as they are corruptible, have a pre-existent intellectual form.
For they would be incorruptible and unbegotten, if they derived their
hypostasis from intellectual forms.


                          PROPOSITION CLXXIX.

Every intellectual number is bounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if there is another multitude posterior to this, essentially
inferior to it, and thus [more remote from _the one_, but the
intellectual number is nearer to _the one_;[300]] and if that which is
nearer to _the one_, is less according to quantity, but that which is
more remote from it, is more according to quantity;--if this be the
case, the intellectual number also will be less than every multitude
posterior to it. Hence, it is not infinite. The multitude of intellects
therefore, is bounded. For that which is less than a certain thing is
not infinite, because the infinite, so far as infinite, is not less
than any thing.


                          PROPOSITION CLXXX.

Every intellect is a whole, so far as each consists of parts, and is
united to other things, and at the same time separated from them. But
imparticipable intellect indeed, is simply a whole, as containing all
parts in itself totally. But each partial intellect possesses the whole
as in a part; and thus is all things partially.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if a partial intellect is all things according to one, but a
subsistence according to one thing is nothing else than a subsistence
partially, the whole is in each of these intellects partially, being
defined according to a certain one particular thing which predominates
in all of them.


                          PROPOSITION CLXXXI.

Every participated intellect is either divine, as being suspended from
the Gods, or is intellectual only.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if a divine and imparticipable intellect has a primary subsistence,
the intellect which is allied to this, is not that which differs from
it in both respects, viz. which is neither divine, nor imparticipable.
For things which are dissimilar in both these respects, cannot
be conjoined with each other. It is evident therefore, that the
medium between these is partly similar to that which is primarily
intellect, and partly dissimilar to it. Either[301] therefore, it is
imparticipable and not divine; or it is participated and divine. But
every thing imparticipable is divine, as being allotted an order in
multitude analogous to _the one_. Hence, there will be a certain
intellect which is divine and at the same time participated. It is
necessary however that there should be [an intellect which does not
participate[302]] of the divine unities, but intellectually perceives
them only. For in each series, such things as are first, and which
are conjoined with their monad, are able to participate of things
proximately situated in a superior order. But such as are far distant
from the primary monad, cannot be suspended from the natures that
proximately belong to a higher order. There is therefore both [a
divine intellect,[303]] and an intellect which is intellectual only;
the latter indeed, being established according to an intellectual
peculiarity, which it possesses from its own monad, and from
imparticipable intellect; but the former subsisting according to the
union which it receives from the participated monad.


                         PROPOSITION CLXXXII.

Every [divine[304]] participated intellect, is participated by divine
souls.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if participation assimilates the participant to that which is
participated, and renders the former connascent with the latter,
it is evident that the participant of a divine intellect must be a
divine soul, as being suspended from a divine intellect, and that
through intellect as a medium it must participate of the deity which
it contains. For deity conjoins his soul which participates of it with
intellect, and binds that which is divine to that which is divine.


                         PROPOSITION CLXXXIII.

Every intellect which is participated indeed, but is intellectual
alone, is participated by souls which are neither divine, nor
subsisting in a mutation from intellect into a privation of intellect.

       *       *       *       *       *

For neither are divine souls of this kind, nor such as participate
of intellect. For souls participate of the Gods through a divine
intellect, as was before demonstrated. Nor are souls which admit of
mutation, of this kind. For every intellect is participated by natures
which are always intellectual, both according to essence and according
to energy. For this is evident from what has been before shown.


                         PROPOSITION CLXXXIV.

                          _Concerning Soul._

Every soul is either divine, or is changed from intellect into a
privation of intellect; or always remains as a medium between these,
but is inferior to divine souls.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if a divine intellect indeed, is participated by divine souls,
but an intellectual intellect by those souls alone which are neither
divine, nor receive a mutation from intelligence into a privation of
intellect (for there are souls of this kind, which sometimes perceive
intellectually, and sometimes do not);--if this be the case, it
is evident that there are three genera of souls. And the first of
these indeed, are divine. But the second are not divine, yet always
participate of intellect. And the third are those, which are sometimes
changed into an intellectual condition, and sometimes into a privation
of intellect.


                          PROPOSITION CLXXXV.

All [divine][305] souls, are indeed Gods psychically. But all those
that participate of an intellectual intellect, are the perpetual
attendants of the Gods. And all those that are the recipients of
mutation, are sometimes only the attendants of the Gods.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if some souls have divine light supernally shining upon them,
but others are endued with perpetual intelligence, and others again
only sometimes participate of this perfection;--if this be the case,
the first of these will among the multitude of souls be analogous
to the Gods. But the next to these, will always follow the Gods, in
consequence of always energizing according to intellect, and will be
suspended from divine souls, having the same relation to them as that
which is intellectual[306] to that which is divine. And the souls
which sometimes energize intellectually and follow the Gods, neither
participate of intellect after a manner always the same, nor are always
able to be converted [to the intelligible] in conjunction with divine
souls. For that which sometimes only participates of intellect, cannot
by any contrivance whatever be always conjoined with the Gods.


                         PROPOSITION CLXXXVI.

Every soul is both an incorporeal essence, [and separate from
body].[307]

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it knows itself, but every thing which knows itself, is
converted to itself, and that which is converted to itself, does not
pertain to body (since every body is without conversion to itself) nor
is inseparable from body, since that which is inseparable from body is
not naturally adapted to revert to itself as it would thus be separated
from body;--if this be the case, every soul is neither a corporeal
essence, nor inseparable from body. Moreover, that the soul knows
itself is evident. For if it knows the natures that are above itself,
and is also naturally adapted to know itself, it will in a much greater
degree know itself from the causes prior to itself.


                         PROPOSITION CLXXXVII.

Every soul is indestructible, and incorruptible.

       *       *       *       *       *

For every thing which can in any way whatever be dissolved and
destroyed, is either corporeal and a composite, or is allotted its
hypostasis in a subject. And that indeed, which is dissolved, is
corrupted as consisting of many things. But that which is naturally
adapted to be in another thing, vanishes into non-entity when separated
from its subject. Moreover, the soul is incorporeal, and external to
every subject, subsisting in itself, and being converted to itself.
Hence, it is indestructible and incorruptible.


                        PROPOSITION CLXXXVIII.

Every soul is both life and vital.

       *       *       *       *       *

For that to which soul accedes necessarily lives. And that which
is deprived of soul, is immediately left destitute of life. Either
therefore it lived through soul, or through something else, and not
through soul. It is however impossible that it should have lived
through something else alone. For every thing which is participated,
either imparts itself, or something pertaining to itself to its
participant. But if it suffers neither of these, it will not be
participated. Soul however, is participated by that to which it is
present. And that which participates of soul is said to be animated.
If therefore that which is participated introduces life to animated
natures, it is either life, or vital alone, or both life and vital. If
however, it is alone vital, but not also life, it will consist of life
and non-life. It will not therefore know itself, nor be converted to
itself. For knowledge is life, and the gnostic power so far as it is
such is vital. If therefore, there is any thing in soul without life,
this will not possess essentially the power of knowing. But if soul is
life alone, it will no longer participate of the intellectual life.
For the participant of life is vital, and is not life alone, i.e. the
first and imparticipable life; but the life which is posterior to this,
is both vital and life. Soul however, is not imparticipable life. And
hence it is at the same time both life and vital.


                         PROPOSITION CLXXXIX.

Every soul is self-vital.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is converted to itself, but every thing which is converted
to itself is self-subsistent, the soul also is self-subsistent, and
produces itself. But it is likewise life and vital, and its hyparxis
is according to vitality. For it imparts life by its very being to the
natures to which it is present. And if the participant is adapted, it
immediately becomes animated and vital, [soul in effecting this not
reasoning][308] nor acting from deliberate choice, nor vivifying by
cogitation and judgment, but by its very essence, and by that which
it is, supplying the participant with life. Hence the being of soul
is the same as _to live_. If therefore the soul possesses being
from itself, and this is the same as _to live_, and it has life
essentially;--if this be the case, it will impart life to itself, and
will possess it from itself. And this being admitted, soul will be
self-vital.


                           PROPOSITION CXC.

Every soul is a medium between impartible natures, and the natures
which are divisible about bodies.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if soul is self-vital and self-subsistent, and has an hyparxis
separate from bodies, it is, in consequence of being more excellent
than, exempt from every thing divisible about body. For the natures
which are divided about bodies, are entirely inseparable from their
subjects, being co-distributed with divisible bulks. They also depart
from themselves, and their own impartibility, and are co-extended
with bodies. And though they subsist in lives, yet these are not the
lives of themselves, but of participants. Though likewise they exist
in essence and in forms, yet they are not the forms of themselves,
but of those things which are fashioned by forms. If therefore, soul
is not these, it is a self-subsistent essence, a self-vital life, and
a knowledge gnostic of itself. Hence, it is entirely separate from
bodies, but is a participant of life. If however, this be the case, it
also participates of essence. But it likewise participates of knowledge
from other causes. It is evident therefore, that it is inferior to
impartible natures, because it is filled [with life externally.][309]
But if with life, it is evident that it is also externally filled
with essence. For imparticipable life and imparticipable essence
are prior to soul.[310] That soul however is not primarily gnostic
is evident.[311] For every soul indeed, so far as soul is life,
but not every soul, so far as it is soul possesses knowledge. For a
certain soul while it remains soul, is ignorant of [real] beings. Soul
therefore, is not primarily gnostic, nor does it possess knowledge from
its very being. Hence, it has an essence secondary to those natures
that are primarily, and by their very being, gnostic. Since however,
the essence of soul is divided from its knowledge, soul does not belong
to natures [entirely] impartible. But it has been demonstrated that
neither does it rank among the natures that are divisible about bodies.
Hence, it is a medium between both.


                           PROPOSITION CXCI.

Every participable soul has indeed an eternal essence, but its energy
is accompanied with time.

       *       *       *       *       *

For either it possesses both eternally, or both temporally; or the
one eternally, but the other temporally. It cannot however, possess
both eternally: for it would be an impartible essence, and the nature
of soul would in no respect differ from an intellectual hypostasis,
viz. a self-motive from an immoveable nature. Nor can it possess both
temporally: for thus it would be generated alone, and would neither
be self-vital, nor self-subsistent. For nothing which is essentially
measured by time is self-subsistent. But soul is self-subsistent.
For that which is converted to itself, according to energy, is also
essentially converted to itself, and proceeds from itself. It remains
therefore, that every soul is partly eternal, and partly participates
of time. Either therefore, it is essentially eternal, [but participates
of time according to energy,[312]] or vice versa. The latter however,
is impossible. Hence, every participable soul, is allotted an eternal
essence, but a temporal energy.


                          PROPOSITION CXCII.

Every participable soul ranks among the number of [truly existing]
beings, and is the first of generated natures.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is essentially eternal, it is truly being according to its
hyparxis, and always is. For that which participates of eternity,
participates likewise of perpetual existence. But if it is in
time according to energy, it is generated. For every thing which
participates of time, since it is always becoming to be, or rising into
existence, according to the prior and posterior of time, and is not at
once that which it is, is wholly generated. But if every soul is in a
certain respect generated according to energy, it will be the first of
generated natures. For that which is in every respect generated, is
more remote from eternal natures.


                          PROPOSITION CXCIII.

Every soul subsists proximately from intellect.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it has an immutable and eternal essence, it proceeds from an
immoveable essence. For that which proceeds from a moveable essence, is
essentially changed in every respect. The cause, therefore, of every
soul is immoveable. But if it proximately subsists from intellect, it
is perfected by, and converted to intellect. And if it participates of
the knowledge which intellect imparts to the natures that are able to
partake of it; (for all knowledge is derived from intellect, and all
things have their progression essentially from that to which they are
naturally converted)--if this be the case, every soul proceeds from
intellect.


                          PROPOSITION CXCIV.

Every soul contains all the forms which intellect primarily possesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it proceeds from intellect, and intellect gives subsistence
to soul; and if intellect subsisting immoveably produces all things
by its very being, it will also impart to soul which it fabricates,
the essential reasons [or producing principles] of all things which
it contains. For every thing which produces by its very being,
imparts secondarily to the thing generated by it, that which it is
itself primarily. The soul, therefore, contains secondarily the
representations of intellectual forms.


                           PROPOSITION CXCV.

Every soul is all things, containing indeed sensibles paradigmatically,
or after the manner of an exemplar; but intelligibles iconically, or
after the manner of an image.

       *       *       *       *       *

For subsisting as a medium between impartible natures, and such as
are divisible about body, it produces and gives subsistence to the
latter of these, but pre-establishes in itself the causes from which
it proceeds. Those things, therefore, of which it is the pre-existent
cause, it antecedently comprehends paradigmatically. But it possesses
according to participation, and as the progeny of first natures the
causes of its subsistence. Hence it antecedently comprehends according
to cause all sensible natures, and contains the immaterial productive
principles of things material, the incorporeal principles of things
corporeal, and without interval, the principles of things which possess
interval. But it contains intelligibles and the forms of them after the
manner of an image; so that it receives partibly indeed impartibles,
with multiplication unical natures, and in a self-motive manner, things
immoveable. Hence it is all beings, containing such as are first,
according to participation, but paradigmatically such as are posterior
to its own nature.


                          PROPOSITION CXCVI.

Every participable soul, primarily uses a perpetual body, which
possesses an unbegotten and incorruptible hypostasis.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if every soul is essentially eternal, and by its very being
primarily animates some particular body, [it will always animate this
body. For the essence of every soul is immutable]. But if this be the
case, that which is animated by it is always animated, and always
participates of life. That, however, which always lives, by a much
greater priority always exists. But that which always is, is perpetual.
Hence, that which is primarily suspended from every soul, is perpetual.
But indeed every participable soul is primarily participated by a
certain body, since it is participable and not imparticipable, and
animates its participant by its very being. Every participated soul,
therefore, uses a body which is primarily perpetual, and essentially
unbegotten and incorruptible.


                          PROPOSITION CXCVII.

Every soul is an essence vital and gnostic, and a life essential and
gnostic, and is knowledge, essence, and life. All things likewise
subsist in it at once, the essential, the vital, and the gnostic; and
all things are in all, and each is separate from the rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is the medium between impartible forms, and those which are
divided about bodies, it is neither so impartible as all intellectual
natures, nor so partible as corporeal forms. Since, therefore,
essences, lives and cognitions are divided in corporeal natures, these
subsist in souls impartibly, unitedly, and incorporeally, and all of
them exist at once, through their immateriality and impartibility.
Since, likewise, in intellectual natures, all things subsist according
to union, they are distinguished and divided in souls. All things,
therefore, subsist together in these, and at the same time apart. But
if all impartibles subsist together and in one, they pervade through
each other, and if they are separate, they are again divided without
confusion; so that each subsists by itself, and all are in all. For
in the essence of soul there is both life and knowledge;[313] since
every soul would not know itself, if the essence of it was of itself
deprived of life and knowledge. And in the life of the soul there are
both essence and knowledge. For unessential[314] life, and which is
without knowledge, pertains to material lives, which are neither able
to know themselves, nor are genuine essences. Knowledge, also, which is
unessential and without life, is without subsistence. For all knowledge
belongs to that which is vital, and which is of itself allotted an
essence.


                         PROPOSITION CXCVIII.

Every thing which participates of time, and is always moved, is
measured by periods.

       *       *       *       *       *

For since it is measured by time, the motion of it also participates of
measure and bound, and proceeds according to number. But because it is
always moved, and this always is not[315] eternal, but temporal, it is
necessary that it should use periods. For motion indeed is a mutation
from some things to others. But beings are terminated by multitude
and magnitude. These, however, being bounded, there can neither be a
mutation to infinity according to a right line, nor can that which
is always moved, make its transitions finitely. Hence, that which is
always moved, will proceed from the same to the same, and thus will
proceed periodically.


                          PROPOSITION CXCIX.

Every mundane soul uses periods of its proper life, and restitutions to
its former state.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is measured by time, it energizes transitively, and possesses
a peculiar motion.[316] But every thing which is moved and participates
of time, if it is perpetual, uses periods, periodically revolves, and
is restored from the same things to the same. And every mundane soul
possessing motion, and energizing according to time, will have periods
of motions, and restitutions to its pristine state. For every period of
perpetual natures is _apocatastatic_, or restorative to a former
condition.


                            PROPOSITION CC.

Every period of soul is measured by time. The period of other souls
indeed is measured by a certain time; but that of the first soul, since
it is measured by time, is measured by the whole of time.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if all motions have prior and posterior, so likewise have periods,
and on this account they participate of time. That also which measures
all the periods of souls is time. But if indeed there were the same
periods of all souls, and they were about the same things, the time of
all would be the same. If, however, the restitutions of different souls
are different, the periodic time also and which restores to a pristine
state, is different in different souls.

That the soul, therefore, which is primarily measured by time, is
measured by the whole of time, is evident. For if time is the measure
of all motion, that which is primarily moved, will entirely participate
of time, and will be measured by the whole of time. For if the whole
of time did not measure its first participant, it would not measure
any thing else, according to the whole of itself. From these things,
however, it is evident that all souls are measured by certain
measures which are more partial than the whole of time. For if these
souls are more partial than the soul which primarily participates of
time, neither can they adapt their periods to the whole of time. The
multitude of their restitutions, however, will be parts of the one
period, and of the one restitution of things to their pristine state,
which is effected by the soul that primarily participates of time. For
a more partial participation pertains to a less power; but a more total
to a greater power. Other souls, therefore, are not naturally adapted
to receive the whole temporal measure according to one life, because
they are allotted an order inferior to that of the soul which is first
measured by time.


                           PROPOSITION CCI.

All divine souls have triple energies; some indeed as souls; but others
as receiving a divine intellect; and others as suspended from the Gods.
And they provide indeed for the whole of things as Gods; but they know
all things through an intellectual life; and they move bodies through a
self-moved hyparxis.

       *       *       *       *       *

For because they psychically[317] participate of the natures situated
above them, and are not simply souls, but divine souls, and are
established according to an order, in the psychical extent, analogous
to the Gods, they energize not only psychically, but also divinely,
being allotted a deified summit of their essence, and also because they
have an intellectual hypostasis, through which they are spread under
intellectual essences. Hence, they not only energize divinely, but also
intellectually; the former indeed according to _the one_ which
they contain; but the latter through an energy established according to
intellect. A third energy, likewise, is present with them, according
to their own hyparxis, which is motive indeed of things naturally
alter-motive, but is vivific of such as possess an adventitious life.
For this is the proper employment of every soul; but such energies
as are intellectual and providential, they possess according to
participation.


                           PROPOSITION CCII.

All souls attending upon, and always following the Gods, are inferior
to divine, but are expanded above partial souls.

       *       *       *       *       *

For divine souls participating of intellect and deity, on which
account, they are at the same time both intellectual and divine, are
the leaders of other souls, just as the Gods also are the leaders
of all beings. But partial souls are deprived of a suspension from
intellect, in consequence of not being able to participate proximately
of an intellectual essence. For they would not fall from intellectual
energy, if they essentially participated of intellect, as has been
before demonstrated [in Prop. 184]. Hence, the souls which always
follow the Gods are of a middle condition; receiving indeed a perfect
intellect, and through this surpassing partial souls, yet not being
suspended from the divine unities. For the intellect which they
participate is not divine.


                          PROPOSITION CCIII.

Of every psychical multitude, divine souls indeed being greater in
power than other souls, are contracted according to number. But those
that always follow divine souls have a middle order among all souls,
both in power and quantity. And partial souls indeed are inferior in
power to the others, but proceed into a greater number.

       *       *       *       *       *

For divine souls are more allied to _the one_, on account of
their hyparxis being divine; but souls of a middle rank, through
the participation of intellect; and those of the last order, are
essentially dissimilar both to those of the middle, and those of the
first rank. Among perpetual natures, however, those that are nearer
to _the one_, are more single in number, and are more contracted in
multitude, than such as are more remote from it. But such as are more
remote from _the one_, are more multiplied. The powers, therefore, of
superior souls are greater, and have the same ratio to those of souls
in the second rank, which the divine has to the intellectual, and the
intellectual to the psychical peculiarity. Inferior souls also are more
in number. For that which is more remote from _the one_, is a greater,
and that which is nearer to it, is a less multitude.


                           PROPOSITION CCIV.

Every divine soul is the leader of many souls that always follow the
Gods; and of a still greater number of such as sometimes receive this
order.

       *       *       *       *       *

[For if it is a divine soul] it is necessary that it should be allotted
an order [which is the leader or generator[318]] of all things, and
which has a primary rank among souls. For in all beings that which is
divine, is the leader of wholes. It is likewise requisite that every
divine soul should neither alone preside over such souls as perpetually
follow the Gods, nor over those alone that are sometimes their
attendants. For if any divine soul should alone preside over those
that sometimes follow the Gods, how can there be a contact between
these and a divine soul, since they are entirely different from it,
and neither proximately participate of intellect, nor much less of the
Gods. But if it only presides over those that always follow the Gods,
how is it that the series proceeds as far as to these [alone]? For
thus intellectual natures will be the last, and will be unprolific,
and unadapted to perfect and elevate. It is necessary, therefore, that
such souls as follow the Gods, and energize according to intellect, and
which are elevated to intellects more partial than divine intellects,
should be primarily suspended from a divine soul. But it is necessary
that partial souls, and which through those that are divine as media,
participate of intellect and a divine life, should be suspended from
a divine soul in the second place. For through those which always
participate of a more excellent condition, those that sometimes only
participate of it, are perfected. And again, it is necessary that
about every divine soul, there should be a greater number of those
that only sometimes follow, than of those that always attend on the
Gods. For the power of the monad always proceeds into multitude,
according to diminution; being deficient indeed in power, but redundant
in multitude. Since every soul also of those that always follow the
Gods, is the leader of a greater multitude of partial souls, imitating
in this a divine soul; and elevates a greater number of souls to the
primary monad of the whole series. Every divine soul, therefore, is the
leader of many souls that always follow the Gods, but presides over a
still greater number of those that sometimes only receive this order.


                           PROPOSITION CCV.

Every partial soul has the same ratio to the soul under which it is
essentially arranged, as the vehicle of the one to the vehicle of the
other.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if the distribution of vehicles to souls is according to nature,
it is necessary that the vehicle of every partial soul should have
the same ratio to the vehicle of the soul which ranks as a whole, as
the essence of the one to the essence of the other. The distribution,
however, is according to nature. For things which primarily participate
are spontaneously conjoined with the natures which they participate.
If, therefore, as a divine soul is to a divine body, so is a partial
soul to a partial body, each soul essentially participating,--if
this be the case, that which was at first asserted is true, that the
vehicles of souls have the same ratio to each other, as the souls
themselves of which they are the vehicles.


                           PROPOSITION CCVI.

Every partial soul is able to descend infinitely into generation, and
to ascend from generation to real being.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it sometimes follows the Gods, but sometimes falls from an
extension to a divine nature, and participates of intellect and
the privation of intellect, it is evident that it is alternatively
conversant with generation and the Gods. For since it is not for
an infinite time with the Gods, it will not for the whole of the
following time be conversant with bodies. For that which has not a
temporal beginning will never have an end; and that which never has an
end is necessarily without a beginning. It remains, therefore, that
every partial soul must make periods of ascents from, and of descents
into generation, and that this must be unceasing through an infinite
time. Every partial soul, therefore, is able to descend and ascend
infinitely. And this never ceases to be the case with all of them.


                          PROPOSITION CCVII.

The vehicle of every partial soul, is fabricated by an immoveable cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it is perpetually and connascently suspended from the soul that
uses it,[319] being immutable according to essence, it is allotted its
hypostasis from an immoveable cause. For every thing which is generated
from moveable causes, is essentially changed. Moreover, every soul has
a perpetual body, which primarily participates of it. Hence, the cause
of a partial soul, and therefore of its vehicle,[320] is immoveable,
and on this account supermundane.


                          PROPOSITION CCVIII.

The vehicle of every partial soul is immaterial, essentially
indivisible and impassive.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it proceeds from an immoveable fabrication, and is perpetual,
it will have an immaterial and impassive hypostasis. For such things
as are adapted to suffer essentially, and to be changed, are all
of them material, and in consequence of subsisting differently at
different times, are suspended from moveable causes. Hence, likewise,
they receive an all-various mutation, being moved in conjunction with
their principal causes. Moreover, that this vehicle is indivisible, is
manifest. For every thing which is divided, so far as it is divided,
is corrupted, in consequence of departing from the whole, and from its
continuity. If, therefore, it is essentially immutable and impassive,
it will be indivisible.


                           PROPOSITION CCIX.

The vehicle of every partial soul descends indeed with the addition of
more material vestments, but becomes united to the soul by an ablation
of every thing material, and a recurrence to its proper form, analogous
to the soul that uses it.

       *       *       *       *       *

For this soul indeed descends irrationally, assuming irrational lives;
but it ascends laying aside all the generation-producing powers, with
which it was invested in its descent, and becoming [pure, returns to
the pristine condition of its nature. For the vehicle[321]] imitates
the lives of the souls that use it, and they being every where moved,
it is moved in conjunction with them. By its circulations likewise
it represents the intellections of some souls; but the falling of
others through their inclination to the realms of generation; and the
purifications of others, through the circumductions which lead to an
immaterial nature. For because it is vivified by the very essence of
souls,[322] and is connascent with them, it is all-variously changed
in conjunction with their energies; follows them every where; becomes
co-passive with them; is restored to its pristine state together
with them when they are purified;[323] and is elevated when they are
elevated, and aspires after its own perfection. For every thing is
perfected when it obtains its proper perfection.


                           PROPOSITION CCX.

Every connascent vehicle of the soul, always possesses both the same
figure and magnitude. But it is seen to be greater and less, and of a
dissimilar figure, through the additions and ablations of other bodies.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if it derives its essence from an immoveable cause, it is evident
that both its figure and its magnitude are defined by this cause, and
each is immutable and invariable. Moreover, at different times it
appears to be different, as likewise greater and less. Hence, through
other bodies added from the material elements, and again taken away, it
exhibits a different appearance both in quantity and form.


                           PROPOSITION CCXI.

Every partial soul descending into generation descends wholly; nor does
one part of it remain on high, and another part descend.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if something pertaining to the soul remained on high in the
intelligible world, it will always perceive intellectually, without
transition or transitively. But if without transition, it will
be intellect, and not a part of the soul, and this partial soul
will proximately[324] participate of intellect. This, however, is
impossible. But if it perceives intellectually with transition, from
that which always [and from that which sometimes[325]] energizes
intellectually, one essence will be formed. This, however, also is
impossible. For these always differ, as has been demonstrated. To which
may be added, the absurdity resulting from supposing that the summit
of the soul is always perfect, and yet does not rule over the other
powers, and cause them to be perfect. Every partial soul, therefore,
wholly descends.




                                  ON

                         PROVIDENCE AND FATE,

                               AND THAT

                       _WHICH IS IN OUR POWER_.

                                  TO

                       THEODORUS, THE MECHANIST.


1. I am of opinion, my friend Theodorus, that the conceptions of your
mind are mature, and adapted to a man who loves the contemplation of
beings; and I am gratified that you have thought fit to write to us
on these subjects, though there are many among you that are able to
investigate and doubt with you about such like problems. But it is
requisite, as it seems, that we also should adduce[326] what appears
to us to be the truth on the subjects which you have proposed for our
discussion, and what we conceive to accord with things themselves,
and with the opinions of the most celebrated of the philosophers
prior to us; and that we should not in vain hear the inquiries of a
man eminently skilled in mechanics, who was formerly known to us,
as I conceive, and as you have asserted. You inquire however, about
things which have been a thousand times investigated, and which in my
opinion will never have any rest, because the soul is excited to the
discussion of them, much light having been already thrown on them by
the elaborate writings of Plotinus and Iamblichus, and prior to these
by the divine Plato; and if it be not too much to say, such particulars
respecting them have been proclaimed by the divinely-inspired mouth
of theologists, as Plato alone has unfolded by demonstrations. And
why is it requisite to adduce to you Plato, and men who were divinely
wise, since they have been most luminously developed[327] by the Gods
themselves, who transcendently know what pertains to themselves,
and what they have produced, and have not been delivered by them in
enigmas, as by theologists. It is requisite therefore, that we also
writing conformably to them, should as I have said adduce to you what
appears to us to be the truth respecting the subjects of your inquiry.


2. You deserve indulgence if looking to the all-various tragic and
comic, and other connexions of human affairs, you have conceived that
there is only one fabricator and maker of such colligations in the
universe, and have called this Fate; or rather you have denominated
it the series and consequent generation of things; have thought that
such a dramatic scene is alone directed by some inevitable necessity;
and have celebrated this as providence, and asserted that it alone
possesses freedom of will, and is the lord of all things. But you have
conceived that the freedom of will of the human soul is only a name,
and is truly nothing, since she has an arrangement in the world, is
subservient to the energies of other things, and is a part of the
mundane fabric. Or rather, that I may use your own words, the human
soul is a machine, since there is an irrefragable cause which moves all
things that the world comprehends in itself. But the universe being as
it were one machine, the whole spheres are complicated in each other
analogously to certain drums, but the partial animals and souls that
are moved by them, and in short, all things, depend on one mover. And
perhaps in consequence of honouring your art, you have conceived that
the maker of the universe is a certain mechanic, and that you are an
imitator of the best of causes. These things however we have written,
mingling the jocose with the serious.


3. Betaking ourselves therefore to the contest, we say, that the
difference of these three things ought especially to be considered
by you, if you intend to arrive at the gate of the subjects of
investigation. And of these, the first indeed is, that Providence and
Fate do not differ in the way in which you conceive they do, viz. that
the one is a connected consequence, but the other is necessity, the
cause of this consequence. For both indeed are the causes of the world,
and of whatever is produced in the world, but Providence subsists prior
to Fate; and all that is produced according to Fate, is by a much
greater priority produced by Providence, but the contrary is not true;
for in short,[328] the natures which are governed by Providence are
more divine than those which are governed by Fate. The second thing
is this, that the soul which is separable from the body, and which
descends into this mortal abode from the Gods, is different from the
soul which is in bodies, and which subsists in, and is inseparable from
its subjects; and that the latter essentially depends on Fate, but the
former on Providence. The third particular is, that the science and
truth which are inherent in souls conversant with generation, though
they may lead an immaculate life, are different from the science and
truth in souls that have fled from this abode, and are established in
that place whence they first fell, and descended into the realms of
mortality. Of these three particulars therefore, as we have said, if
you can discover sufficient solutions, you will obtain a satisfactory
answer to your inquiries. For Providence indeed, differing in the
above mentioned manner from Fate, it will be evident that many things
escape Fate, but that nothing escapes Providence; that Providence
supernally governs Fate, produces it, and has limited its empire[329]
by alter-motive natures, viz. by things which are allotted their first
subsistence in beings that are moved by something else. But again,
having shown that the soul which is separable from bodies, is different
from that which is planted in bodies, it will be manifest to you which
of these two possesses freedom of will, and that which is in our power;
which is subservient to necessity, and is under the dominion of Fate;
and where the complication of these is to be found, on account of which
the one dulls the freedom of the will through a subordinate life, but
the other participates of a certain image of election, in consequence
of its greater proximity to a more excellent nature.[330] And science
appearing to you to be twofold, it will be evident after what manner
both Plato and Socrates, and to these also may be added the great
Parmenides, assert, that the soul while here is capable of knowing
truth, when it is purified from material darkness, and the passions
introduced into it by the body, and its commixture with corporeal
natures, but that it is allotted science in a greater degree, and in a
mote genuine mode, when it exists beyond bodies, and generation, and
bitter matter.


4. These three problems therefore, being necessary and having been
well discussed[331] by the ancients, partly by Iamblichus, in his
copious and elaborate treatises On Providence and Fate, and partly
by all the lovers of Plato, who proclaim that the soul is twofold,
by Plotinus likewise in many places, and also by Porphyry, who make
a distinction between contemplation, and contemplative virtue, and
in short, by all who are able to understand Plato,--this being the
case, it is necessary that beginning from the first thing proposed, we
should discover the difference between Providence and Fate. “But in
every thing, says Plato, it is requisite to know the one principle
of that which is the subject of speculation, or we must err in every
thing.” It is necessary however, as the dæmoniacal Aristotle teaches,
after inquiring _if a thing is_, to investigate in the next place _what
it is_. If therefore, you inquired whether Providence is, or is not,
and in a similar manner concerning Fate, it would be requisite in the
first place to show you _that_ each of them is,[332] and if you still
doubted, I should be unwilling after this to answer your doubts, but
since you acknowledge that both of them have a subsistence, and that
all things are comprehended in their dominion, it evidently remains,
I conceive, that I should demonstrate to you _what_ each of them is;
for from this it will be evident what it is in which they differ.
And this being known, many of your doubts, as we have said, will be
solved. But again, because to the discovery of _what a thing is_, the
dividing method is said to contribute, which Socrates in the Philebus
celebrates as the gift of the Gods to men, and because what are called
our common conceptions contribute to the discovery of principles, from
which conceptions it is possible, as Aristotle writes, to investigate
many things that are demonstrable,--hence it is requisite that we
also employing both these, should unfold Providence and Fate; so far
as pertains to what we say they are, using common conceptions, but so
far as pertains to other things, employing distinctly the divisions of
beings, from which, as it appears to me, we can alone discover what
the definitions are of Providence and Fate. But these being known will
enkindle a clear light in the subjects of investigation, and will
perhaps free us from the doubts by which we are at present detained.


5. The common conceptions therefore of all men, and which possess
indubitable evidence, assert, that Providence is indeed the cause of
good to those beings for which it provides, and that Fate is also a
cause, but the cause of a certain connexion and consequence to those
things that are generated. For that all of us have these irrefragable
conceptions about Providence and Fate, is evident from our asserting
that men who are the procurers of good to others, have _well_ provided
for the subjects of their beneficence; and again, we denominate that
which is evolved through many causes complicated with each other and
unknown to us, no otherwise than _Fate_. Our life also is full of these
names, because names testify the truth of these conceptions. For the
word Providence (προνοια) indicates[333] that energy which is prior to
intellect, and which it is necessary to attribute to _the good_ alone;
for this alone is more divine than intellect, because much-honoured
intellect desires good, together with all things and prior to all
things. But the word Fate (ειμαρμενη) indicates _that which connects
all things that are naturally adapted to have such a connexion_.
Moreover, that the thing which is provided for is not the imparting,
nor that which is connected, Fate, nor that which proceeds into this,
connexion, but that which connects, you may assume from this, that all
of us conceive Providence and Fate to be certain productive powers.
But every where effective causes are distinct from their effects: and
these three things differ from each other, viz. that which makes,
that which is made, and the energy of making.[334] Just as in what
pertains to Providence and Fate there are, that which provides, that
which is provided for, and the effective energy which proceeds from the
providing cause into that which is provided for: and again, there are,
that which connects, that which is connected, and the effective energy
proceeding from the connecting cause into the thing connected. And it
is evident that according to each of these triads, that which makes is
not such as that which is made, but if the latter is various, it is
necessary that the former should be simple, and that if the participant
of good is the thing made, the maker should be imparticipable. For
every where that which makes is allotted a part more divine than that
which is made. When we say therefore, that Providence is the cause of
good, we must also say that it is the fountain of good, which does not
require to be benefited by other things. And admitting Fate to be the
cause of connexion, we must not say that it is itself connected by
other things. Such therefore, being the common conceptions which we
antecedently assume of these two, it remains in the next place that we
should consider what it is in which each of them excels [and by which
each is characterized]: and first, in what the characteristic of Fate
consists.


6. From these conceptions therefore, we infer that Fate is the cause
of things that are connected. But let us consider what the things are
that are connected. Of beings therefore, some have their essence in
eternity, but others in time. By beings however, whose essence is in
eternity, I mean those whose energy[335] together with their essence
is eternal: but by beings whose essence is in time, I mean those
whose essence _is_ not, but is always in generation, or rising into
existence, though it should be in generation for an infinite time. And
the natures that subsist between these, are such as have their essence
indeed permanent, and better than generation, but their energy measured
by time. For it is necessary that every progression from things first
to last should be effected through media. Since therefore, there are
beings which are eternal both in essence and energy, it is necessary
that there should be a middle extent, and that it should either have
an eternal essence, but an energy indigent of time, or the contrary.
The contrary however is impossible, that we may not confess that we
place energies prior to essences. Hence it remains that the medium must
be that which has an eternal essence, but a temporal energy. We say
therefore, that we have exhibited to you these three orders of beings,
the intellectual, the psychical,[336] and the corporeal. But I call
the intellectual that which exists and is intellective through all
eternity; the corporeal, that which is always rising into existence,
or becoming to be, either in an infinite time, or in a part of time;
and the psychical, that which is eternal indeed in essence, but which
employs temporal energies. Where then, must the things which are
connected be arranged? Consider assuming from the Gods the meaning
of the term ειρεσθαι _to be connected_, as implying nothing else than
this, that the natures which are differently produced according to
time, are conjoined with, and not separated from each other. And if
existing at one and the same time they are distant from each other
according to place, yet they have a certain co-ordination with each
other. Hence being separated either by places or times, they are in a
certain respect collected into unity, and into one sympathy, through
connexion. And in short,[337] the things which are connected, cannot
suffer this from themselves, but require something else which may
impart to them connexion. If therefore the natures which are arranged
under Fate, are such as are connected with each other, according to
our common conception of Fate; but the things which are connected are
partible, being distant either in places or times, and are naturally
adapted to be connected by something else, on account of the opinion
of connexion which prevails among all men; and these are moved by
something else, and are corporeal; for of the natures which are beyond
bodies, some [i.e. intellects] are better both than place and time, but
others [viz. souls] though they energize according to time, appear to
be pure from place;--if this be the case, it is evident that the things
which are governed and connected by Fate, are moved by something else,
and are entirely corporeal.


7. If however this is demonstrated, it is evident that admitting Fate
to be the cause of connexion, we must also admit that it presides
over alter-motive and corporeal natures. But assuming this, we will
ask ourselves what that is which is said to be the cause of bodies,
which is proximate to them, and by which things alter-motive are
inspired[338] and contained, and accomplish whatever they are able
to effect. And if you are willing, looking in the first place to our
bodies, let us consider what it is that moves and nourishes, and always
reweaves, and binds them together? Is not this that which is innate in
bodies, which also in other animals exhibits a similar energy,[339]
which extends as far as to things that are rooted in the earth, and
possesses a twofold energy, _this_ indeed renovating bodies that
they may not by discerption entirely vanish, but _that_ preserving
the several individuals in a condition conformable to nature? For it
is not the same thing to add what is deficient, and to preserve the
power of things that are held together. If therefore, not only in us,
and other animals and plants, but in this universe also[340] much prior
to bodies, there is one nature of the world, which is connective and
motive of the subsistence of bodies, as it is also in us, or why do
we call all bodies the progeny of nature, it is indeed necessary that
nature should be the cause of things that are connected, and that in
this what is called Fate should be investigated. And on this account
perhaps the dæmoniacal Aristotle also is accustomed to call those
augmentations or generations which are effected beside the accustomed
time, _deviations from Fate_. And the divine Plato says, “that the
world considered by itself, without the intellectual Gods, is convolved
as being corporeal by Fate, and innate desire.” The oracles of the Gods
also accord with these and bear witness to our demonstrations when they
say: “Look not upon Nature, for the name of it is fatal.” And thus we
have discovered what Fate is, and how it is the nature of this world,
and a certain incorporeal essence. For it presides over and is the life
of bodies, and this essentially, since it internally moves bodies,
and not externally, moves all things according to time, and connects
the motions of all things that are distant both in times and places;
according to which also, mortal are adapted to the participation of
eternal natures, are convolved together with them, and these are
mutually co-passive. For the nature which is in us, binds and connects
all the parts of our body, and their operations on each other: and
this also is a certain Fate of our body. As in our body likewise, some
parts are more, but others are less principal, and the latter follow
the former, so in the universe, the generations of the less principal
follow the motions of the more principal parts, viz. the sublunary
generations follow the periods of the celestial orbs, and the circle
of the former is an image of the circle of the latter. And these things
which have been divulged by all the ancients, I am unwilling to prolong.


8. It is not therefore, difficult for you to see what Providence
is. For if you assert that the fountain of good is primarily the
divine cause itself, you will speak rightly. For whence, except from
divinity, is good imparted to all things? So that as Plato says, “no
other cause of good than God, is to be admitted.” In the next place,
Providence being established above both intelligibles and sensibles,
is superior to Fate. And those things which are under Fate, are also
under Providence, possessing indeed, their connexion from Fate, but
their participation of good from Providence, so that the connexion may
have a good end, and that Providence may contain the end of Fate in
itself. But again, with respect to things that are under Providence,
all of them are not likewise indigent of Fate, but intellectual natures
are exempt from it. For the empire of Fate is entirely in corporeal
natures;[341] since to be connected introduces time, and corporeal
motion. To these things also, as it appears to me, Plato looking,
says that a subsistence of this kind, is mingled from intellect and
necessity, intellect ruling[342] over the necessity of bodies. And in
this place, he calls the motive cause necessity, which he elsewhere
denominates Fate, conceiving that bodies act by compulsion. And this
rightly. For every body is compelled both to do whatever it does, and
to suffer whatever it suffers, to heat, or to be heated, to impart
or to receive cold. But choice is not in bodies, because you may say
that their peculiarity is the necessary and an existence unaccompanied
with choice. For if this were not the case, what could there be that
is better than bodies? For the body which is moved in a circle, and
which is of an illustrious nature, is thus moved from necessity, in
the same manner as fire is from necessity moved to the circumference,
but earth to the middle [of the universe]. Plato therefore asserts
that necessity presides over the generations of bodies, and on this
account, over their corruptions also; but he exalts intellect, and
determines that it rules over necessity. If therefore Providence is
above intellect, it is evident that it rules over intellect, and those
things which are under this necessity; and that necessity alone rules
over those things which are under its dominion. Hence, every thing
indeed which has an intellectual subsistence, continues to exist under
Providence alone, but every thing which has a corporeal subsistence,
endures under necessity.


9. You must understand therefore, that there are two genera of things,
the one intellectual, but the other sensible, and also that there are
two kingdoms of these, the kingdom of Providence indeed above, which
reigns over both intellectuals and sensibles, and the kingdom of Fate
beneath, which has dominion over sensibles alone. And Providence
differs from Fate, in the same way in which a God differs from that
which is divine indeed, but by participation and not primarily. For in
other things also, as you may see, one thing has a primary subsistence,
and another is according to participation. Thus for instance, there is
light in the sun,[343] and light in the air, but the former subsists
primarily, and the latter subsists on account of the former. And life
is primarily in the soul, but secondarily in the body, and subsists
on account of the life of the soul. Thus also, Providence indeed,
is essentially deity, but Fate is something divine, and not deity,
for it depends on Providence, and is as it were its image. For if as
Providence is to intellectual, so is Fate to sensible beings; since
the former reigns over intellectuals, but the latter over sensibles;
then alternately, as geometricians say, as Providence is to Fate, so
are intellectuals to sensibles. But intellectuals are primarily beings,
and sensibles derive their subsistence from them. Hence Providence
is primarily that which it is, and from this the order of Fate is
suspended. But of these things enough.


10. If you are willing, however, we will betake ourselves to the second
discussion, viz. the consideration of the soul which is separable, and
of that which is inseparable from bodies. But assume this also from
the philosophy of Aristotle. For he says, that every soul which has an
energy not at all indigent of body, is likewise allotted an essence
beyond and separable from body. And this necessarily. For if we should
arrange energy as existing independent of body, but essence inseparable
from body, energy would be better than essence, since it would not
be at all indigent of a subordinate essence, that being rooted in
it, it might have a subsistence according to nature. This however is
impossible. It is necessary, therefore, that the soul which has an
energy separable from body, should also be itself separable. Consider
then, my friend, what soul it is in us, which we acknowledge is not at
all indigent of body, in the energies of itself according to nature?
Is it sense? But every sensitive power uses corporeal instruments,
and together with them energizes about its proper sensibles; viz. it
uses the eyes, the ears, and all the other senses, being at the same
time moved and co-passive with them. What then shall we say of anger
and desire? But do you not see that these frequently co-operate with
the corporeal parts, with the heart and the liver, and that these
also are not pure from body? For how is it possible that things which
energize with sense, should not also be indigent of body, since sense
is always moved through body? But with respect to the orectic powers,
that these energize with sense, is I conceive known to all of us. For
what deprived of sense, can either be angry, or desire? Plotinus also
rightly asserting, that all the passions are either senses, or are not
without sense. If, therefore, that which is angry is so in conjunction
with sense, possessing at the same time a sense of sorrow, and that
which desires possesses a sense of delight; but that which energizes
with sense energizes with body, for sense subsists with body;--if
this be the case, it is necessary that every thing which is angry and
desires, should energize with body. Hence, these species of life, being
all of them irrational, have that energy which is according to nature
in conjunction with body.


11. Looking now, however, to the rational nature itself, consider the
life of it which is seated in the inferior lives, and corrects either
what is deficient in them according to knowledge, as when from above
it evinces that sense is deceived about its own objects of knowledge.
I mean for instance, when it shows that sense is deceived in asserting
that the sun is but a foot in diameter, or when sense with its usual
deception asserts of such things any thing of a similar nature: or when
reason disciplines anger,[344] which is immoderate in its motions, when
it is agitated with fury. Hence Ulysses in Homer exclaims “endure, my
heart,” and represses the impulse of anger barking like a dog: or when
the rational nature represses the wantonness of desire, and frustrates
its endeavours to detain the soul by the delights that germinate
from the body, the petulance of these delights being ameliorated by
the corporeal temperaments. For in all such energies the rational
soul evidently represses all the irrational motions both gnostic and
orectic, and liberates itself from them, as from things foreign to its
nature. It is necessary, however, to investigate the nature of every
thing, not from the perverted use of it, but from its natural energies.
Hence, if reason, when it is moved in us as reason, restrains the
shadowy impression of the delights of desire, punishes the precipitate
motion of anger, and reproves sense as full of deception, asserting
that we neither hear nor see any thing accurately,[345] and if it
asserts these things looking to its internal reasons, none of which
it knows through body, or through corporeal cognitions, it is evident
that according to this energy it elongates itself from the senses,
contrary to the decision of which it is separated from those sorrows
and delights.


12. After this, however, I see another and a better energy of our
rational soul, the inferior powers being now at rest, and exhibiting
no tumult, as in many things they are accustomed to do, according to
which energy she is converted to herself, sees her own essence and the
powers[346] she contains, the harmonic ratios of which she consists,
and the many lives of which she is the completion, and re-discovers
herself to be a rational world, the image indeed of the natures prior
to herself, and from which she has departed, but the paradigm of the
natures posterior to herself, and over which she presides. To this
energy of the soul, my friend, arithmetic, and geometry, the mother of
your art, are said to contribute much,[347] which indeed elongate the
soul from the senses, purify the intellect from the irrational forms
of life with which it is surrounded, and lead it to the incorporeal
comprehension of forms, extending as it were, the lustrations to
the future mystics that are anterior to the most sacred mysteries.
For consider from intellectual energies after what manner the
above-mentioned sciences are allotted the purifying power of which we
have been speaking. For if they assume the soul replete with images,
and knowing nothing subtile, and unattended with material garrulity,
and if they cause reasons to shine forth which possess an irrefragable
necessity of demonstration, and forms full of all certainty and
immateriality, and by no means calling to their assistance the
grossness which is in sensibles, do they not evidently purify our
intellectual life from those things that fill us with folly, and which
are unadapted to the divine circumscription of beings?


13. After both these energies of the rational soul, let us survey her
now running back to her highest intelligence, through which she sees
her sister souls in the world, which are allotted the heavens and the
whole of generation according to the will of the father, and of which
she being a part, desires the contemplation of them. But she sees above
all souls, intellectual essences and orders. For above every soul a
deiform intellect resides, which imparts to the soul an intellectual
habit. She also sees prior to these, the monads of the Gods themselves
which are above intellect, and from which the intellectual multitudes
receive their unions. For it is necessary that unific causes should
be placed above things united, in the same manner as vivifying causes
are above things vivified, causes that impart intellect are above
things intellectualized, and in a similar manner imparticipable
hypostases are above all participants. For according to all these
elevating intellections, I conceive it is evident to those that are
not perfectly blind, how the rational soul leaving sense and bodies
behind, is led upward by intellectual surveys about the inflected and
truly mystic intuitions of the supermundane Gods. Or whence, and from
what kind of energies have the progeny of the Gods unfolded to us the
occult dispensations of divinity? And after what manner are souls
said to energize enthusiastically, and assuming a mania better than
temperance[348] to be conjoined to the Gods themselves? I speak of the
Sibyl who soon after she was born uttered admirable things, and told
those who were present at the time who she was, and from what order she
came into this terrestrial abode, and I allude to any other soul who in
a similar manner was of a divine destiny.[349]


14. In short, we must say that the rational and intellectual soul in
whatever way it may energize, is beyond body and sense; and therefore
it is necessary that it should have an essence separable from both
these. This however though of itself now evident, I will again manifest
from hence, that when it energizes according to nature, it is superior
to the influence of Fate, but that when it falls into sense, and
becomes irrational and corporeal, it follows the natures that are
beneath it, and living with them as with intoxicated neighbours, is
held in subjection by a cause that has dominion over things that are
different from the rational essence.[350] For again, it is necessary
that there should be a certain genus of beings of this kind, which
according to essence indeed is above Fate, but according to habitude
is sometimes arranged under it. For if indeed the beings which are
wholly eternal are placed above the laws of Fate, but there are beings
which according to the whole of their life, are arranged under the
periods of Fate, it will also be necessary that there should be an
intermediate nature between these two, which sometimes indeed is above
the productions of Fate, and sometimes is under its dominion. For the
progression of beings much more than the situation of bodies, leaves
no vacuum; but there are every where media between the extremes, which
also bind the extremes to each other. And not only Plato, but likewise
the oracles of the Gods have revealed these things to us. For in the
first place indeed, they order those divine men who were thought worthy
to be the auditors of those mystic discourses, “_not to look upon
nature, because the name of it is fatal_.” And again, they order
them “_not to co-augment Fate_.” Every where also, they exhort
them to turn from the life which is according to Fate, and to avoid
“_becoming corporeal with the fatal herds_;” by all which they
withdraw us from the senses and material desires; for through these we
become corporeal, and are then acted upon from necessity by Fate. For
similitude every where copulates[351] beings to each other; but that
which is assimilated enjoys the same polity as that to which it is
assimilated, whatever it may be, and consequently is under the dominion
of the ruler of that polity. For nothing is without a ruler and a
principality in the universe, whether you speak of wholes, or of parts.
But different things have different rulers, because these live in one
way, and those in another. Afterwards, the oracles teaching concerning
our most divine life, and that immaculate polity, which we enjoy when
liberated from every polity of Fate, say, “_The souls that become
venerable by understanding the works of the father will escape the
fatal wing[352] of Destiny_.”


15. The soul, therefore, embracing this life, and such a life as this,
will not rank among those souls that are led by Fate. But if it wishes
to conform itself to body, aspires after what are called corporeal
goods, and pursues honours, power and riches, it suffers the same thing
as a philosopher who is chained, and in this condition enters a ship.
For he becomes subservient to the winds that move the ship, [and cannot
help himself] if some one of the sailors should trample on him, or some
fettered slave should insult him. Bidding farewell, therefore, to the
things to which we are bound, we should direct our attention to the
strength of virtue, and consider Fate not as effecting any thing in us,
but in the things which surround us. For with respect, my friend, to
all external circumstances that may befal us, enemies may demolish the
walls of our city, and reduce its buildings to ashes, they may deprive
us of our possessions, and leave us in a state of indigence; but all
these being mortal and external, are in consequence of this in the
power of other beings, and not in ours. But with respect to the things
which are in our power, there is no one so potent as to be able to take
away any one of them, even though he should possess all human power.
For if we are temperate, we shall still continue to be so, though these
calamities may befal us, and if we are contemplators of true beings,
neither shall we be plundered of this habit; but all these dreadful
events taking place, we shall still persevere in celebrating the rulers
of all things, and in investigating the causes of effects.


16. By no means, therefore, must we reprobate the necessity of the
soul from its ultimate energies, but looking to its first energies,
we should admire its unconquerable power. And if we are thus wise,
nothing will disturb us pertaining to the passions of the inferior
parts of the soul; but when the body is disturbed, and we say that
we sustain something of a dreadful nature, it is not we who thus
speak, but it is the language of desire;[353] for the delights of the
body, and therefore its sorrows pertain to this part. When also being
robbed of our wealth, or not obtaining riches, we are grieved, this
passion belongs to that power of the soul which is a lover of wealth.
And again, when being reproached, and falling from power, we are
indignant, this is not the passion of the superior soul, but of that
which dwells downward, about the heart. For this pertains to the part
which is a lover of honour. But the reason which is in us, being in all
such particulars deceived, follows and is at the same time disturbed
with the subordinate powers of the soul, being a blind intellect, and
not having that eye[354] yet purified, by which it is able to perceive
itself, and the natures prior and posterior to itself. When, however,
it becomes purified from those things with which it was invested when
it fell, it will then know what that is which is in its power, how it
is neither in corporeal natures; for these are posterior to reason;
nor in those beings in whom there is the liberty of divine will; for
they are prior to reason; but that it consists in living according to
virtue. For this alone is free and unservile, and adapted to liberty,
and is truly the power of the soul, and confers power on its possessor.
For it is the province of all power to contain and preserve that which
possesses it.


17. But he who directs his attention to vice, looks at the debility
of the soul, though she should possess all other power. For the power
of instruments is one thing, and the power of those beings that ought
to use the instruments another. Hence, every soul, so far as it
participates of virtue, and so far as it is [a rational soul], is free;
but so far as it is vicious and debilitated, and is not [rational],
it is subservient to other things,[355] and not to Fate only, but to
every thing, in short, that is either willing to give that which is
appetible, or is able to take it away. For he who possesses virtue
is subservient to those beings who are alone sufficient to impart to
and co-augment with him that which is desirable; but these are the
Gods, with whom there is true virtue, and from whom that which is in
our power is derived. Plato also somewhere says, that this voluntary
servitude is the greatest liberty. For by being subservient to those
who possess all the power of all things, we become assimilated to
them, so that, as he says, we govern the whole world; i.e. when we are
perfect and winged, and reign on high. This, therefore, pertains to
the most divine of our souls, just as it pertains to the last of them,
to be as it were bound in prison, and to live an involuntary, instead
of a voluntary free life. But to the souls that have an intermediate
subsistence between these, it belongs, so far as they are liberated
from passions and the body, to ascend above necessity to a life which
has dominion over generation.


18. For again, if intellect and deity are prior to soul, but passions
and bodies are posterior to it; and if to these it belongs to act from
compulsion, but to intellect and deity, to act in a manner better than
all necessity, and which is alone free, it is necessary that the soul
betaking itself either to the former or to the latter, should either
enter under the necessity of subordinate, or exert the liberty of
more excellent natures; and that it should be subservient either to a
supernal dominion, or to a dominion inferior to itself.[356] But if it
is subservient, it must either rule in conjunction with the powers that
rule over it, or be alone subservient in conjunction with subservient
natures. Here, therefore, the soul ascending and resuming its power,
which is virtue, will consider nothing as dreadful whatever it may be,
that takes place about and external to the body. For the passions of
instruments do not pass to those that use them; but in whatever manner
they may subsist, it is possible for the soul to energize according to
virtue; strenuously indeed, if the body should happen to be languid,
but moderately when it is sane. And when poverty is present, it may
energize sublimely, but in affluence magnificently; but every where
from occurring circumstances, it may extol virtue that uses them;
and being ameliorated by its inward strength may vanquish external
calamities. For you must not suppose that you mechanists alone, are to
be permitted to say, that you can move a given weight with a given
power; for this you are well known to assert; but it is much more
possible for those who live according to virtue, truly to adorn a power
given from every circumstance by another power. And he who does this is
generous and free; but the bad man is the slave of all things though he
should rule over all things. For he resembles those who are punished in
Egypt, by laughing vizards that surround them. Over these also, who are
not able to govern themselves, necessity prevails. For being elongated
from the Gods, the universe uses them as brutes.


19. When, therefore, you wish to see that which is in our power, look
at the soul living according to nature. But the soul which is not
debile lives according to nature. For there is nothing debile in that
which is conformable to nature. The soul, however, is not debile, which
is not replete with vice, [the evil of the soul]; for in all things
evil is debile. And if you consider the soul in this point of view, you
will see what the nature is of that which is in our power. For you will
see that it uses all circumstances rightly, and either prohibits them
from taking place, or providentially attends to calamitous events when
they occur. It also permits Fate to act upon those things which are
posterior to Fate, and of which it is the lord; but is co-ordinated to
the natures prior to itself, and from which being more excellent than
itself, it is not divulsed. And thus much for the second particular
which we proposed to discuss.


20. In the third place, we will show what, and of what kind the modes
of knowledge are; for if we suffer these to remain indistinct, we
shall ignorantly err both about things themselves, and the doctrines
of the divine Plato. Let us then direct our attention to that mode of
knowledge divulged by Aristotle, and also Plato, which without the
assignation of cause alone knows the truth of the οτι; or _that a
thing is_;[357] because to souls beginning to be purified, these
philosophers attribute opinion as the first mode of knowledge, and as
adapted to those who are instructed in practical affairs,[358] without
engaging in the contemplation of beings. For erudition is a purgation
of the immoderation of the passions, reason in this case being
co-passive indeed, but moderately, and casting off all the rope of the
passions.


21. Such then being this mode of knowledge, another mode of an
elevating nature is delivered to us from the same Gymnasium. But this
knowledge is said to proceed from principles indeed as hypotheses, to
know causes, and to form necessary conclusions in all its reasonings.
And such is the knowledge obtained through arithmetic and geometry,
which syllogize, conclude from things necessary, and are alone placed
above doxastic knowledge. Because, however these sciences abiding in
their principles, do not ascend to the causes of these, on this account
they show themselves to fall short of the most perfect knowledge.
For as Aristotle says, “it is not the business of a geometrician to
discourse with him who subverts the principles of his science.” Hence,
in these sciences, that which is deduced from principles acknowledged
by them will be manifest; but that which pertains to the principles
themselves is obscure and unknown.


22. In the third place, ascending higher, conceive me to speak of
that knowledge of the human soul which ascends as far as to _the
one_, and to that which is unhypothetical, through all forms or
ideas, as I may say, dividing some, but analyzing others, and producing
many things from one, and one thing from many. Socrates, in the
Republic, defines this knowledge to be the defensive inclosure of the
mathematical sciences, and the guest in the Epinomis asserts it to
be the bond of them. For from this, geometry, and each of the other
sciences, assume the theory concerning their principles, adapting[359]
to themselves many principles, and which are divided or separated from
the one principle of all things. For what _the one_ is in all
beings, that a point is in geometry, the monad in arithmetic, and
in every thing, that which is most simple; from which principles the
several sciences producing those things which are under them, frame
their demonstrations. Each of these, however, is said to be, and is, a
certain principle. For the principle of all beings is simply principle,
and the highest ascent of the sciences, is as far as to this.


23. There still remains for you to understand a fourth mode of our
knowledge, which is more simple than the preceding, because it does
not employ methods, or analyses, or compositions, or definitions,
or demonstrations; but those who are able to energize according to
it, celebrate it as contemplating beings by simple, and as it were
self-visive projections; and they add, that they venerate it as
intellect, and not as science. Or have you not heard that Aristotle
in his demonstrative treatises says, that the intellect which is in
us is our most excellent part, and is that by which we know terms or
boundaries; and that Plato in the Timæus asserts that intellect and
science are the knowledges of the soul about beings? For science indeed
appears to pertain to the soul, so far as the soul is knowledge; but
intellect pertains to it so far as the soul is the image of true and
real intellect. For intellect perceiving intellectuals, or rather being
one with them, Plato says, that it understands them by projecting
energies, by intuition and contact, understanding itself, and beholding
intelligibles in itself, on which account it intellectually sees what
it is, and knows that it is at one and the same time both the perceiver
and the thing perceived. The soul, therefore, imitating this as much as
she is able, becomes herself intellect, running above science, leaving
the many methods with which she was before adorned, elevating her eye
to beings alone, and understanding them by contact in the same manner
as intellect; from which she differs in this, that she comes into
contact with different intelligibles at different times, but intellect
passes into contact with all things at once.


24. After all these modes of knowledge, I wish you (who have believed
in Aristotle when he leads the soul upward as far as to intellectual
energy, but insinuates nothing beyond this), to assume a fifth
intelligence; in so doing, following Plato, and prior to Plato
theologists, who are accustomed to celebrate a knowledge which is
above intellect, and have divulged this as a truly divine mania. But
they say that this is obtained by exciting the profundity of the soul,
which is no longer intellectual, and adapting it to union with _the
one_. For all things are known by the similar, that which is sensible
by sense, that which is the object of science by science, that which
is intelligible by intellect, and that which is one by that which is
charactertized by unity. For the soul indeed being intellective knows
herself, and knows whatever she understands, by contact, as we have
before observed. But being superintelligent, she is ignorant both of
herself and of the objects of knowledge, and being near to _the one_,
she loves quiet, having shut up her knowledge, becoming mute, and being
silent with internal silence. For how can she be adjacent to the most
ineffable of all things, except by laying asleep the garrulous matter
that is in her? Hence, she must become one that she may see _the one_,
or rather that she may not see _the one_. For seeing, she will see
that which is intellectual, and not that which is above intellect, and
will intellectually perceive a certain one, and not _the one itself_.
He, my friend, who energizes according to this most divine energy
of the soul, trusting solely to himself, viz. to the flower of his
intellect, causing himself to be at rest not from external, but from
internal motions, and becoming a God as far as it is possible for the
soul to be so, will understand how the Gods alone ineffably know all
things, according to _the one_ of themselves. But as long as we are
rolled about things beneath, it will appear to us to be incredible that
divinity knows all things impartibly and supereternally; eternal beings
indeed, having a real existence, but things which are in generation,
or becoming to be, subsisting temporally, neither time nor eternity
subsisting in _the one_. So many indeed are the species of knowledge
with us, by looking to which it is possible to solve all the doubts
concerning the truth which the soul may know,[360] and concerning that
which it is not possible for her to know, in the present life.


25. Because, however, we have made three discussions which we said
were necessary to a distinct survey of the objects of inquiry, let
us now pass to the doubts, and give to each of them an appropriate
solution. In the first place, therefore, you consider this as a
sufficient argument that what is in our power is frivolous, and is the
work alone of the celestial bodies, viz. that we men assert ourselves
to be the causes of those events which are attended with prosperity;
but in things in which we are unfortunate, we transfer the cause to
necessity, instead of ascribing them to choice. And thus doubting, you
think you obtain this as a common conception concerning Fate, that it
has a more principal power in practical affairs than our impulses.
Indeed, I myself do not see men otherwise affected than as ascribing to
themselves the cause of their success, but to others the cause of their
errors. But in this we differ, that you indeed admit the opinion of the
many as sufficient to form a judgment of things; while I conceive them
to reason in this way through a certain immoderate love of themselves.
Among wise men, however, to whom it belongs to look both to whole and
parts, and not to neglect the order which they possess with reference
to them, divinity is considered as the principal cause of all events
from which good is derived to all things; but the next causes to this
are, the period of the world, and time, in which events are co-adapted
and co-ordinated to wholes, nothing being superfluously adventitious
in the polity of wholes; and in the third place, they consider
themselves as causes in those things in which they are allotted a
deliberate choice, and in which by their impulses they co-operate to
the completion of things.


26. When, however, any thing happens contrary to their choice, then
they deservedly ascribe the event to wholes alone, and the efficiency
of wholes, as the conquering cause. For it is every where necessary
that partial natures should energize in conjunction with wholes, but
wholes without partial natures. And after this manner intellectual men
divide events, but not as you have divided them. Hear, likewise, Plato
in the Laws exclaiming that divinity indeed governs all things; but
that after divinity, Fortune and Time rule over all human affairs; and
that our art follows as the third after these. For during a tempest,
the pilot’s art contributes something, and in disease the medical
art, and in short, in practical affairs, the political art.[361] If,
therefore, our affairs are prosperous, Fate, Time, and Divinity, must
be considered as the causes that they are so. Hence, there will be
three causes of events, Divinity indeed causing that which comes to
pass to be good; but Time and Fate causing it to be arranged in one
concord with every thing. And in short, another cause is human. For
every human work is a part of the universe, but the contrary is not
true, because it is necessary that other animals also, since they are
parts of the universe, should not only[362] act, but also suffer. For
every part, indeed, of this mundane fabric and drama has for its end
good; since no part of it is left inordinate, but is so woven with
other parts, as to contribute to the well-being of the universe. The
contrary, however, is not true, that every thing which is allotted good
is co-ordinated with the mundane polity. For there is a supermundane
life, and the life of the Gods, and of souls that transcend Fate, and
follow Providence alone.


27. Where then does that which is in our power exist? Since that which
is generated, is connected with the period of the world, and again,
since it is produced from that alone. Where else should we say it
exists, than in our internal elections and impulses? For of these alone
we are the lords; but things which take place external to us, have many
other more powerful beings as their lords. For it is necessary that
what is generated externally should become a part of the universe, that
it may also be generated; and that this should be effected through the
consent and co-operation of the universe, that it may produce every
thing in itself, by one part of itself acting on another, and being
passive from another. On this account, therefore, in the actions of
men, we praise these persons, but we blame those, because through
choice they were lords of their deeds, and we do not say that the
universe, but the agent was the cause of the quality of the actions.
For the quality of a deed is not derived from the universe, but from
the life of the agent. It is, however, co-ordinated to the whole on
account of the whole, and is again such as it is on account of a
part. And that we assert these things with truth, the oracles of the
Gods will manifest to you, since they often ascribe victory to our
choice, and not to the order alone of the mundane periods; as for
instance, when they say: “On beholding yourself, fear.” And again;
“Know thyself.” And, “Believe yourself to be above body, and you are.”
In short, they say, “that our sorrows germinate in us as the voluntary
progeny of the particular life which we lead.”


28. It is not fit, therefore, to refer all events to the order alone of
the universe, as neither is it fit to refer them to our impulse alone.
Nor again is it proper to separate the soul from those beings that
have an absolute elective power,[363] and whose very being consists in
deliberate choice alone, and in declining this thing, but embracing
that; though the soul in those events which take place is not the
mistress of the universe. For it is requisite that every cause should
aspire after that thing alone which it is naturally adapted to obtain.
But that which is in our power, is not only adapted to be active, but
also to be essentially elective. It is also adapted to act electively
in conjunction with other things, and either to err or act rightly on
account of choice. For though the deed may be good, yet if the agent
acts from a bad choice, we say that the action is bad. For that which
is good in the deed, is on account of something else, but that which
is depraved is on account of the choice of him who performs the deed.
Hence, it is evident to all men that we are the lords of actions, so
far as they are eligible.


29. But after this question, you say that all of us are solicitous
about futurity in all things, and even in those things which appear
to be in our power. Speaking summarily, you say well. What then, if
we are all lovers of divination, is there nothing in our power? I,
however, on the contrary say, that if nothing is in our power, but
events are compelled to take place from motion alone, we shall not
be lovers of divination. For what occasion is there for divination
in things which owe their existence to external compulsion, and the
knowledge of which is as of things future or not future. For such
knowledge is superfluous, when events are necessary; since it is
impossible for that which is necessary not to come to pass, though we
should a thousand times consult about, and be prescient of it. If,
therefore, events necessarily happen, we are in vain solicitous about
futurity. We are not, however, in vain solicitous about it, since
this is natural to us; for nothing which is according to nature is in
vain. Hence, it is not proper to consider all things as produced by
compulsion, in consequence of binding them by the circulation of the
heavenly bodies; but we must admit that foreknowledge is in some things
profitable to us, and that we do not live merely for the purpose of
foreknowing events, but that by foreknowing we may contribute or not
contribute something to things future, and may be more prompt in our
energies. We must likewise admit that not divination only, but prayers,
and the whole business of sacred rites contribute something to our
advantage, or we must exile these, pouring oil on their heads, and
crowning them with wool, and we must neither extend our hands upward,
nor grant that we ought to worship those who are able to suspend the
celestial influences. For men when in difficult circumstances will in
vain indulge a hope of being liberated from them by invoking divinity,
and Apollo himself will in vain give responses, unless[364] by
performing certain things it is possible to escape the punishment which
is suspended from the celestial periods, and by not performing them,
the dreaded event will necessarily take place.


30. Indeed, if this were not the case, would it not be perfectly absurd
to make this division, and to allow conformably to the oracles of the
Gods that something must be granted to our choice? But neither must we
proclaim this of divinity [viz. that his oracles are given in vain],
nor must we exterminate from human life, the utility of divination, and
of the sacerdotal office; because you have all history both Barbarian
and Grecian conjointly testifying that through divination, whether
from divine inspiration, or from human art, many have frequently known
what it was requisite to do, and through this knowledge have been
liberated from evils, which would have been otherwise inevitable.
This then I determine as appropriate to the present discussion, that
sometimes[365] this much celebrated divination, and the performance
of sacred rites contribute to a certain thing being effected or
not, and sometimes[366] predominate over those generations which
are introduced from the universe. When, therefore, since all things
are in all, divine and dæmoniacal causes concur in one, and as it
were assert the same thing, then the works of sacrifice are seen
to be inefficacious; for it is impossible for a part to oppose and
effect things contrary to the whole; and foreknowledge, in this case,
neither adds nor takes away any thing from the events which are the
subjects of divination. But when, in consequence of there being many
things of this kind, these effect one thing, and those another; as
for instance, these effect the destruction, but those the safety of
the diseased, through the operations of the celestial bodies upon us,
as is evident from all history, then the performance of some sacred
right, by employing co-operative powers, liberates us from the noxious
defluxions, by those that are beneficial. And the consideration of
the future contributes much to effects. In short, that which is in
our power being co-ordinated with these, or with other causes, as in
calamities, in consequence of receiving a greater increase through its
own motion, exhibits sometimes one, and sometimes another end. And
know that this takes place in things which are externally produced.
Every where, however, the quality of the impulse has a prior existence,
and choice characterizes that which is in our power. This also is
the work of the soul, which abides in it and is not to be referred
to the universe.[367] Conformably, therefore, to these things, as it
appears to me, you say that the universe governs all animals, and that
we and other animals have a diminished life imparted from the air,
and the first circulation. And that the rational part indeed is in
the brain; but that what is called sense is in the organs of sense,
and is conversant with different sensibles, but that the sight, the
hearing, and the other senses, differ only in their subjects, but are
essentially one and without diversity.[368]


31. Hearing you make this arrangement, I was surprized that a lover
of philosophy and intellectual speculations, and why do I say of
intellectual speculations, but who is also skilled in the paths of
erudition and in the inventions of geometry and arithmetic, should
attribute as much to the senses as to our rational and intellectual
essence, though they scarcely come into contact with the objects
of knowledge through debile organs, and should conceive that they
only differ from each other, and from the rational part by a certain
diversity of organs. For we have indeed elsewhere and prior to this
shown that all the senses are inseparable from body, and incapable of
being converted to themselves, but that the rational and intellectual
life is naturally adapted to know itself, and in consequence of this
knowledge to be converted to itself. For every thing gnostic is
according to energy converted to the object of knowledge; and therefore
that which is gnostic of itself is converted to itself. What identity,
therefore, do you see between the intellectual and the sensitive soul,
between that which looks downward, and that which tends upward? And in
short, what identity do you perceive between the soul which is buried
in bodies, and the soul which is unmingled with bodies? Between that
which can never know truth, and that which always extends itself to
real being?

32. But if the appetite which is according to nature is not in vain in
any thing else, neither is it in that which is sometimes allotted the
perception of truth. I omit to say that it is absurd to assert that the
essence of a divine soul flows downward from ether, if it is proper to
call that which is impossible absurd. For the souls which are derived
from ether are allotted a corporeal generation; but the Athenian guest
demonstrates that the rational soul is more ancient than all bodies.
But if by ether you do not mean a body, but an etherial intellect, or
an intellectual soul surrounding ether, neither thus do you appear to
me to have discovered the most true cause of the soul. For there is
another fountain of souls from which etherial souls, the souls of the
sublunary elements, dæmoniacal souls, and ours are derived. And it is
necessary to look to that cause which Plato concealing the truth, as it
appears to me, calls the Crater; in which he represents the demiurgus
mingling the soul of the universe, as Timæus says, not from ether, but
prior to bodies. The Chaldean oracles also celebrate the essential
fountain of every soul, viz. of the empyreal, etherial, and material,
and separate this from the whole vivific goddess; from which also
suspending the whole of Fate, they make two series, the one psychical,
and the other fatal. Deriving the soul, therefore, from one of these
series, they assert that it sometimes becomes subservient to Fate, when
becoming irrational it changes its lord, viz. Fate for Providence.


33. That, as I have said however, you have not asserted any thing
worthy the intellectual energy of Geometry and Arithmetic, in
co-ordinating our soul with the senses, you may learn, by considering
that the first employment of these sciences is to separate the soul
from that energy which subsists in conjunction with the senses, to
withdraw it from them as much as possible, to accustom it to look
within, to see immaterial reasons, and to investigate demonstrations,
the conclusions of which are contrary to the informations of the
senses. For they indeed reject impartibility, but these sciences
require it, and derive their existence from impartibles; since
partibles are the principles of the former, but impartibles of
the latter. And the knowledge of the senses indeed is confined
to particulars; but universals, and those things the nature of
which is always the same, are the objects of the knowledge of the
above-mentioned sciences; which they do not derive from the senses,
for imperfect are not the causes of perfect things; but supernally from
intellect, on which account also they sit in judgment on the senses,
reprehend the grossness of their knowledge, the passivity of their
perceptions, and their indefinite motions.


34. For indeed the knowledge of the senses is truly ludicrous; but the
intention of the mathematical sciences is to liberate us from things
ludicrous, and accustom us instead of pursuing these, to investigate
the knowledge of real being. It belongs to the sensible life therefore,
to be under the dominion of Fate, and to be acted upon differently at
different times, in conjunction with bodies, in which the necessity
from Fate consists. For every form inseparable from matter, is
ingenerated in, and contained by it; since it does not pertain to
it, through being converted to itself to say, that what externally
accedes to it is one thing, and that which is true another. But it
alone says that it announces passion, on which account it belongs to
alter-motive natures, in consequence of not having an energy perfectly
liberated from them. The intellectual life however, is according to
its own nature converted to itself,[369] and cannot endure to follow
the violent passions of sense, but contains in itself criteria of the
fallacious motions externally introduced, and adds indeed what is
deficient to the passive perceptions of sense, and confutes the fallacy
of its information; accomplishing at the same time all this by its own
proper energy. For it is not the province of things which pertain to
sense to form a judgment of sense, but this belongs to intellectual
reasons, which the knowledge of sense is incapable of receiving. The
immaterial therefore and separable life, and which energizes in itself,
must be admitted to be contrary to that of sense; and to this must be
given a choice of inclination, upward and downward, to intellect by
which it was produced, and to sense which it generates; but we must
admit that sense and all corporeal lives are without choice, because
this is also the case with bodies. For the rational soul being a medium
between intellect and sense, tends to both on account of the unstable
inclination of choice; but it becomes according to habitude each of the
extremes, of which it is essentially neither. But the perfection which
it derives from intellect, and the deception which it receives from
sense, manifest its middle nature. And such, as it appears to me, is
the correction[370] of the dogma.


35. With respect to your opinion concerning good which you have
introduced into the midst of your enquiries, viz. that what is
delectable to the several individuals of mankind is good, and that this
exists by position, since different things are considered as legal
by different nations; I should be ashamed indeed, if in writing to a
friend I did not manifestly assert that I conceive this opinion to be
unworthy both of my choice and my years. For it does not appear to me
to be at all wonderful that a young man in consequence of looking to
the opinions of men in many things, should form such an opinion. But I
think he who admits that an aged intellect ought to preside as a judge,
will adopt the decisions of intellectual conceptions, and not those
which the rumour and unbalanced motions of the multitude have spread
abroad. Now therefore, because to the Persians, some things appear to
be delectable, and also certain things which are congruous to these
delectables are considered by them as legal; but to the Greeks other
things appear to be delectable and legal; and to other nations other
things; on this account a different thing is imagined to be good and
delectable by different people. And whoever is allotted a delight which
is naturally good to every one, will possess an end adapted to man;
but whoever errs from this end, though he should be a thousand times
delighted with things which are present to him and appear to be good,
yet he will reap but an imperfect fruit of such delight.


36. But it is, as it seems, true, that one inconvenience being given,
others follow, which you also appear to me to suffer. For placing the
soul under the dominion of Fate, you have co-ordinated her with the
irrational senses, and collecting these into one and the same thing,
you have mingled good with that which is debile. It is necessary
however to eject both the former and this from the soul, that we may
not ignorantly ascribe the same things to men as to brutes, whose life
is without conversion to itself, and is naturally bent to earth, and
whose knowledge is mingled with material passions. These things also
are unfolded by Plato with, as I may say, adamantine arguments. For
says he that which is not good is not [truly] delectable, though all
oxen should assert it to be so. For we are not to adduce the testimony
of oxen, but of the Gods, with whom there is intellect, and the good of
being, which is more divine than intellect itself. These things being
clearly asserted in the Gorgias, the Philebus, and the Republic, I
think it would be superfluous to dwell on them any farther.


37. This however, I will add to what has been said, that the
investigation of good is not to be mingled with the delectable, (for
thus the petulance of delight will cause us to be foolish) but the
all-various diversities of human customs and legal institutions, are to
be referred to the different lives of souls, viz. to the rational, the
irascible and the epithymetic forms of life; for the former germinate
from the latter; since, as it is said, they are not derived from an
oak, nor from a rock. But the many-headed beast persuades these to
establish such things by law as the Persians established; the leonine
soul persuades others to adopt such things as the Thracians adopted;
and in others reason prevails in the adoption of legal and true good.
And the delectable indeed, is common to all these. For the appetible
when present is delectable to every one, but good is not delectable
to all men, but to those in whom reason presides. For the passions do
not see good, but this is alone the province of reason. And to reason
indeed, the delectable and the good are the same; but the fabrication
of things did not give to the blind passions the investigation of
good, but of the delectable; for every species of life when it
energizes without impediment is delighted. Hence there are many legal
institutions, and all-various delectables, and they are different
to different persons; but good is alone with those in whom reason
predominates over the passions. For dominion must not be given to
desire, that we may not be affected in the same manner as asses; nor
to anger, that we may not resemble lions; but it must be given to that
which is the most excellent part of our nature, which we alone are,
or according to which we principally subsist. For the being of every
thing which consists of many things, some better, and others worse, is
according to that which is the best among them. For that which is best
sagaciously conjectures the nature of good.


38. As to what you afterwards write in the way of doubt, you seem
to me to have written it in consequence of hearing Socrates in many
places asserting that he knew nothing, deriding those who say that
they know all things, and farther still contending that when we depart
from hence we shall especially know the truth, and be in possession of
more certain sciences, and also inferring that the mathematical are
not truly sciences. You doubt therefore from all this whether it is
not perhaps impossible to know the truth, and whether we do not only
dream about it. Indeed it is requisite you should at the same time
understand, that if it is not possible for us to know the truth, we do
not more know if there is any thing in our power than if there is not.
For our ignorance of both similarly prevents our adoption of either of
these positions. How therefore, can we use the ignorance of truth in
order to show whether there is any thing which is in our power? Since
with respect to the existence, and non-existence of this, ignorance
possesses the same power, or rather impotency.


39. That we may not however, suffer any thing of this kind, we have
already enumerated all the modes of knowledge; and have shown what
the modes are of which the soul can participate here, and what those
are when she assumes a supreme order. And of these indeed, Socrates
possessing the former, but hoping that he shall obtain the latter on
being liberated from the body, says, “that arriving thither he shall
know the truth.” For other measures and other objects of knowledge
afforded him an opportunity of indulging such a hope. Because it is a
thing usual with the friends of Plato to inquire whether it is possible
for the soul to live not only cathartically, but also theoretically,
while surrounded with this gross bond the body. And I think the
subject has been sufficiently discussed, and has been brought to this
conclusion, that perhaps it is possible to live theoretically even
here, like the coryphæan philosopher in the Theætetus, astronomizing
above the heavens,[371] and investigating on all sides all the nature
of beings, and also like those guardians in the Republic, who ascend
as far as to _the good itself_, through that dialectic, which Plato
calls the defensive inclosure of the mathematical sciences. Again,
however, that it is impossible while here to lead a theoretic life
in perfection, is evident from the causes which are enumerated in
the Phædo, viz. the occupations and molestations of the body, which
do not suffer us to energize theoretically without impediment, and
disturbance. For the life is theoretic, but the energy is called
contemplation, and the contemplation of _the one_.


40. When also Socrates does not permit us to call the mathematical
sciences [truly] sciences, he does not do this as denying that they
have a necessity of demonstrations, but as falling short of the supreme
of sciences. And why should I not say, at falling short of dialectic,
which no longer considers a point, or the monad, as a principle, but
_the good_, and considers the principle of all things. Whence also, as
I conceive, Socrates in the section of a line[372] [in the 6th book of
the Republic] assigns the second part to the mathematical sciences;
but to perfectly immaterial and separate forms, he assigns a part, and
a knowledge prior to these; the former proceeding from hypothesis,
but the latter being unhypothetical. And with Socrates, the author of
the Epinomis likewise accords. For he calls dialectic the bond of the
mathematical sciences, as uniting the principles of all of them.


41. But if Socrates asserted that he knew nothing, and the Pythian
oracle pronounced him to be on this account the wisest of all men,
as he himself informs us, consider the profound meaning both of the
Pythian deity and of Socrates, and how by the assertion of knowing
nothing this is implied, that _the good_ alone possesses an exempt
transcendency,[373] but not he who possesses scientific knowledge; and
this it is to know that he does not know. For the attainment of such
a knowledge as this appears to be the principal business of those who
intend to be wise. For in reality, he is truly wise, who knows that he
is not truly wise, and is not ignorant of this. For to whom does it
belong to know that he does not scientifically know every thing, but to
him who possesses knowledge. For it is indeed necessary that he should
perfectly know that he does not know [every thing]; since he will know
himself not to possess a scientific knowledge [of all things]. Hence no
one will perfectly know that he does not possess scientific knowledge
[in perfection], till he knows that he possesses scientific knowledge.
For then he will at one and the same time know that he knows, and what
the things are which he does not know, and will both know that he knows
and that he does not know, possessing a middle knowledge, and science
alone, which subsists between those natures that know truth wholly,
and those that do not know it at all,[374] of which the former is
intellect, but the latter sense. For sense neither knows real, being,
nor the essence itself of sensibles, of which it is feigned to be the
knowledge; but intellect knows essence itself, and the real truth
itself of being.


42. The soul therefore, being a medium between these, knows the
essences of things as being prior to sense, and does not know them as
being posterior to intellect. He therefore that is wise, will both know
that he knows, and that he does not know. And thus much, my friend,
in answer to the assertion of Socrates, and concerning that which
is real wisdom. Hence, it is not proper to exterminate the reasons
pertaining to science, neither on account of the mathematical sciences
being distinguished from the first science, nor on account of the
hope of obtaining true knowledge after a separation from hence, nor on
account of the answer of the Pythian deity. For it is Plato himself who
exclaims, that if science is destroyed, it will no longer be possible
to make an assertion about any thing, and not even about that which is
contingent. But he shows indeed, what the knowledge is which the soul
may assume while it is united to the body, and what it may obtain when
it is freed from its bonds; and also what that is which is at the same
time knowledge and not science. He likewise shows that there is one
knowledge which is true science, an intellect better than science, and
an intelligence which deifies intellect; and that the soul perceiving
this knowledge, and not being able to obtain it in this life, desires
a departure from body, that she may then be allotted this supernatural
and divine comprehension of beings. But of these things enough.


43. In consequence however of what you have said, you doubt, why good
men are in a worse condition, in consequence of failing to obtain the
end which was the object of their wishes, but bad men are allotted the
things which they desire. You therefore indeed, think that this also
is an argument in favour of the non-existence of any thing which is
in our power. And indeed, if this is an argument of the non-existence
of any thing in our power, that things do not happen to the good
according to their wishes, the success of bad men in gaining the
objects of their desire, will be an argument in proof of the existence
of something which is in our power. It is better however, not to adduce
opposing arguments to what you say, but merely to show you that this
doubt was proposed by some of the ancients not only with a view to the
subversion of that which is in our power, but also with a view to the
investigation whether providence has any existence. And this inquiry
of the ancients has been extended to Plotinus himself, to Iamblichus,
and your namesake [Theodorus Asinæus]. For the unexpected introduction
of fortunate events, shakes in reality our invincible preconceptions
of providence, and the affair requires intellectual inspection, if the
objector being saved from that doubt, ought to commit every thing to
providence.


44. If therefore, we are not the lords of any thing, and have not an
elective life from ourselves, and neither good nor evil is from us,
but these are externally produced, there is no longer any occasion to
doubt of events, as if they happened contrary to desert, since both
good and evil derive their subsistence from an external source. For if
we do not cause ourselves to be such characters as we are, it will not
be requisite that there should be any retribution for our life; nor
in short, is any thing due from those, who are not the causes of the
life which they lead. Hence, if the retribution of fortunate events is
contrary to desert, we ourselves shall be the cause of the lives, the
desert of which it is said we are allotted in the distributions from
the universe; because, of all the things that surround us, we do not
require to have retribution in what we derive from wholes, but in those
things in which we co-operate something. If therefore, there is nothing
in our power, we shall have nothing from ourselves. And if this be the
case, neither should we desire retributions of those things which we
derive from an external source. And this being admitted, neither should
we accuse the distribution of events as contrary to desert.


45. If, therefore, there is nothing in our power, it is not fit to
enquire why good men fail in obtaining the end they desire, contrary to
desert, but bad men obtain this end. But admitting there is something
which is in our power, and that Providence has dominion over all
things, we say, adducing to you persuasion after violence, that what
is in our power does not predominate over, but co-operates with things
external. The rational soul therefore very properly disposes things
that are internal according to its own power, but it cannot do this
with externals, because these require other things in order to their
distribution, which are not inherent in it. I am delighted however with
these doubts of yours, perceiving in you a generous proselyte whom I
frequently desire not to confound those things which are in our power
with those which are not, nor to be so disposed with respect to things
which are not in our power, as if they ought entirely to take place,
in order that we may bear them without difficulty, when they do take
place. Now, however, the doubt happens, from things which are out of,
not conforming themselves to things which are in our power, though we
fancy that they ought, and also from supposing that to be good for
us which is not, and seeking for its accomplishment. But it would be
better for us always to explore the true and real beings that are in
us, and acquire them for ourselves, and to leave things external, and
which are not in our power to the causes of them, as to masters who
know what they do. We should likewise be prepared for those things
which are not, by those things which are in our power. In what manner,
therefore, the doubt pertains to that which is in our power, we have
shown you through such arguments as these. But you ought rather to
refer it, as we have said, to the doubt concerning Providence. And many
things, as I have before observed, have been said on this subject by
the ancients, and they thus solve the doubt.


46. Again, therefore, you inquire what that which is in our power
is. Which it was requisite to investigate in the beginning of the
discussion. And afterwards you doubt concerning it. But inquiring about
it, you define it to be that which is of itself uncircumscribed,[375]
and self-energetic. If, however, this be the case, it is entirely
incorruptible, and most powerful, and alone pertains to the ruler
of all beings, but is not adapted to that which is in our power.
I, therefore, consider this definition to be very remote from that
conception of what is in our power, which the ancients adopting,
attributed this to human souls. But do you also consider the truth of
what I say. For they assumed that which is in our power as indicative
of the energy of choice, making us to be the lords of choice and
aversion, and as indicative of the choice of some good, or the
contrary. For they did not consider choice and will to be the same; but
they asserted that the latter pertains to good alone, but the former
both to good and evil; just as false opinion pertains to that which is
not good. Hence also, they said that election or choice characterizes
the soul, which extends itself both to what is good, and what is not
good, and that this pertains to the middle nature of that being which
is converted to both these. This also common rumour testifies. For
we praise the choice of these, but blame the choice of those. Evil,
however, is not wished for by any one. And evil indeed appears to be
good to those that choose it; for no soul knowing a thing to be evil
would choose, but would avoid it. On account of ignorance, however, the
soul is busily employed about it; for she naturally possesses an acute
love of good, but sometimes is powerless with respect to the attainment
of it.


47. The soul, therefore, essentially possessing an inclination to
both, viz. to good and evil, the ancients called this power of her
elective, on account of which we are naturally adapted to choose one
thing instead of another. And indeed, you may obtain from division such
a definition of this power. Because all power is either rational or
irrational, it is necessary that choice should be in one of these. But
since it is not irrational; for we all say that the irrational power is
without choice, it will be a certain rational power. But every rational
as well as every irrational power, is either gnostic or appetitive.
Choice, however, being election and desire, will be a certain appetite.
But every appetite either alone looks to that which is real good, or to
that which is only apparent good, or to both these. We say, however,
that choice does not look to real good alone; for if it did, it would
never be justly blamed; nor to apparent good alone; for in this case,
it would not frequently be praised. Hence such a power is naturally
adapted to look to both these.


48. Election, therefore, is in short, a rational power, desirous both
of true and apparent good, leading the soul to both, on account of
which she ascends and descends, errs, and acts with rectitude. The
ancients perceiving the energy of this power, called the inclination of
it both to real and apparent good, a twofold path in our nature. Hence
the elective and that which is in our power, will be the same thing.
And according to this power, we differ from divine, and from mortal
natures; for each of these is unreceptive of this twofold inclination;
since the former, indeed, on account of their transcendent excellence
are alone established in true good; but the latter on account of
defect, in apparent good. For intellect indeed characterizes the
former, but sense the latter. And the former is our king, but the
latter our messenger. We, however, being of a middle nature are
established in choice; and are capable of being moved both to true and
apparent good. But wherever we move, we are on all sides comprehended
by wholes, from which we are allotted what is, according to desert. And
if indeed we tend to that which is better, we thus tend as intellect;
but if to that which is subordinate, as sense. That which is in our
power, therefore, is not capable of effecting all things. For that
which can effect all things is a power characterized by unity, and on
this account can effect all things, because it is one and boniform.
But the power which is elective is dyadic, and on this account cannot
accomplish all things; because by its twofold inclinations, it falls
short of that nature which is prior to all things. It would, however,
be itself effective of all things, if it had not an elective impulse;
for then it would be will alone. For a life characterized by will
subsists according to good, which causes that which is in our power to
be most powerful, and is truly deiform, on account of which the soul
also becomes a God, and as Plato says, governs the whole world.


49. Hence that which is in our power, neither pertains to the first,
nor to the last of things, but to the medium between both. You,
however, as it seems, have conceived it to be a power ruling over all
things, leading all things according to its own impulse, and obtaining
every thing which it desires; for you do not define it to be a power
over the objects of desire within the soul, and which cause the
electing soul to be such as it is; but you ascribe to it a power over
things which are not in its power. For things external to the soul are
not in our power; on which account also our life is mingled from things
which are not, and from things which are in our power. And with worthy
men, indeed, there is much of that which is in our power; for they use
all things, modifying even those that are out of our power on account
of virtue, and always adorning the present circumstance. But with the
multitude, there is more of that which is not in our power; for they
follow things external to themselves, not possessing a life within,
which is able to assimilate them to themselves. Hence worthy men,
indeed, are said to be free, and are so on account of the energy both
of that which is in, and of that which is not in their power. But the
multitude are called into servile necessity, in consequence of burying
those things which are in their power, with those that are not, and
possessing all things not in themselves.


50. After all this, you have added the colophon (or summit) of the
doubts, by asking whether divinity knows or does not know events which
are future to us. And if, indeed, he does not know them, you will
say that he does not at all differ from us, who have no knowledge of
futurity. But if he does know them, that which he knows will entirely
and from necessity come to pass. This, however, as it would seem, not
only destroys that which is in our power, but likewise every thing
which is said to be contingent. This also, is usually said by those who
conceive all things to exist by compulsion, and as I may say, has been
asserted a thousand times. But they all reason as follows: if divinity
knows every future event, that which is future will be from necessity.
And they indeed assert it to be false that divinity knows every thing
definitely; but they say that his knowledge is indefinite of things
which indefinitely come to pass, in order that they may save what
is contingent. Others, however, attributing a definite knowledge to
divinity, admit necessity in every thing which comes to pass. These are
the dogmas of the Peripatetic and Stoic sects. But Plato, and whoever
is a friend to Plato, affirm that divinity definitely knows future
events, and that nevertheless[376] some things are produced definitely,
and others indefinitely, according to their respective natures. For
those things which in effects subsist with division and contrarily, are
antecedently comprehended in the Gods according to a more excellent
condition only.


51. I say, for instance, the causes of generated natures, whether they
are incorporeal or corporeal, subsist incorporeally with the Gods; and
in a similar manner their knowledge is incorporeal. And again, the
causes of intellectual, and of non-intellectual beings, subsist with
the Gods both essentially, and according to science. For they also know
things which are not intellectual intellectually. And again, of things
which are produced by them, that are either temporal or without time,
there is with them a cause and a knowledge exempt from time. Hence
because of effects some are definite, but others indefinite, the Gods
antecedently assume the knowledge of both these according to the more
excellent mode, viz. according to the definite. Moreover, the form
of knowledge is not such as the object of knowledge, but such as the
gnostic nature. For knowledge is not in that which is known, but in
that which knows. Hence, it is similar and of the like form to that in
which it is, and not to that in which it is not. If, therefore, that
which is known is indefinite, but that which knows it is definite, the
knowledge is not also indefinite on account of the thing known, but
definite on account of that which knows. For it is possible to know
that which is subordinate after a more excellent mode, and that which
is supreme after an inferior mode.


52. Hence, because the Gods are better than all things, they
antecedently comprehend all things after a more excellent mode. And
beings indeed, they comprehend superessentially;[377] things which are
according to time, as we have already said, prior to time; corporeal
natures, incorporeally; material natures immaterially; definitely,
things indefinite; permanently, things unstable; and ingenerably,
things generable. It does not, therefore, follow that if they know what
will be, the event must happen from necessity; but to the event indeed
we must give an indefinite generation from a definite cause, and to the
Gods a definite foreknowledge of that which is indefinite. For neither
does it follow that because your art[378] employs drums and wheels, and
corporeal materials, these subsisted corporeally in your foreknowledge;
but your imagination comprehended in itself incorporeally and vitally
the productive principle of the future machine; and the astrolabe
was corporeally fashioned from an internal knowledge which is not
corporeal. If this, however, is the case in your art, what ought you
to say of the foreknowledge of the Gods, in which all things subsist
in a manner truly ineffable, and not to be circumscribed by us? Is it
not evident, that this mode of comprehension is different from, and in
no respect allied to the things which are produced by it? Hence the
Gods know divinely, and in a way unaccompanied by time those things
which are in our power, and we energize, as we are naturally adapted.
Whatever we choose also, is foreknown by them, not on account of the
boundary which is in us, but on account of the boundary which is with
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such, my friend, is my answer to your inquiries, independent of which
I am able to show you that there is something in our power, from
praise and blame, from counsel, from exhortation and dehortation, from
judicial affairs, from accusation and defence, from all political
erudition, from legislation, from prayer, from sacerdotal methods,
and from philosophy itself. For you well know that my preceptor
[Syrianus,] used frequently to say, that if that which is in our power
were destroyed, philosophy would be superfluous. For what should it
instruct, when there is nothing which can be instructed, when there is
nothing in us by which we may become better? Reconsidering, therefore,
these things again and again, if you still have any doubts, do not be
averse to write to me. For what subjects can we more aptly discuss than
those, in the disquisition of which no one will accuse us of nugacity?




                               EXTRACTS

                               FROM THE

                         TREATISE OF PROCLUS,

                               ENTITLED

                   TEN DOUBTS CONCERNING PROVIDENCE.


1. Whether Providence extends to all things, to wholes and parts, and
as far as to the most indivisible natures in the heavens and in the
sublunary regions, in things eternal and things corruptible? This
Proclus affirms, and says that every particular, even of the minutest
things, depends on the beneficent providence of divinity. For nothing
escapes that one whether you speak of the essence of a thing, or its
being known. It is said indeed, and is rightly said, that the whole
circle is centrally in the centre, since the centre is the cause, but
the circle the thing caused, and for the same reason every number is
monadically in unity. But in the one of Providence, all things subsist
after a more exalted mode, since that is more transcendently one than a
centre and the monad.


2. How divinity foreknows and provides for things contingent? Proclus
answers, that divinity, on account of his most perfect nature, knows
in their seeds and causes things indefinite definitely, as he also
knows things distant and corporeal, without distance and incorporeally.


3. Whether Providence is the cause of things definite and indefinite
according to the same, and after the same manner? Proclus answers
that to provide for is nothing else than to benefit; and that hence
every thing participates of that one good according to its own measure
and order, so that Providence retains its unity and liberty even in
things indefinite. In the same chapter also he proves that divinity
provides for things contingent and indefinite, that they may not be as
it were super-adventitious in the universe. For, says he, if the Gods
are willing and able to provide definitely for things indefinite, as
being the authors of them, they will entirely provide for them, and
providing will know the desert of the subjects of their providential
energy. And the Gods indeed, with an exempt transcendency, extend their
providence to all things, but dæmons dividing their superessential
subsistence, receive the guardianship of different herds of animals,
distributing the providence of the Gods, as Plato says, as far as to
the most ultimate division. Hence some of them preside over men, others
over lions, or other animals, and others over plants; and still more
partially, some are the inspective guardians of the eye, others of the
heart, and others of the liver. All things, however, are full of Gods,
some of whom exert their providential energies immediately, but others
through dæmons as media; not that the Gods are incapable of being
present to all things, but that ultimate are of themselves incapable of
participating first natures.


4. How the participations of the Gods are effected, or how the Gods
energize providentially on inferior natures? Proclus answers that the
participations are according to the aptitude of the participants;
viz. they subsist rationally in rational, but intellectually in
intellectual natures, and imaginably and sensibly in those beings that
live according to imagination and sense. And they subsist essentially
and through being alone, in those things which are without life.
Hence, Providence being established above all beings, according to
divine union itself, and energizing according to one energy adapted
to _the one_, every thing which accedes to it participates of
it according to its natural adaptation. With respect to the failure
of the oracles he says, that the energy of divinity remaining always
the same, places or men become unadapted to its participation, just
as if a certain statue always remaining the same, a mirror should at
one time exhibit a fulgid image of it, but at another, an obscure or
debile, or indeed no image of it at all. He adds, If, therefore, it
should be said that oracles sometimes participate of the Gods who
are the sources of divination, but at other times fail, becoming
inefficacious, and as it were without spirit, for a certain period, the
causes of this irregularity must be referred to the vapours that are
the instruments of inspiration failing, through an inability of always
being the participants of divine influence. For the oracles are true
which give completion to the phænomena, and angels, dæmons and heroes
are veracious, which the Gods and the perpetually existing allotments
in the universe illuminate, though certain waters and openings of the
earth cannot always participate of them, on account of their unstable
nature. Or if it should be said, that the powers of sacred rites,
sometimes entering into statues, causing them to be vitalized, and
filling them with divine inspiration, fail in certain periods of time,
the failure of these also, I should think it proper to refer to the
recipients, and not to any variation of the energy of the Gods that
inspire them. For neither do we dare to accuse the sun as the cause of
the eclipse of the moon, but the conical shadow of the earth into which
the moon falls.


5. Whence and why evil subsists, since there is Providence? Proclus
answers, that there are two kinds of evils, one in bodies, contrary
to nature; the other in souls, contrary to reason. The kingdom of
Providence, however, says he, is molested by neither of them; but
to the former of these evils, the end is good, and the variety and
perfection of the universe. For every thing which is preternatural
takes place, in order that something which is according to nature may
be effected, but not vice versa. And with respect to the latter of
these evils, between beings more perfect than we are, and brutes, it is
necessary that souls should intervene as a medium, which are endued
with reason, anger and desire, and rejoice in freedom of will.


6. If Providence is, why are good men oppressed with evil, but bad
men triumph? Proclus answers, that notwithstanding this, virtue and
the matter of virtue are not wanting to the good; and also, that this
praise is peculiar to them, that they had rather cultivate naked
Virtue, than Vice with all her abundance. That it is not an evil to
be deprived of the incentives to evil; that some have even earnestly
desired adverse fortune; and that wise men have always borne it with
fortitude. Nor is it expedient that wise men should at one and the same
time abound with every kind of good. For it is necessary that they
should have a certain experience of the evils of the present life, by
which the soul being excited, desires a transition from hence to that
place which is beyond the reach of evil. He adds, that many through
adversity have arrived at greater attainments in virtue; and that in
short, those things only are evil which we ourselves perpetrate, and
not those which we suffer [from an external cause]. That all bad men
are without glory, and without honour, though they should be surrounded
by thousands of flatterers. To the question which he adjoins to
this, why Providence distributes equal to unequal things, according
to arithmetical, and not according to geometrical equality, as when
a whole city perishes, there is a similar destruction of dissimilar
men, viz. of the good and the bad, he answers as follows. In the first
place, indeed, they do not suffer this similitude of punishment so far
as they are dissimilar, but so far as they are similar; in consequence
of voluntarily inhabiting the same city, or entering the same ship, and
fighting together, or mutually suffering any thing else of the same
species; and so according to the energy of that species, they suffer
a certain something which is the same. So far, however, as they are
better and worse, they participate differently of the common calamity;
since the latter perish, bearing it impatiently, but the former
enduring it mildly. And after a separation from the present life, the
place destined to be the habitation of more excellent beings receives
the former, but the abode of subordinate beings receives the latter.
Proclus afterwards adds, that there is a certain order and a period
of common fate, terminating from different principles in the same end,
and a concurrence of progressions, where the less principal parts are
compelled from necessity to be co-passive, And that we are ignorant of
the true equalities of souls.


7. If Providence extends as far as to the lowest beings, whence is the
great inequality in the allotments of brutes, their mutual devorations,
and the like, derived? Proclus answers, that if there is any thing in
them of a self-motive nature, the cause of this must be investigated
from a higher source; but if they are only corporeal, it is of no
consequence if they suffer the same thing as a shadow all-variously
transformed, and are subject to Fate.


8. Why punishments do not immediately follow after crimes, but are
inflicted at length after the commission of them, and this sometimes
is very long after?[379] Proclus answers, that the implanted root of
wickedness (just as the earth bearing thorns, though the germes are
a thousand times cut off, still produces the like) renders the same
energies, in consequence of continuing inflexible by punishment.
Providence, therefore, waits for an appropriate time, not such as may
be pleasing to the vulgar, but such as it knows will contribute to the
health of souls, and instructs many by endurance. For, together with
the Gods, says Plato, Fortune and Time govern all things, whether it
be requisite that some good should be imparted, or that there should
be a purification from something contrary to good. In the next place,
vice is a punishment to itself, and the most grievous injury the soul
can sustain. Precipitate anger also is not a good dispensator of
punishments. Plato once, being about to chastize a slave, was seen
holding his hand in an elevated position for some time, and being
asked why he did so, said that he was punishing his own impetuous
anger. Archytas said to his servants in a field, who had not done
what he had ordered them to do, and expected to be punished for their
negligence, “It is well for you that I am angry.” And Theano said to
one of her servants, “If I were not angry I would chastize you.” Among
the Egyptians there was a law, that a pregnant woman who was judged
worthy of death, should not be put to death till she was delivered.
What wonder, therefore, is it that Providence should for a time
spare those who are deserving of death, but are able to perform not
trifling, but illustrious actions, till they have accomplished them? If
Themistocles had been immediately punished for what he did when he was
a young man, who would have delivered Athens from the Persian evils?
Who also would have explained the Pythian oracle? If Dionysius had
perished in the beginning of his tyranny, who would have freed Sicily,
which was thought to be irremediably lost, from the Chalcedonians? If
the punishment of Periander had not been deferred for a long time,
who would have freed the pleasant island of Leucadia, who would have
liberated Anaxorium from its adversaries?--To which may be added,
that the time of deferred punishment seems long to our feeble vision,
but is nothing to the eye of Providence, just as the place also in
which we live, and carry about these bodies is perfectly small for the
punishment of great offences; but there are many and indescribable
places of punishment in the infernal regions, and excessive torments
for the offenders that are there.--On account of the magnitude of the
punishment likewise, the whole of it is not inflicted at once. Souls
also are naturally adapted to feel remorse, which is the forerunner of
their greatest sufferings. For they say that Apollodorus the tyrant
saw himself in a dream scourged and boiled by certain persons, and his
heart exclaiming from the kettle, I am the cause of these thy torments.
But Ptolemy who was surnamed Thunder, thought in a dream that he was
called to judgment by Seleucus, and that vultures and wolves sat there
as his judges. Such are the preludes to the vicious of impending
punishment.


9. How the crimes of other persons, as for instance of parents or
potentates are punished in children and subjects? For that certain
persons are said to have suffered punishment for the crimes of their
ancestors, both revelations and the mysteries manifest, and certain
liberating Gods are said to purify from them. Proclus answers, that
a nation, or a family, or a city, must be considered as one body, and
that these have kindred powers that preside over them, so that such
crimes are not foreign, on account of this conjunction and similitude.
Why, therefore, should it be any longer paradoxical, that souls when
transferred into other bodies, should suffer punishment for the crimes
which they have committed in former bodies?


10. Since the providence of divinity knows all things and reduces them
to good, how are angels and demons, and if you are also willing, heroes
and souls that govern the world in conjunction with the Gods, said to
exert a providential energy? Proclus answers, that divinity provides
for _all things_ universally and totally, but the other powers
partially, subordinately, and for _certain things_ only.

In order to supply as much as possible the loss of the entire treatise
of Proclus on this subject, the following admirable observations on
Providence, are added, translated from his Commentary On the Parmenides
of Plato; a work, which to the disgrace of Europe, is still only extant
in manuscript.

“The Athenian guest in the Laws clearly evinces that there is a
providence, where his discourse shows that the Gods know, and possess a
power which governs, all things. But Parmenides, at the very beginning
of the discussion concerning Providence, evinces the absurdity of
doubting divine knowledge and dominion. For to assert that the
conclusion of this doubt is still _more dire_ than the former [i.e.
that divinity is not known by us] sufficiently shows that he rejects
the arguments which subvert providence. For it is dire to say that
divinity is not known by us who are rational and intellectual natures,
and who essentially possess something divine; but it is still more
dire to deprive divine natures of knowledge; since the former pertains
to those who do not convert themselves to divinity, but the latter to
those who impede the all-pervading goodness of the Gods. And the former
pertains to those who err respecting our essence, but the latter to
those who convert themselves erroneously about a divine cause. But the
expression _still more dire_ (δεινοτερον) is not used as signifying a
more strenuous doubt, in the same manner as we are accustomed to call
those _dire_ (δεινοι) who vanquish by the power of language, but as a
thing worthy of greater dread and caution to the intelligent. For it
divulses the union of things, and dissociates divinity apart from the
world. It also defines divine power as not pervading to all things, and
circumscribes intellectual knowledge as not all-perfect. It likewise
subverts all the fabrication of the universe, the order imparted to
the world from separate causes, and the goodness which fills all
things from one will, in a manner adapted to the nature of unity. Nor
less dire than any one of these is the confusion of piety. For what
communion is there between Gods and men, if the former are deprived
of the knowledge of our concerns? All supplications, therefore, of
divinity, all sacred institutions, all oaths adducing the Gods as a
witness, and the untaught conceptions implanted in our souls concerning
divinity, will perish. What gift also will be left of the Gods to
men, if they do not previously comprehend in themselves the desert of
the recipients, if they do not possess a knowledge of all that we do,
of all we suffer, and of all that we think, though we do not carry
it into effect? With great propriety, therefore, are such assertions
called dire. For if it is unholy to change any legitimately divine
institutions, how can such an innovation as this be unattended with
dread? But that Plato rejects this hypothesis which makes divinity to
be ignorant of our concerns, is evident from these things, since it is
one of his dogmas, that divinity knows and produces all things. Since,
however, some of those posterior to him have vehemently endeavoured to
subvert such-like assertions, let us speak concerning them as much as
may be sufficient for our present purpose.

Some of those then posterior to Plato, on seeing the unstable
condition of sublunary things, were fearful that they were not under
the direction of Providence and a divine nature; for such events
as are said to take place through fortune, the apparent inequality
respecting lives, and the disordered motion of material natures,
induced them greatly to suspect that they were not under the government
of Providence. Besides, the persuasion that Divinity is not busily
employed in the evolution of all-various reasons, and that he does not
depart from his own blessedness, induced them to frame an hypothesis
so lawless and dire. For they were of opinion that the passion of
our soul and the perturbation which it sustains by descending to
the government of bodies, must happen to divinity, if he converted
himself to the providential inspection of things. Farther still, from
considering that different objects of knowledge are known by different
gnostic powers; as for instance, sensibles by sense, objects of
opinion by opinion, things scientific by science, and intelligibles
by intellect; and, at the same time, neither placing sense, nor
opinion, nor science in divinity, but only an intellect immaterial and
pure;--hence they asserted that divinity had no knowledge of any other
things, than the objects of intellect. [And this was the opinion of the
more early Peripatetics.] For say they, if matter is external to him,
it is necessary that he should be pure from apprehensions which are
converted to matter; but being purified from these, it follows that he
must have no knowledge of material natures. Hence the patrons of this
doctrine deprived him of a knowledge of, and providential exertions
about sensibles; not through any imbecility of nature, but through a
transcendency of gnostic energy; just as those whose eyes are filled
with light, are said to be incapable of perceiving mundane objects, at
the same time that this incapacity is nothing more than transcendency
of vision. They likewise add, that there are many things which it
is beautiful not to know. Thus to the entheastic, (or those who are
divinely inspired) it is beautiful to be ignorant of whatever would
destroy the deific energy; and to the scientific, not to know that
which would defile the indubitable perception of science.

But others [as the Stoics], ascribe indeed to divinity a knowledge of
sensibles, in order that they may not take away his providence, but
at the same time convert his apprehension to that which is external,
represent him as pervading through the whole of a sensible nature, as
passing into contact with the objects of his government, impelling
every thing, and being locally present with all things; for say they,
he would not otherwise be able to extend a providential energy in
a becoming manner, and impart good to every thing according to its
desert.

Others again affirm that divinity has a knowledge of himself, but
that he has no occasion to understand sensibles in order to provide
for them, since by his very essence he produced all things, and
adorns whatever he has produced, without having any knowledge of his
productions. They add, that this is by no means wonderful, since
nature operates without knowledge, and unattended with phantasy; but
that divinity differs from nature in this, that he has a knowledge of
himself, though not of the things which are fabricated by him. And such
are the assertions of those who were persuaded that divinity is not
separated from mundane natures, and of those who deprived him of the
knowledge of inferior concerns, and of a knowledge operating in union
with providence.

With respect to these philosophers, we say, that they speak truly, and
yet not truly, on this subject. For if providence has a subsistence,
neither can there be any thing disordered, nor can divinity be busily
employed, nor can he know sensibles through passive sense: but these
philosophers in consequence of not knowing the exempt power and
uniform knowledge of divinity, appear to deviate from the truth. For
thus we interrogate them: does not every thing energize in a becoming
manner when it energizes according to its own power and nature? as for
instance, does not nature, in conformity to the order of its essence,
energize physically, intellect intellectually, and soul psychically, or
according to the nature of soul? And when the same thing is generated
by many and different causes, does not each of these produce according
to its own power, and not according to the nature of the thing
produced? Or shall we say, that each produces after the same manner,
and that, for example, the sun and man generate man, according to the
same mode of operation, and not according to the natural ability of
each, viz. the one partially, imperfectly, and with a busy energy, but
the other without anxious attention, by its very essence, and totally?
But to assert this would be absurd; for a divine operates in a manner
very different from a mortal nature.

If therefore, every thing which energizes, energizes according to its
own nature and order, some things divinely and supernaturally, others
naturally, and others in a different manner, it is evident that every
gnostic being knows according to its own nature, and that it does
not follow that because the thing known is one and the same, on this
account, the natures which know, energize in conformity to the essence
of the things known. Thus sense, opinion and our intellect, know that
which is white, but not in the same manner: for sense cannot know what
the essence is of a thing white, nor can opinion obtain a knowledge
of its proper objects in the same manner as intellect; since opinion
knows only _that_ a thing is, but intellect knows the cause of
its existence. _Knowledge therefore subsists according to the nature
of that which knows, and not according to the nature of that which is
known._ What wonder is it then that Divinity should know all things
in such a manner as is accommodated to his nature, viz. divisible
things indivisibly, things multiplied, uniformly, things generated,
according to an eternal intelligence, totally, such things as are
partial; and that with a knowledge of this kind, he should possess a
power productive of all things, or, in other words, that by knowing all
things with simple and united intellections, he should impart to every
thing being, and a progression into being? For the auditory sense knows
audibles in a manner different from the common sense; and prior to,
and different from these, reason knows audibles, together with other
particulars which sense is not able to apprehend. And again, of desire
which tends to one thing, of anger which aspires after another thing,
and of _proairesis_, or deliberate choice, there is one particular
life moving the soul towards all these, which are mutually motive of
each other. It is through this life that we say, I desire, I am angry,
and I deliberately choose this thing or that; for this life verges
to all these powers, and lives in conjunction with them, as being a
power which is impelled to every object of desire. But prior both to
reason and this one life, is _the one_ of the soul, which often
says, I perceive, I reason, I desire, and I deliberate, which follows
all these energies and energizes together with them or we should not
be able to know all these, and to apprehend in what they differ from
each other, unless we contained a certain indivisible nature, which
has a subsistence above the common sense, and which prior to opinion,
desire and will, knows all that these know and desire, according to an
indivisible mode of apprehension.

If this be the case, it is by no means proper to disbelieve in the
indivisible knowledge of divinity, which knows sensibles without
possessing sense, and divisible natures without possessing a divisible
energy, and which without being present to things in place, knows them
prior to all local presence, and imparts to every thing that which
every thing is capable of receiving. The unstable essence therefore, of
apparent natures is not known by him in an unstable, but in a definite
manner; nor does he know that which is subject to all-various mutations
dubiously, but in a manner perpetually the same; for by knowing
himself, he knows every thing of which he is the cause, possessing a
knowledge transcendently more accurate than that which is co-ordinate
to the objects of knowledge; since a causal knowledge of every thing is
superior to every other kind of knowledge. Divinity therefore, knows
without busily attending to the objects of his intellection, because
he abides in himself, and by alone knowing himself, knows all things.
Nor is he indigent of sense, or opinion, or science, in order to know
sensible natures: for it is himself that produces all these, and that
in the unfathomable depths of the intellection of himself, comprehends
an united knowledge of them, according to cause, and in one simplicity
of perception. Just as if some one having built a ship, should place
in it men of his own formation, and, in consequence of possessing a
various art, should add a sea to the ship, produce certain winds, and
afterwards launch the ship into the new created main. Let us suppose
too, that he causes these to have an existence by merely conceiving
them to exist, so that by imagining all this to take place, he gives
an external subsistence to his inward phantasms, it is evident that in
this case he will contain the cause of every thing which happens to the
ship through the winds on the sea, and that by contemplating his own
conceptions, without being indigent of outward conversion, he will at
the same time both fabricate and know these external particulars. Thus,
and in a far greater degree, that divine intellect the artificer of
the universe, possessing the causes of things, both gives subsistence
to, and contemplates, whatever the universe contains without departing
from the speculation of himself. But if with respect to intellect one
kind is more partial, and another more total, it is evident that there
is not the same intellectual perfection of all things, but that where
intelligibles have a total and undistributed subsistence, there the
knowledge is more total and indivisible, and where the number of forms
proceeds into multitude and extension, there the knowledge is both one
and multiform. Hence, this being admitted, we cannot wonder on hearing
the Orphic verses, in which the theologist says:

    Αυτη δε Ζηνος και εν ομμασι πατρος ανακτος
    Ναιουσ’ αθανατοι τε θεοι, θνητοι τ’ ανθρωποι,
    Οσσα τε ην γεγαωσα, και υστερον οσσα εμελλον.

i.e.

    There in the sight of Jove, the parent king,
    Th’ immortal gods and mortal men reside,
    With all that ever was, and shall hereafter be.

For the artificer of the universe is full of intelligibles, and
possesses the causes of all things separated from each other; so
that he generates men, and all other things, according to their
characteristic peculiarities, and not so far as each is divine, in
the same manner as the divinity prior to him, the intelligible father
Phanes.”

The admirable dogma in this most beautiful extract, “that knowledge
subsists according to the nature of that which knows, and not according
to the nature of that which is known,” was originally derived
from Iamblichus, as is evident from the commentary of Ammonius on
Aristotle’s treatise On Interpretation. (See note to p. 162 of my
translation of the Organon.) Boethius in the 5th book of his treatise
De Consolatione, elegantly illustrates this dogma. The passage I allude
to begins with the words: “Omne enim quod cognoscitur, non secundum
sui vim, sed secundum cognoscentium potius comprehenditur facultatem.”
The sources however from whence he derived this doctrine, appear to
have been unknown to all his editors and commentators; for they are not
noticed by any of them.




                               EXTRACTS

                               FROM THE

                          TREATISE OF PROCLUS

                                ON THE

                         SUBSISTENCE OF EVIL.


In this treatise Proclus inquires, first, Whether there is such a thing
as evil? secondly, If there is, whether it is in intellectual natures?
thirdly, If evil is in sensibles, whether it subsists according to
a principal cause? fourthly, If it does not subsist according to
a principal cause, whether any essence must be assigned to it, or
whether it must be admitted to be perfectly unessential, and without
hypostasis? fifthly, And if this be the case, how does it subsist,
another principle existing, and whence does it originate, and how far
does it proceed? And farther, still, sixthly, how, since Providence
exists, does evil subsist, and whence is it derived? If the father of
the universe not only produced the nature of good, but was also willing
that there should be nothing evil any where, by what contrivance or
art does evil subsist, which the Demiurgus did not wish to subsist?
For it is not lawful to assert that he was willing some things should
subsist, but produced others, since in divine natures _to be willing_,
and _to produce_ are simultaneous and conjoined. Hence evil is not
only a thing contrary to the will of divinity, but is also without
hypostasis, divinity not only not producing it (for this it is not even
lawful to suppose) but not suffering it to subsist. Proclus answers,
that physical evil, viz. the evil which is corruptive of the essence,
power and energy of a thing, is not evil but good, because it subsists
on account of good, and because generation is from corruption, of
which two the world consists, and by which the order of the universe
is adorned. There is not, however, such a thing as unmingled evil, and
evil itself, or an eternal idea, form and essence of evil, but moral
evil is mixed with good, and so far as it is good, it subsists from
divinity, but so far as evil, it is derived from another cause which is
impotent. For evil is nothing else than a greater or less declination,
departure, defect and privation from _the good itself_, and which is
good alone, in the same manner as darkness from the sun. It is the
debility and absence of power in energizing, but is not power. And that
which is evil to partial natures, is not evil to the universe.


2. Evil is not in the Gods, nor in the triple government of the better
genera, viz. it is neither in angels; (for how could we call them
messengers and elucidators of the Gods, if evil of any kind was in
them who are the images of the divinities, and who dwelling in the
vestibules of deity participate of its goodness?) nor in dæmons, nor
in heroes. If divinity produced evil, he either produced it contrary
to his nature, or every thing thence subsisting will be boniform, and
the progeny of the goodness that abides in him. But as it is said, it
is not the property of fire to impart cold, nor of good to produce
evil from itself. Either, therefore, it must be said that evil is not,
if it is necessary to its existence that it should be produced by
divinity, or that it is, and does not originate from deity. Against
those who assert that evil is primarily in dæmons, he observes as
follows: There are certain persons who attribute passions to dæmons,
and say that some of their passions are according to nature as when
they tragically speak of their deaths, and different generations; but
that others are from choice only, as when they denominate certain
dæmons base and evil, who, they also say, defile souls, lead them to
matter, and draw them down from their journey to the heavens to the
subterranean region. It is necessary, however, to ask these persons,
whether are the dæmons, which you say are evil, such to themselves [or
in their own nature,] or not to themselves, but to others? For if they
are evil to themselves, one of two things must follow, either that
they must remain in evil for ever, or that they must be susceptive of
transmutation. And if indeed they are always evil, how can that which
subsists from the Gods be perpetually evil? For it is better not to
be at all, than to be always evil. But if they are transmuted, they
are not essentially evil, but are evil from habitude, in which there
is the better and the worse, and another species of life. Dæmons,
however, are always in the ratio of dæmons, and each of them is always
in its own order. But if they are indeed good to themselves, but evil
to others whom they lead into a worse condition, it is just as if some
one should call teachers depraved, and certain pedagogues, who ranking
as the chastisers of offences, do not suffer the offenders to pursue
a better order in a fluctuating manner, instead of an order which is
adapted to them. Or as if some one should denominate those [officers]
evil, who standing before things of a sacred nature [in temples] keep
the impure from entering into the sanctuary, because they prohibit them
from the participation of the interior rites. Hence, it is not evil to
perform this office, but to be of such an order, and to deserve such a
prohibition.[380] If, therefore, of the dæmons that are in the world,
some lead souls upward, but others keep such in their own manners, as
are not yet able to ascend, we cannot justly call either of them evil,
neither those that separate from nor those that detain souls [in a
corporeal life.] For it is necessary that there should also be those
dæmons who coerce the soul that is defiled with vice, and is unworthy
of a progression into the heavens, in the place which surrounds the
earth. Neither, therefore, in these, does reason appear to discover
evil. For whatever they do, they perform according to their own nature,
and always after the same manner. But this is not evil.


3. Evil in souls is a debility of not always and uniformly adhering
to better natures, and to good. Hence arises their descent to things
subordinate, their oblivion, their malefic inclination to things
conversant with body, and their discord with reason. According to
some, matter is that which is primarily evil, and evil itself, and the
debility of souls arises from their lapse into matter. This Proclus
denies, and says that both body and matter originate from deity, and
that both are the progeny of divinity. He adds, that matter is the
first indefinite, and that essential infinity, in the same manner as a
mixed body, depends on one cause, divinity. That souls sinned before
they were thrust into matter. That there are not two principles [matter
and deity.] And that matter is neither good nor evil, but a thing
necessary, and distant in the last degree from _the good itself_.


4. Of good there is one eternal, definite, universal and producing
cause, viz. God; but of evils the causes are manifold and infinite,
some to souls, and others to bodies. They are also fluctuating,
indefinite, inordinate, and particular, surrounding the nature of souls
and bodies from necessity, and arising from impotency, incommensuration
void of design, anadaptation, debility, and the victory of a
subordinate nature. Good has an hypostasis, but evil a parhypostasis or
a deviation from hypostasis. Good is form, but evil is without form,
and is as it were privation.


5. Evil possesses its power of acting, and its capability from a
contrary good, which becomes debile and inefficacious on account of
the mixture of evil; and evil is allotted its efficacy and energy on
account of the presence of good, for both are in one. Thus in bodies,
that which is preternatural, debilitates that which is according to
nature, the energy, of nature being in this case dormant, and order,
in which good consists, being dissolved. Thus also in souls, evil when
it vanquishes good, uses its power, viz. the power of reason, to its
own purposes, and makes it subservient to desire. Each of these also
imparts something according to its own nature, viz. the one power,
but the other debility; because of itself evil is neither adapted to
act, nor to possess power; for all power is good, and all energy is
an extension of power. And this Plato knowing, says, that injustice
itself is of itself debile and inactive; but through the presence of
justice possesses its power, and is led forth into energy, not abiding
in its own nature. Nor does evil alone consist in a privation of
life, because being which subsists prior to life, gives also to evil
a participation of life. All life, however, is of itself power; but
evil subsisting in a foreign power is contrary to good, employing its
own power for the purpose of opposing good. And the more power indeed
is inherent in it, the greater are the energies and works of evil, and
the less it possesses of power, the less are its energies and works.
In bodies too as soon as the powers of nature cease, the preternatural
energy which is in them ceases also; and hence, all order is entirely
dissolved, that which is preternatural being more abundant. When the
soul, therefore, receives an increase from that which is contrary to
good, according to its base and formless nature, but is diminished
according to virtue and energy, then it becomes at the same time debile
and inefficacious. For the augmentation is not then from power, that
the transition might be to something greater; but it arises from the
presence of the contrary to power, just as if frigidity should use the
power of heat to the accomplishment of its own work, vanquishing and
subjecting its power. The soul, therefore, being deficient through the
absence of good, and possessing more of privation in proportion as
it has more of deficiency, becoming also more debile in its energies
through a diminution of virtue, is indeed more evil, but performs less.

And how indeed could the increase since it is evil be from power,
if the work of all power is to preserve that in which it is, but
evil dissipates every thing of which it is the evil. Hence evil is
of itself inefficacious and impotent. If also, as Plato says, it is
involuntary, it will not be the object of the will. And thus it will be
a privation of the first triad of _the good_, viz. of _will_, _power_,
and _energy_. For good indeed, is the object of the will, and is in
its own nature powerful and efficacious; but evil is unwished for,
is debile and inefficacious. For that is not the object of the will
to any thing which is corruptive of it, nor does power wish for that
which may corrupt it, nor does energy wish not to have its hypostasis
according to power. But evil is desired in consequence of appearing
to be good; and we say that evil seems to be an object of the will,
on account of the mixture of good with it. Power, therefore, and
energy are apparently in evil, [but are not so in reality] because
they are not essentially inherent in it, nor so far as it is evil,
but they extrinsically accede to it, as that to which a parhypostasis
belongs. Hence, as it appears to me, this is what Socrates shows in the
Theætetus to those who are able to understand his meaning, viz. that
evil is neither privation, nor the contrary to good. For privation is
not able to effect any thing, nor does it in short possess any power;
nor does that which is contrary to good of itself possess either power
or energy. But he denominates evil in a certain respect _subcontrary_
to good, because of itself indeed, or essentially, it is privation,
yet because it is not altogether perfect privation, but in a similar
manner with habit changes from capacity, it is from thence constituted
in energizing in the part of contrariety, and is neither perfect
privation, nor contrary, but subcontrary to good.


7. There are these three things which may debilitate, and in which
there is evil, viz. a partial soul; the image of soul in animals; and
body. The evil to body is to have a preternatural subsistence; the evil
to the image of soul is to be in a state of deviation from reason;
and the evil to soul [i.e. to the rational soul,] is to deviate from
intellect. The defect of life according to reason is the malady of
this life; but ignorance and a privation of intellect are baseness,
whether this takes place about the dianoetic or the doxastic power;
and if about the former it is a want of science, but if about the
latter, of art. Baseness, however, and malady, subsist in one way in
cognitions, and in another in impulses. For the irrational appetites
are hostile to the life which consists in action, and the many senses
and precipitate imaginations intervening in the contemplative energy
destroy its purity and immateriality. Hence unbecoming imaginations, or
evil consent and base choice arise, either from an external source and
in various actions, or internally according to anger and desire. That
also which is preternatural is twofold. For in the body, it is either
deformity, as in monsters, or malady, in consequence of the order and
commensuration of the body being dissolved, as in corruption, disease,
and pain.

       *       *       *       *       *

In many persons meditated evil, and which abides occultly within the
soul, is benefited as being base and unbecoming. But when it subsists
in energy the quality of it becomes apparent. It is manifested,
however, by penitence and the consciousness of the soul. For the
medical art also, in the opening of ulcers, and leading forth
externally the inwardly concealed cause which produced the malady,
exhibits an image of the operations of Providence, which permits base
deeds and passions, in order that the perpetrators of them being
changed from the habit which they have acquired, and which is inflated
with evils, may assume the principle of a better period and life. But
whatever passions are within the soul, are attended with this good,
that they always lead the soul to a proper condition, her improper
choice being accompanied with punishment. Thus also the law which is in
souls leads each to its appropriate state, and to that desert which is
derived from Providence.


9. Evil cannot exist, if it is admitted that it is not contrary to
good, because all things, and even evil itself, are for the sake of
good. Divinity, therefore, is not the cause of evil. For evil, so far
as evil never originates from thence, but from other causes which
as we have said generate not according to power, but on account of
debility. Hence it appears to me that Plato[381] when he places all
things about the king of all, and says that all things are for his
sake, (even things which are not good appearing to be good, and in a
similar manner belonging to beings) calls him the cause of every thing
good, and not at once the cause of all things, for he is not the cause
of evil, but is the cause of every being, and of every thing so far as
it is good. If, therefore, we assert these things rightly, all things
will be from Providence, and evil will have a place among beings. Hence
also the Gods produce evil, but they produce it as good; and they know,
as possessing a unical knowledge of all things, partibles impartibly,
evils according to the form of good, and multitude according to the
form of _the one_. For there is one knowledge of soul, another of
an intellectual nature, and another of the Gods themselves. For the
first of these indeed, is a self-motive, the second, an eternal, and
the third an indivisible and unical knowledge, knowing and producing
all things by _the one_.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the further information of the reader on this most important
subject, the Subsistence of Evil, the following admirable extract is
added, from the Commentaries of Proclus On the Timæus, (p. 112.) The
Comment is on these words, “Divinity being willing that all things
should be good, and that as much as possible nothing should be evil;”
and is as follows:

“The divine fabrication and intellectual production, proceeds from
things impartible to such as are partible, from the united to the
multiplied, and from things without interval to corporeal masses
that are every way distended with interval. This also the discourse
about it adumbrating, in the first place, _enunciatively_ celebrates
the final cause, afterwards _discursively_, and in the third place,
delivers _in an evolved manner_, the whole orderly distribution and
progression from it. For the words “he was good,” _uniformly_ indeed
comprehend every thing final, and the most divine of causes. But
the words, “In that which is good, envy is never inherent about any
thing; and being without this, he was willing that all things should
be generated as much as possible similar to himself,” effect this
_discursively_.[382] For after the one will of intellect, he introduces
the divided contemplation of it. And in the present words, he delivers
to us the intelligence of divinity now proceeding into all multitude
and interval, _evolving_ every demiurgic providence, and all the
parts of fabrication. Moreover, the third of these is in continuity
with the second, and the second with the first. For since the first
particle was, “he was good,” on this account the second begins from the
good, but proceeds as far as to the will of the father. But the third
beginning from will, delivers the whole of his providential energy. For
if he was good, he was willing to make all things good. But if he was
willing, he made them to be so, and led the universe into order. For
providence indeed, is suspended from will, but will from goodness. And
thus much concerning the order and connexion of the words.

Let us however consider what this will is, in order that we may
understand how it is conjoined with goodness. Superessential union
itself therefore, and which is of itself exempt from beings, is indeed
one, ineffable, and indefinite, having the uncircumscribed, and the
incomprehensible in _the one itself_. If therefore, it be requisite to
survey in this, the above mentioned uniform triad, _goodness_ indeed
has the precedency, but _will_ is the second, and _providence_ is the
third; goodness indeed, producing the perfect, the sufficient, and
the desirable; but will exhibiting exuberant plenitude, the extended,
and the generative; and providence imparting the efficacious, the
perfective, and the undefiled. According to this ineffable and united
hyparxis of the triad, the intelligible also is triply divided into
essence, power, and energy; essence indeed, being firmly established
in it, and being self-perfect; but power having a never-failing and
infinite progression; and energy being allotted perfection, and
essential production. And again, intellect after the same manner is
triply divided, into being, life, and the intellectual. For the first
of these indeed, is the supplier of its existence, the second of its
life, and the third, of its gnostic power. After these also, soul is
divided, into that which is the object of science, into science, and
into that which is scientific. For the first of these is that which is
known, the second is knowledge, and the third is that which derives
its completion from both these. These triads therefore being four, as
goodness is to will, so is essence to power, being to life, and the
object of science to science. And as will is to providence, so is power
to energy, life to intellect, and science to that which is scientific.
For essence, being, and the object of science, have an order analogous
to goodness. For the connective, the stable, the uniform, and the
perfective, pertain to goodness. But power, life, and science, are
analogous to will. For the self-begotten, and that which comprehends
and measures all things, belong to will. And energy, intellect, and
that which is scientific, pertain to providence. For the efficacious,
and that which proceeds through and antecedently comprehends all
things, are the resemblances of divine providence. Since therefore, the
demiurgus also is a God, and an imparticipable intellect, so far as he
is a God indeed, he possesses goodness, will, and providence; but as
intelligible, he has essence, power, and energy; and as intellect, he
is, and has life, and a knowledge of wholes. The monad also which he
possesses is suspended from unity. And thus much concerning will.

Consequent to this, it remains to enquire how the demiurgus wished all
things to be good, and if this is possible, and in what manner. For it
may be said, if he was willing that this should be the case, it would
be requisite that the progression of things should stop at the Gods
and undefiled essences. If however, he not only fabricated these, but
also brutes, and reptiles, and men, and every thing material, he was
not willing that all things should be good. For he was not willing that
better natures should exist, but also fabricated such as are worse.
If he had been willing therefore, that all things should be good, he
would have stopped his fabrication at the Gods. We reply however,
that if the progression of things was only as far as to the Gods, all
things would not be good. For first natures being allotted the last
order, the good would be destroyed; since being able and willing to
generate through their goodness, yet in consequence of an arrangement
as the last of things, they would become unprolific and not good. Our
opponents therefore say, if all things are good, the progression is as
far as to the Gods. But we say, if the progression of things extends
only as far as to the Gods, all things are not good. For if a divine
nature is unprolific how is it good? But it will be unprolific, if it
is the last of things. For every thing which generates is better than
that which is generated. But the less excellent nature not existing,
that which is more excellent will have no subsistence. Let there be
the Gods therefore, and let them have the first order. But after the
Gods, let there be a progression[383] as far as to matter itself; and
let us give a transition to all beings, from the first to the last of
things. And neither let there be any thing wanting even of the last
of beings, nor any vacuum. For what vacuum can there be, when things
characterized by _itself_[384] have the first subsistence, those
that rank as the second proceed from these, those of the third order,
proceed from these and others, those in the fourth rank, are generated
from things characterized by the term _another_, and those in the
fifth rank being _others_ only; and on each side of these those
natures subsisting which are dissimilarly similar?[385] Such therefore,
being the continuity in things, what can be deficient? Immoveable
natures being first established, self-motive natures having the second,
and alter-motive natures the third rank, all of which are the last of
things. For all beings derive their completion from the above-mentioned
orders. In short, the production of things may be shown to be continued
in many ways; and if you are willing so to speak, analogy subsisting
from on high as far as to the last of things, according to the
well-ordered progression of all beings from _the one_.

Let therefore, all these things be acknowledged, and let the generation
of beings be extended as far as to nothing; but whether is there
nothing evil in these, or shall we admit that there is in a certain
respect, and that there is what is called depravity in bodies, and in
souls? For some have been led by this doubt to take away evil entirely;
but others have been induced to deny a providence, in consequence of
believing, that if providence has a subsistence, all things are good.
For if indeed divinity was willing there should be evil, how can he
be good? For it is the province of that which is essentially good to
benefit every thing, just as it is of that which is essentially hot, to
give heat. But it is not lawful for _the good_ to effect any thing
else than what is good. And if divinity was not[386] willing there
should be evil, how can it have a subsistence? For something will exist
contrary to the will of the father of all things. Such therefore is the
doubt.

We must say however, conformably to the doctrine of Plato according to
our preceptor, that the habitude of divinity with respect to things
subsists in a different manner from that of ours. And again, that the
habitude of things with reference to deity is different from their
habitude with reference to us. For wholes have a relation to parts
different from that of parts to each other. To divinity therefore
nothing is evil, not even of the things which are called evil. For
he uses these also to a good purpose. But again, to partial natures
there is a certain evil, these being naturally adapted to suffer by
it. And the same thing is to a part indeed evil, but to the universe
and to wholes is not evil, but good. For so far as it is a being, and
so far as it participates of a certain order, it is good. For this
thing which is said to be evil, if you apprehend it to be destitute of
all good, you will make it to be beyond even that which in no respect
whatever is. For as _the good itself_ is prior to being, so evil
itself is posterior to the nothingness of non-entity. For that which is
most distant from the good is evil, and not that which has no kind of
subsistence.[387] If therefore, that which in no respect whatever is,
has more of subsistence than evil itself, but this is impossible, it is
much more impossible that there should be such a thing as evil itself.

If however, that which is entirely evil has no subsistence, but evil
is complicated with good, you give it a place among beings, and you
make it good to other things. And indeed, how is it possible it should
not, if it ranks among beings? For that which participates of being,
participates also of unity, and that which participates of unity,
participates likewise of good. Hence evil if it is, participates
of good; because evil has not an unmingled subsistence, and is not
entirely deprived of order, and indefinite. Who therefore made it to be
such? Who imparted to it measure and order, and bound? It is evident
that it is the demiurgus, who rendered all things similar to himself.
For he filled both wholes and parts with good. But if he benefits
all things, and colours evil itself with good, there is nothing evil
according to the power of divinity and of recipients. For power is
twofold, one being that of divinity which benefits the depravity that
is so abundantly seen;[388] but the other being that of recipients,
which participate of the goodness of the demiurgus according to the
measure of their order [in the scale of beings]. In consequence
therefore of the demiurgus being willing that there should be nothing
evil, nothing is evil. But if certain persons accuse him as the cause
of evil, because he gave subsistence to partial natures, they take away
the fabrication of the world, subvert the prolific power of wholes, and
confound the nature of things first and last.

That we assert these things however, conformably to the opinion of
Plato, may be easily seen from his writings. For in the Politicus,
he clearly says, “that the world obtained from[389] its maker all
beautiful things, but from its former habit, all such injustice and
evil, as are produced within the heavens.” For because there is
generation, and also corruption, that which is preternatural has a
subsistence. And because the deformity of matter fills partial souls
with inelegance, through an association with it, on this account that
which is not conformable to reason is allotted a certain resemblance
of subsistence. At the same time however, all these particulars become
beautiful through the goodness of the maker of the universe. But in
the Republic, Plato assigns no other cause of good than God, and says
that certain other causes of evils are to be investigated; through
which he manifests that evils do not derive their subsistence from
divinity. For it is not, says he, the province of fire to refrigerate,
nor of snow to heat, nor of that which is all-good to produce evil. And
he asserts that certain partial causes of these are to be admitted,
and such as are indefinite. For it is not in evils as in things that
are good, viz. that _the one_, and what is primarily good, precede
multitude; and this on account of the indefinite diffusion of evil. The
words _others_ therefore and _certain_, evince that the causes of evil
are partial and indefinite. But in the Theætetus he says “that it is
neither possible for evils to be abolished, nor for them to be in the
Gods, but that they revolve from necessity about the mortal nature,
and this place of our abode.” If therefore, evil revolves necessarily
in the mortal place, it will not be according to Plato, that which in
no respect whatever has a subsistence, and which is exempt from all
beings. So that according to him evil exists, is from partial causes,
and is benefited through the boniform providence of the demiurgus,
because there is nothing which is entirely evil, but every thing is in
a certain respect accomplished conformably to justice and divinity.

For we may make the following division: Of all that the world contains,
some things are wholes, but others parts. And of parts, some eternally
preserve their own good, such as a partial intellect, and partial
dæmons, but others are not always able to preserve their proper good.
And of these, some are alter-motive, but others self-motive. And of
self-motive natures, some have evil established in their choice; but
in others, it terminates in actions. With respect to wholes therefore,
they are perfectly good, supplying not only themselves, but also parts
with good. Such things however, as are parts, and yet preserve their
own good, possess good secondarily and partially. But such as are
parts, and alter-motive, deriving their subsistence from other things,
are suspended from the providence of them, and are transmuted in a
becoming manner, as is the case with such bodies as are generated and
corrupted. For if it is necessary that there should be generation, it
is also necessary that there should be corruption. For generation
subsists according to mutation, and is a certain mutation. But if
there is corruption, it is necessary that the preternatural should be
secretly introduced. As therefore, that which is corrupted, is indeed
corrupted with reference to itself, but is not destroyed with reference
to the universe; for it is either air or water, or something else into
which it is changed; thus also that which is preternatural, is indeed
with respect to itself disordered, but with respect to the universe
has an orderly arrangement. For, if though it should be destroyed
and entirely deprived of order, it would not dissolve the order of
the universe, how is it possible that when having a preternatural
subsistence which is of itself nothing when deprived of all order,
it can destroy the whole arrangement of things? But again, partial
natures which are self-motive indeed, and whose energy is directed to
externals, cause that which is effected by their energy to be evil to
themselves, yet in a certain respect this also is good, and conformable
to divinity. For since impulses and actions are from choice, actions
follow elections according to justice, when he who chuses not only
deserves the retribution consequent to his choice, but that also which
follows from his conduct. And simply indeed, the action is not good,
but to him who chuses a certain thing, and is impelled in a certain
way, it is introduced according to justice; and is good to this
individual and this particular life. For of goods, some are good to all
things, others to such as differ according to species, and others to
individuals, so far as they are individuals. For hellebore is not good
to all men, nor to all bodies, nor yet to all diseased bodies, but it
is good to one who is diseased in a particular manner, and is salutary
from a certain principle. Whether therefore, the action is intemperate
or unjust, to those who perform it indeed it is good, so far as it is
conformable to justice, but simply it is not good, nor to those by whom
it is done, but is to them the greatest evil. And so far as it proceeds
from them and is directed to them, it is evil; but so far as it
proceeds from the universe to them, it is not evil. And so far as their
energy is directed to themselves, they destroy their life, becoming
actually depraved; but so far as they suffer from the universe, they
undergo the punishment of their choice; (just as it is said, that those
who deliberate about betraying a suppliant, subvert divinity); or they
suffer the punishment of their will.

Let us however, direct our attention to what remains, viz. to such
partial natures as energize self-motively, and who stop their depravity
as far as to their choice. For they suffer the punishment of their
cogitation alone. For, as it is said, there is a certain punishment of
mere imagination, impulse and will; since the Gods govern us inwardly,
and as they reward beneficent choice, so likewise they punish the
contrary. But it may be said, how can choice itself have that which is
conformable to justice and divinity? May we not reply, because it is
necessary there should be an essence of this kind and a power of an
ambiguous nature, and which verges to different lives. If therefore
that which has dominion over choice is from divinity, choice also is
from divinity, and if this be the case, it is good. For the electing
soul alone, is transferred to another and another order. For all
choice either elevates the soul, or draws it downward [to an inferior
condition of being]. And if indeed the choice is from a depraved[390]
soul, it is evil; but if it transfers that which chuses to its proper
order, it is according to justice and good. For the choice itself
introduces punishment to the electing soul. Or rather, the choice
becomes punishment in him who chooses, causing the soul to apostatize
from good. For as a beneficent choice becomes truly the reward of
itself, so a depraved choice becomes its own punishment. For this is
the peculiarity of self-motive powers. Hence there is no evil, which
is not also in a certain respect good; but all things participate of
providence.

If however, certain persons should ask on what account an
evil-producing cause had at first a subsistence, though it should not
rank among wholes, but is of a partial nature, to these it must be
said, that the progression of beings is continued, and that no vacuum
is left among them. Whether therefore, is it necessary that there
should not be every self-motive life? But we shall thus take away many
natures that are divine. Or shall we say it is necessary there should
be wholes that are self-motive, but there is no necessity there should
be self-motive parts? But how is it possible they should be wholes,
if deprived of their proper parts?[391] And how will the continuity of
beings be preserved, if wholes and self-motive natures have a prior
existence, and also partial and alter-motive natures, but we entirely
destroy the intermediate natures, viz. such as are self-motive indeed,
but at the same time partial? And which through the partial form become
connected with habitude, but through the self-motive power, are at a
certain time liberated from habitude. It is necessary therefore, that
there should be this life also, which is a medium in beings, and the
bond of things which have as it were an arrangement contrary[392] to
each other. Evil however, is not on this account natural to the soul;
since she is essentially the mistress of her choice. For the animated
body has an essential tendency to disease; for it is essentially
corruptible; and yet disease is not according to nature. Hence disease
is indeed evil to the partial nature which is allotted to connect this
particular body, but is good to the wholeness of bodies. For it is
necessary that what is generated from other things, should be changed
into another thing. As therefore, to the nature which is in us, it is
good for the nutriment to be changed, in order to the preservation
of the animal; thus also to every nature it is good for a part to be
corrupted, in order that the wholes may be preserved, which are always
prior to parts. For if parts were generated from wholes, and the
things generated should remain, all things would be rapidly consumed,
in consequence of wholes becoming partial natures. For a continued
ablation taking place from things of a finite nature, the whole must
necessarily fail. But wholes not existing, either generation will be
stopped, or mutation to partial natures will be derived from other
things. Hence that which is evil to a partial nature is good to the
whole life of the world.

Farther still therefore, resuming the enquiry after another manner
from the beginning, if we are asked whether divinity was willing there
should be evil, or was not willing, we reply that he was both. For he
was willing indeed, considered as imparting being to all things. For
every thing in the universe which has any kind of being proceeds from
the demiurgic cause. But he was not willing, considered as producing
all things good. For he concealed evil in the use of good. And if you
are willing to argue physically, evil is produced _essentially_
indeed from a partial soul, but _accidentally_ from divinity, so
far as it is evil, if it is admitted that divinity gave subsistence
to the soul. Evil also so far as it is essentially good, originates
from a divine cause, but accidentally from the soul. For so far as it
subsists according to justice, it possesses good. Again, Plato in the
Laws defines what punishment is, viz. that it appears to consume him
who suffers it, and resembles the opening of ulcers. And he who is
incapable[393] of being healed without a certain action, is incited
to the performance of it, in order that the soul being liberated from
her parturiency and stupid astonishment about that which is base, and
repenting of her own evils, may begin to be purified. For base and
unjust actions, when they are the objects of hope, are lovely to those
that vehemently admire them, but when accomplished, fill those that
perform them with repentance. And when indeed, they are the subjects
of meditation, they cause the soul to be latently diseased; but when
they have proceeded into energy, they demonstrate their own imbecility,
but liberate the soul from the most disgraceful parturition. And some
indeed, exhibit this punishment according to the whole of their life;
but others according to partial energies. For he who does any thing
irrational, does it from choice, is impelled to that which is the
object of his choice, and leads into energy that which pre-existed in
his imagination.

In short, evil is neither in intellectual natures; for the whole
intellectual genus is free from all evil; nor in whole souls, or whole
bodies; for all wholes are exempt from evil, as being perpetual, and
always subsisting according to nature. It remains therefore, that it
must be in partial souls, or in partial bodies. But neither is it
in the essences of these; for all their essences are derived from
divinity; nor in their powers; for these subsist according to nature.
Hence it remains, that it must be in their energies. But with respect
to souls, it is neither in such as are rational; for all these aspire
after good; nor in such as are irrational; for these energize according
to nature. But it subsists in the privation of symmetry[394] of these
with reference to each other. And in bodies, it is neither in form;
for it wishes to rule over matter; nor in matter; for it aspires after
the supervening ornaments of form. But it consists in the privation
of symmetry between form and matter. From which also it is evident,
that every thing evil exists according to a _parhypostasis_, or
_resemblance of subsistence_, and that at the same time it is
coloured by good; so that all things are good through the will of
divinity, and as much as possible nothing is destitute of good. For it
was not possible, that generation existing, evil also should not have
a shadowy subsistence, since it is necessary to the perfection of the
whole of things. And from what has been said, it is evident, that the
will of divinity is not vain. For all things are good with reference to
him, and there is not any being which is not vanquished by a portion
of good. Nor are the words, “_as much as possible_,” written
superfluously. For they do not signify an imperfect power, but that
power which rules over all things, and benefits all things through an
abundance of good.”


                               THE END.




                           ADDITIONAL NOTES


VOL. I. P. 1. _Becoming unapparent to many._ It is a remarkable
historical fact, as I have observed in my History of the Restoration
of the Platonic Theology, that the philosophy of Plato was in a manner
lost for many centuries after the death of its great master. For its
depths were not penetrated prior to Plotinus, who lived about two
hundred and fifty years after the birth of Christ.

P. 2. _Jamblichus and Theodorus._ Both these philosophers were the
disciples of Porphyry. For an account of the former, of whom the
Emperor Julian says, that he was posterior indeed in time to Plato,
but not in genius, see my History of the Restoration of the Platonic
Theology, annexed to my translation of Proclus on Euclid.

P. 5. _Being likewise a partaker of the dialectic of Plato._
The dialectic of Plato is very different from the dialectic which
is conversant with opinion, and is accurately investigated in the
Topics of Aristotle. For the business of this first of sciences, is
to employ definitions, divisions, analyzations, and demonstrations,
as primary sciences in the investigation of causes; imitating the
progression of beings from the first principle of things, and their
continual conversion to it, as the ultimate object of desire. “But
there are three energies, says Proclus (in MS. Comment. in Parmenid.
lib. 1.) of this most scientific method, the first of which is adapted
to youth, and is useful for the purpose of rousing their intellect,
which is, as it were, in a dormant state. For it is a true exercise of
the soul in the speculation of things, leading forth thro’ opposite
positions the essential impression of ideas which it contains, and
considering not only the divine path, as it were, which conducts to
truth, but exploring whether the deviations from it contain any thing
worthy of belief; and lastly, stimulating the all-various conceptions
of the soul. But the second energy takes place when intellect rests
from its former investigations, as becoming most familiar with the
speculation of beings, and beholds truth itself firmly established on
a pure and holy foundation. And this energy, according to Socrates,
by a progression through ideas, evolves the whole of an intelligible
nature, till it arrives at that which is first; and this by analyzing,
defining, demonstrating and dividing, proceeding upwards and downwards,
till, having entirely investigated the nature of intelligibles, it
raises itself to a nature superior to beings. But the soul being
perfectly established in this nature, as in her paternal port, no
longer tends to a more excellent object of desire, as she has now
arrived at the end of her search. And you may say that what is
delivered in the Phædrus and Sophista is the employment of this energy,
giving a twofold division to some, and a fourfold to other operations
of the dialectic art. Hence it is assigned to such as philosophize
purely, and no longer require preparatory exercise, but nourish the
intellect of their soul in pure intellection. But the third energy
purifies from twofold ignorance, when its reasons are employed upon
men full of opinion; and this is spoken of in the Sophista.” So that
the dialectic energy is triple, either subsisting through opposite
arguments, or alone unfolding truth, or alone confuting falsehood. See
admirable specimens of this master science in the notes to my Plato,
Vol. 3.

P. 13. _Devised wanderings, sections, battles, lacerations, rapes and
adulteries of the Gods._ See the fables in which these things are
asserted of the Gods admirably unfolded by Proclus in the Introduction
to the 2nd. and 3rd. books of the Republic of Plato, in Vol. 1. of my
Plato.

P. 90. _And thus much concerning divine names._ In addition to what is
here said, Proclus admirably remarks on this subject as follows, in his
MS. Scholia On the Cratylus of Plato.

Since, however, the present discourse is about divine names, it is
necessary to speak a little concerning them. And in the first place,
let us speak concerning the names which are occultly established in the
Gods themselves; since some of the ancients said that these originated
from the more excellent genera,[395] but that the Gods are established
beyond a signification of this kind; but others admitted that names are
in the Gods themselves, and in those Gods that are allotted the highest
order.

The Gods, therefore, possess an hyparxis uniform and ineffable, a
power generative of wholes, and an intellect perfect and full of
conceptions; and they give subsistence to all things according to
this triad. Hence it is necessary that the participations of those
divinities who are of a more elevated order, and who are arranged
nearer to _the good_, should proceed triadically through all things to
which they give subsistence. It is also necessary that among these,
those participations should be more ineffable, which are defined
according to the _hyparxes_ of the first Gods; but that those should
be more apparent, and more divided, which are illuminated according to
the _intellect_ of exempt causes; and that those participations which
are between these, should be such as are the effluxions of _prolific
powers_. For the fathers of wholes giving subsistence to all things,
have disseminated in all things vestiges, and impressions of their own
triadic hypostasis; since nature also inserts in bodies an exciting
principle (εναυσμα) derived from her proper idiom through which she
moves bodies, and governs them as by a rudder. And the demiurgus has
established in the universe an image of his own monadic transcendency,
through which he governs the world, holding a rudder, as Plato says,
like a pilot. It is proper to think therefore, that these rudders
and this helm of the universe, in which the demiurgus being seated
orderly disposes the world, are nothing else than a symbol of the whole
fabrication of things, to us indeed difficult of comprehension, but
to the Gods themselves known and manifest. And why is it requisite to
speak concerning these things, since of the ineffable cause of all,
who is beyond intelligibles, there is an impression in every being,
and even as far as to the last of things, through which all things are
suspended from him, some more remotely, and others more near, according
to the clearness and obscurity of the impression which they contain.
This it is which moves all things to the desire of good, and imparts
to beings this inextinguishable love. And this impression is indeed
unknown: for it pervades as far as to things which are incapable of
knowledge. It is also more excellent than life; for it is present with
things inanimate: and has not an intellectual power; since it lies
in things destitute of intellectual energy. As nature therefore, the
demiurgic monad, and the father himself who is exempt from all things,
have disseminated in things posterior, impressions of their respective
peculiarities, and through these convert all things to themselves, in
like manner all the Gods impart to their progeny, symbols of their
cause, and through these establish all things in themselves, The
impressions, therefore, of the hyparxis of the higher order of Gods,
which are disseminated in secondary natures are ineffable and unknown,
and their efficacious and motive energy surpasses all intelligence. And
of this kind are the characters of light, through which the Gods unfold
themselves to their progeny; these characters subsisting unically in
the Gods themselves, but shining forth to the view in the genera more
excellent than man, and presenting themselves to us divisibly, and
accompanied with form. Hence the Gods[396] exhort “To understand the
fore-running form of light.” For subsisting on high without form, it
becomes invested with form through its progression; and there being
established occultly and uniformly, it becomes apparent to us through
motion, from the Gods themselves; possessing indeed an efficacious
energy, through a divine cause, but becoming figured, through the
essence by which it is received.

Again, the impressions which are illuminated from powers, are in
a certain respect media between things ineffable and effable, and
pervade through all the middle genera. For it is not possible for the
primary gifts of the Gods to arrive to us, without the more excellent
genera (i.e. angels, dæmons and heroes) previously participating the
illuminations which thence proceed. But these illuminations subsisting
appropriately in each of their participants, and co-ordinately in all
things, unfold the powers that give them subsistence. Of this kind
are the symbols of the Gods, which are indeed uniform in the more
elevated orders, but multiform in those that are subordinate; and which
the theurgic art imitating exhibits through inarticulate evocations
(αδιαρθρωτων εκφωνησεων).

The impressions which rank as the third in order, which pervade from
intellectual essences to all peculiarities, and proceed as far as to
us, are divine names, through which the Gods are invoked, and by which
they are celebrated, being unfolded into light by the Gods themselves,
and reverting to them, and producing to human knowledge as much of
the Gods as is apparent. For through these we are able to signify
something to each other, and to converse with ourselves about the Gods.
Different nations however, participate differently of these, as for
instance the Egyptians according to their native tongue, receiving
names of this kind from the Gods; but the Chaldeans and Indians in a
different manner, according to their proper tongue; and in a similar
manner the Greeks according to their dialect. Though a certain divinity
therefore may be called by the Greeks Briareus, but differently by the
Chaldeans, we must nevertheless admit that each of these names is the
progeny of the Gods, and that it signifies the same essence. But if
some names are more and others less efficacious, it is not wonderful;
since of things which are known to us, such as are dæmoniacal and
angelic are more efficacious; and in short of things denominated the
names of such as are nearer are more perfect than the names of those
that are more remote.

Not every genus of the Gods however, can be denominated. For Parmenides
evinces that the God who is beyond all things is ineffable. “For,
says he, he can neither be denominated, nor spoken of.” And of the
intelligible Gods the first genera, which are conjoined with _the
one itself_, and are called occult, have much of the unknown and
ineffable. For that which is perfectly apparent and effable, cannot
be conjoined with the perfectly ineffable, but it is requisite that
the progression of intelligibles, should be terminated in this order;
in which there is the first effable,[397] and that which is called
by proper names. For the first forms are there, and the intellectual
nature of intelligibles there shines forth to the view. But all the
natures prior to this being silent and occult, are only known by
intelligence.[398] Hence the whole of the telestic art energizing
theurgically ascends as far as to this order. Orpheus also says,
that this is first called by a name by the other Gods: for the light
proceeding from it is known to and denominated by the intellectual
orders. But he thus speaks,

    μητιν σπερμα φεροντα θεων, κλυτον οντε φανητα,
    πρωτογονον μακαρες καλεον κατα μακρον Ολυμπον.

i.e., “Metis bearing the seed of the Gods, whom the Gods about lofty
Olympus call the illustrious Phanes Protogonus.” In the Gods however
nomination is united with intellectual conception, and both are present
with them through the participation of the light which the mighty
Phanes emits to all things. But in our soul these two are divided from
each other; and intellectual conception is one thing, and name another:
and the one has the order of an image, but the other of a paradigm. In
the middle genera there is indeed a separation, but there is also a
union of the intellective and onomastic energy. The transportive name
(διαπορθμιον ονομα) of _Iynxes_[399] (ιγγυων) which is said to sustain
all the fountains, appears to me to signify a thing of this kind. Such
also is the appellation _teletarchic_ (το τελεταρχικον) which some
one of the Gods[400] says, “leaps into the worlds, through the rapid
reproof of the father.” κοσμοις ενθρωσκειν κραιπνην δια πατρος ενιπην.
For all these things are occultly with the Gods, but are unfolded
according to second and third progressions, and to men that are allied
to the Gods.

There is therefore a certain abiding name in the Gods, through which
the subordinate invoke the superior, as Orpheus says of Phanes, or
through which the superior denominate the subordinate, as Jupiter in
Plato gives names to the unapparent periods of souls.[401] For fathers
define the energies of their offspring, and the offspring know their
producing causes through the intellectual impressions which they bear.
Such then are the first names which are unfolded from the Gods and
which through the middle genera end in the rational essence.

There are however other names of a second and third rank; and these
are such as partial souls have produced, at one time energizing
enthusiastically about the Gods, and at another time energizing
according to science; either conjoining their own intelligence with
divine light, and thence deriving perfection; or committing the
fabrication of names to the rational power. For thus artists, such as
geometricians, physicians and rhetoricians give names to the things
the peculiarities of which they understand. Thus too poets inspired by
Phœbus (των ποιητων οι φοιβοληπτοι) ascribe many names to the Gods,
and to human names give a division opposite to these; receiving the
former from enthusiastic energy and the latter from sense and opinion;
concerning which Socrates now says Homer indicates, referring some
names to the Gods and others to men.

P. 138. _So that language when conversant with that which is ineffable,
being subverted about itself, has no cessation and opposes itself._
Damascius likewise, in a wonderfully sublime manner speaks of the
immense principle of the universe, conformably to what is now said
by Proclus, in his excellent MS treatise περι αρχων, or “concerning
principles;” and the following is an epitome of what he says on this
subject.

“Our soul prophesies that the principle which is beyond all things that
can in any respect be conceived, is unco-ordinated with all things.
Neither therefore, must it be called principle, nor cause, nor that
which is first, nor prior to all things, nor beyond all things. By no
means therefore, must we celebrate it as all things, nor in short,
is it to be celebrated, nor recalled into memory. For whatever we
conceive or consider, is either something belonging to all things, or
is all things, though analyzing we should ascend to that which is most
simple, and which is the most comprehensive of all things, being as it
were, the ultimate circumference, not of beings, but of non-beings.
For of beings, that which has an united subsistence, and is perfectly
without separation, is the extremity, since every being is mingled
from elements which are either bound and infinity, or the progeny of
these. But _the one_ is simply the last boundary of _the many_. For
we cannot conceive any thing more simple than that which is perfectly
one; which if we denominate the principle and cause, the first, and
the most simple, these and all other things are there only according
to _the one_. But we not being able to contract our conceptions into
profound union, are divided about it, and predicate of _the one_ the
distributed multitude which is in ourselves; unless we despise these
appellations also, because _the many_ cannot be adapted to _the one_.
Hence it can neither be known nor named; for, if it could, it would in
this respect be _many_. Or, these things also will be contained in it,
according to _the one_. For the nature of _the one_ is all-receptive,
or rather all-producing, and there is not any thing whatever which
_the one_ is not. Hence all things are as it were evolved from it. It
is therefore, properly cause, and the first, the end and the last, the
defensive enclosure of all things, and the one nature of all things;
not that nature which is in things, and which proceeds from _the one_,
but that which is prior to them, which is the most impartible summit of
all things whatever, and the greatest comprehension of all things which
in any respect are said to have a being.

But if _the one_ is the cause of all things, and is comprehensive of
all things, what ascent will there be for us beyond this also? For we
do not strive in vain, extending ourselves to that which is nothing.
For that which is not even _one_, _is_ not according to the most just
mode of speaking. Whence then do we conceive that there is something
beyond _the one_? For _the many_ require nothing else than _the one_.
And hence _the one_ alone is the cause of the _many_. Hence also _the
one_ is entirely cause, because it is necessary that the cause of
_the many_ should alone be _the one_. For it cannot be nothing; since
nothing is the cause of nothing. Nor can it be _the many_: for so
far as many they are unco-ordinated; and _the many_ will not be one
cause. But if there are many causes, they will not be the causes of
each other, through being unco-ordinated, and through a progression
in a circle, the same things being causes and the things caused. Each
therefore, will be the cause of itself, and thus there will be no cause
of the many. Hence it is necessary that _the one_ should be the cause
of _the many_, and which is also the cause of their co-ordination for
there is a certain conspiring co-ordination, and a union with each
other.

If, therefore, some one thus doubting should say that _the one_ is a
sufficient principle, and should add as the summit that we have not
any conception or suspicion more simple than that of _the one_, and
should therefore ask how we can suspect any thing beyond the last
suspicion and conception we are able to frame;--if some one should
thus speak, we must pardon the doubt. For a speculation of this kind
is it seems inaccessible and immense: at the same time however, from
things more known to us we must extend the ineffable parturitions of
our soul, to the ineffable co-sensation of this sublime truth. For as
that which subsists without is in every respect more honourable than
that which subsists with habitude, and the unco-ordinated than the
co-ordinated, as the theoretic than the political life, and Saturn
for instance than Jupiter, being than forms, and _the one_ than _the
many_ of which _the one_ is the principle; so in short, that which
transcends every thing of this kind is more honourable than all causes
and principles, and is not to be considered as subsisting in any
co-arrangement and habitude; since _the one_ is naturally prior to
_the many_, that which is most simple to things more composite, and
that which is most comprehensive to the things which it comprehends.
So that if you are willing thus to speak, _the first_ is beyond all
such opposition, not only that which is in things co-ordinate, but
even that which takes place from its subsistence as the first. _The
one_ therefore, and the united are posterior to the first: for these
causally contain multitude as numerous[402] as that which is unfolded
from them. _The one_ however, is no less one, if indeed it is not more
so, because separate multitude is posterior to and not in it; and the
united is no less united because it contracted in one things separated
prior to separation. Each of these therefore, is all things, whether
according to co-ordination, or according to their own nature. But all
things cannot be things first, nor the principle. Nor yet one of them
alone, because this one will be at the same time all things, according
to _the one_: but we shall not yet have discovered that which is
beyond all things. To which we may also add, that _the one_ is the
summit of _the many_, as the cause of the things proceeding from it.
We may likewise say that we form a conception of _the one_ according
to a purified suspicion extended to that which is most simple and most
comprehensive. But that which is most venerable, must necessarily be
incomprehensible by all conceptions and suspicions; since also in
other things, that which always soars beyond our conceptions is more
honourable than that which is more obvious: so that what flies from
all our suspicions will be most honourable. But if this be the case
it is _nothing_. Let however nothing be twofold, one better than _the
one_, the other posterior to sensibles. If also, we strive in vain in
asserting these things, striving in vain is likewise twofold; the one
falling into the ineffable, the other into that which in no respect
whatever has any subsistence. For _this_ also is ineffable, as Plato
says, but according to the worse, but _that_ according to the better.
If too, we search for a certain advantage arising from it, this is the
most necessary advantage of all others, that all things thence proceed
as from an adytum, from the ineffable, and in an ineffable manner. For
neither do they proceed as _the one_ produces _the many_, nor as _the
united_ things _separated_, but as the ineffable similarly produces all
things, ineffably. But if in asserting these things concerning it, that
it is no one of all things, that it is incomprehensible, we subvert
what we say, it is proper to know that these are the names and words of
our parturitions, daring anxiously to explore it, and which standing
in the vestibules of the adytum, announce indeed nothing pertaining to
the ineffable, but signify the manner in which we are affected about
it, our doubts and disappointment; nor yet this clearly, but through
indications to such as are able to understand these investigations. We
also see that our parturitions suffer these things about _the one_, and
that in a similar manner they are solicitous and subverted. For _the
one_, says Plato, if it _is_, is not _the one_. But if it is not, no
assertion can be adapted to it: so that neither can there be a negation
of it, nor can any name be given to it; for neither is a name simple.
Nor is there any opinion nor science of it; for neither are these
simple. So that _the one_ is in every respect unknown and ineffable.

What then? Shall we investigate something else beyond the ineffable?
Or, perhaps indeed, Plato leads us ineffably through _the one_ as a
medium, to the ineffable beyond _the one_, which is now the subject of
discussion; and this by an ablation of _the one_, in the same manner
as he leads us to _the one_ by an ablation of other things. For, that
he gives to _the one_ a certain position is evident from his Sophista,
where he demonstrates that it subsists prior to being, itself by
itself. But if, having ascended as far as to _the one_, he is silent,
this also is becoming in Plato to be perfectly silent, after the manner
of the ancients concerning things in every respect unspeakable; for
the discourse was indeed most dangerous, in consequence of falling on
idiotical ears. Indeed, when discoursing concerning that which in no
respect has any subsistence, he subverts his assertions, and is fearful
of falling into the sea of dissimilitude, or, rather of unsubsisting
void. But if demonstrations do not accord with _the one_, it is by no
means wonderful; for they are human and divisible, and more composite
than is fit. Indeed, they are not even adapted to being, since they are
formal, or rather, they are neither adapted to forms nor essences. Or,
is it not Plato himself, who in his Epistles[403] evinces that we have
nothing which is significant of form, no type nor name, nor discourse,
nor opinion, nor science? For it is intellect alone which can apprehend
ideas by its projecting energies, which we cannot possess while busily
engaged in discourse. If there fore we even energize intellectually,
since in this case our intellection is characterized by form, we shall
not accord with _the united_ and with being. And if at any time we are
able to project a contracted intelligence, even this is unadapted and
discordant with _the one_. If, also, we energize according to the most
profoundly united intelligence, and through this occultly perceive
_the one itself_, yet even this is expanded only as far as to _the
one_, if there is a knowledge of _the one_; for this we have not yet
determined. At the same time however, let us now apply ourselves to the
discussion of things of such great importance, through indications and
suspicions, being purified with respect to unusual conceptions, and led
through analogies and negations, despising what we possess with respect
to these, and advancing from things more ignoble with us to things more
honorable.

Shall we therefore say, that the nature which we now investigate
as the first, is so perfectly ineffable, that it must not even be
admitted concerning it that it is thus ineffable; but that _the one_ is
ineffable, as flying from all composition of words and names, and all
distinction of that which is known from that which knows, and is to be
apprehended in a manner the most simple and comprehensive, and that it
is not one alone as the characteristic of one, but as _one all things_,
and _one prior to all things_, and not one which is something belonging
to all things? These indeed, are the parturitions of the soul, and are
thus purified with respect to _the simply one_, and that which is truly
the one cause of all things. But, in short, we thus form a conception
of _the one_ which we contain as the summit or flower of our essence,
as being more proximate and allied to us, and more prompt to such a
suspicion of that which nearly leaves all things behind it. But from
some particular thing which is made the subject of hypothesis, the
transition is easy to that which is simply supposed, though we should
in no respect accede to it, but being carried in that which is most
simple in us, should form a suspicion concerning that which is prior to
all things. _The one_ therefore, is thus effable, and thus ineffable,
but that which is beyond it is to be honoured in the most perfect
silence, and prior to this, by the most perfect ignorance[404] which
despises all knowledge.

Let us therefore, now consider, in the second place, how it is said
to be perfectly unknown. For if this be true, how do we assert all
these things concerning it? For we do not elucidate by much discussion
about things of which we are ignorant. But if it is in reality
unco-ordinated with all things, and without habitude to all things, and
is nothing of all things, nor even _the one itself_, these very things
are the nature of it. Besides, with respect to its being unknown, we
either know that it is unknown, or we are ignorant of this. But if the
latter, how do we say that it is perfectly unknown? And if we know
this, in this respect therefore it is known. Or shall we say that
it is known, that the unknown is unknown? We cannot therefore deny
one thing of another, not knowing that which is the subject of the
negation; nor can we say that it is not this or that, when we can in
no respect reach it. How therefore can we deny of that of which we are
perfectly ignorant the things which we know? For this is just as if
some one who was blind from his birth should assert that heat is not in
colour. Or perhaps indeed, he also will justly say, that colour is not
hot. For he knows this by the touch; but he knows nothing of colour,
except that it is not tangible; for he knows that he does not know it.
Such a knowledge indeed, is not a knowledge of colour, but of his own
ignorance. And we also when we say that the first is unknown, do not
announce any thing of it, but we confess the manner in which we are
affected about it. For the non-perception of the blind man is not in
the colour, nor yet his blindness, but in him. The ignorance therefore
of that of which we are ignorant is in us. For the knowledge of that
which is known, is in him that knows, and not in the thing known. But
if knowledge is in that which is known being as it were the splendour
of it, so some one should say ignorance is in that which is unknown,
being as it were the darkness of it, or obscurity, according to which
it is unknown by, and is unapparent to all things,--he who says this is
ignorant, that as blindness is a privation, so likewise all ignorance,
and that as is the invisible, so that of which we are ignorant, and
which is unknown. In other things therefore, the privation of this
or that leaves something else. For that which is incorporeal, though
invisible, yet is intelligible; and that which is not intelligible
by a certain intelligence, leaves at the same time something else.
But if we take away every conception and suspicion, this also we must
say is perfectly unknown by us, about which we close every eye. Nor
must we assert any thing of it, as we do of the intelligible, that
it is not adapted to be seen by the eyes, or as we do of _the one_,
that it is not naturally adapted to be understood by an essential
and abundant intellection: for it imparts nothing by which it can be
apprehended, nothing which can lead to a suspicion of its nature.
For neither do we only say that it is unknown, that being something
else it may naturally possess the unknown, but we do not think fit to
predicate of it either _being_, or _the one_, or _all things_, or _the
principle of all things_, or in short, _any thing_. Neither therefore,
are these things the nature of it, viz. _the nothing, the being beyond
all things, supercausal subsistence, and the unco-ordinated with all
things_; but these are only ablations of things posterior to it. How,
therefore, do we speak concerning it? Shall we say, that knowing these
posterior things, we despise them with respect to the position, if
I may so speak, of that which is in every respect ineffable? For as
that which is beyond some particular knowledge is better than that
which is apprehended by such knowledge, so that which is beyond all
suspicion must necessarily be most venerable; not that it is known
to be so, but possessing the most venerable as in us, and as the
consequence of the manner in which we are affected about it. We also
call this a prodigy, from its being entirely incomprehensible by our
conceptions: for it is through analogy, if that which in a certain
respect is unknown, according to a more excellent subsistence, is
superior to that which is in every respect known. Hence that which is
in every respect unknown according to a more excellent subsistence,
must necessarily be acknowledged to be supreme, though it indeed has
neither the supreme, nor the most excellent, nor the most venerable:
for these things are our confessions about that, which entirely flies
from all our conceptions and suspicions. For by this very assertion,
that we can form no suspicion of it, we acknowledge that it is most
wonderful; since if we should suspect any thing concerning it, we must
also investigate something else prior to this suspicion, and either
proceed to infinity in our search, or stop at that which is perfectly
ineffable. Can we therefore, demonstrate any thing concerning it? And
is that demonstrable which we do not think fit to consider as a thing
whose subsistence we can even suspect? Or, when we assert these things,
do we not indeed demonstrate _concerning_ it, but not _it_? For neither
does it contain the demonstrable, nor any thing else. What then? Do
we not opine concerning it these things which we now assert? But if
there is an opinion of it, it is also the object of opinion. Or shall
we say we opine that it is not these things? For Aristotle also says
that there is true opinion. If therefore, the opinion is true, the
thing likewise is to which opinion being adapted becomes true. For, in
consequence of the thing subsisting, the opinion also is true. Though
indeed, how will that be true which is perfectly unknown? Or shall
we say this is true, that it is not these things, and that it is not
known? Is it therefore truly false, that it is these things, and that
it is known? Or shall we say that these things are to be referred to
privations, and to that which in a certain respect is not, in which
there may be a falling from the hypostasis of form? Just as we call
the absence of light darkness. For, light not existing, neither is
there any darkness. But to that which is never and in no respect being,
nothing among beings can, as Plato says, accede. Neither, therefore,
is it non-being, nor, in short, privation; and even the expression
_never in no respect_ (το μηδαμη μηδαμως) is incapable of signifying
its nature. For this expression is being, and _signification_ is
something belonging to beings. Likewise, though we should opine that
it is not in any respect, yet at the same time, since it thus becomes
the object of opinion, it belongs to beings. Hence, Plato very properly
calls that which never and in no respect is, ineffable and incapable
of being opined, and this according to the worse than the effable and
opinion, in the same manner as we say the supreme is according to that
which is better than these. What then, do we not think, and are we not
persuaded that the supreme thus subsists? Or, as we have often said, do
not these things express the manner in which we are affected about it?
But we possess in ourselves this opinion, which is therefore empty, as
is the opinion of a vacuum, and the infinite. As therefore, we form a
phantastic and fictitious opinion of these though they are not, as if
they were, just as we opine the sun to be no larger than a sphere whose
diameter is but a foot, though this is far from being the case;--so
if we opine any thing concerning that which never and in no respect
is, or concerning that of which we write these things, the opinion is
our own, and the vain attempt is in us, in apprehending which we think
that we apprehend the supreme. It is, however, nothing pertaining to
us, so much does it transcend our conceptions. How therefore, do we
demonstrate that there is such an ignorance in us concerning it? And
how do we say that it is unknown? We reply in one word, because we
always find that what is above knowledge is more honourable; so that
what is above all knowledge, if it were to be found, would be found
to be most honourable. But it is sufficient to the demonstration that
it cannot be found. We also say that it is above all things; because
if it were any thing known, it would rank among all things; and there
would be something common to it with all things, viz. the being known.
But there is one co-ordination of things in which there is something
common; so that in consequence of this, it will subsist together with
all things. Hence it is necessary that it should be unknown.

In the third place, the unknown is inherent in beings as well as the
known, though they are relatively inherent at the same time. As,
therefore, we say that the same thing is relatively large and small,
so likewise we say, that a thing is known and unknown with reference
to different things. And as the same thing, by participating of the
two forms, the great and the small, is at the same time both great
and small, so that which at the same time participates of the known
and the unknown is both these. Thus, the intelligible is unknown to
sense, but is known to intellect. For the more excellent will not
be privation, the inferior at the same time being form; since every
absence, and a privation of this kind, is either in matter, or in soul;
but all things are present in intellect, and still more in a certain
respect in the intelligible. Unless indeed, we denominate privation
according to a more excellent subsistence, as we say that is not form
which is above form; and that is not being which is superessential; and
that is nothing which is truly unknown, according to a transcendency
which surpasses all things. If, therefore, _the one_ is the last known
of things which are in any respect whatever known or suspected, that
which is beyond _the one_ is primarily and perfectly unknown; which
also is so unknown, that neither has it an unknown nature, nor can we
accede to it as to the unknown, but it is even unknown to us whether
it is unknown. For there is an all-perfect ignorance about it, nor can
we know it, neither as known nor unknown. Hence, we are on all sides
subverted, in consequence of not being able to reach it in any respect,
because it is not even one thing, or rather, it is not that which is
not even one thing. Hence it is that which in no respect whatever has
any subsistence; or it is even beyond this, since this is a negation
of being, and that which is not even one thing is a negation of _the
one_. But that which is not one thing, or in other words, that which is
nothing, is a void, and a falling from all things. We do not however
thus conceive concerning the ineffable. Or shall we say that _nothing_
is twofold, the one being beyond, and the other below, all things?
For _the one_ also is twofold, _this_ being the extreme, as _the one_
of matter, and _that_ the first, as that which is more ancient than
being. So that with respect to _nothing_ also, _this_ will be as
that which is not even the last one, but _that_ as neither being the
first one. In this way therefore, that which is unknown and ineffable
is twofold, _this_, as not even possessing the last suspicion of
subsistence, and _that_, as not even being the first of things. Must we
therefore, consider it as that which is unknown to us? Or this indeed
is nothing paradoxical: for it will be unknown even to much-honoured
intellect, if it be lawful so to speak. For every intellect looks to
the intelligible; and the intelligible is either _form_ or _being_.
But may not divine knowledge know it; and may it not be known to this
superessentially? This knowledge, however, applies itself to _the
one_, but that which we are now investigating is beyond _the one_. In
short, if it also is known, in conjunction with others, it will also be
something belonging to all things; for it will be common to it with
others to be known, and thus far it will be co-ordinated with others.
Further still, if it is known, divine knowledge will comprehend it. It
will therefore define it. Every boundary however, ascends ultimately as
far as to _the one_; but _that_ is beyond _the one_. It is therefore
perfectly incomprehensible and invisible, and consequently is not to
be apprehended by any kind of knowledge. To which we may add, that
knowledge is of things which may be known as beings, or as having a
subsistence, or as participating of _the one_. But this is beyond all
these. Further still, _the one_ also appears to be unknown, if it
is necessary that what is known should be one thing, and that which
knows another, though both should be in the same thing. So that _the
truly one_ will not know itself: for it does not possess a certain
duplicity. There will not therefore be in it that which knows, and
that which is known. Hence, neither will a God, considered according
to _the one itself_ alone, and as being conjoined with _the one_, be
united with that which is simple, according to duplicity. For how can
the double be conjoined with the simple? But if he knows _the one_
by _the one_, that which knows, and also that which is known will be
_one_, and in each the nature of _the one_ will be shown, subsisting
alone, and being _one_. So that he will not be conjoined as different
with that which is different, or as that which is gnostic with that
which is known, since this very thing is one alone; so that neither
will he be conjoined according to knowledge. Much more therefore, is
that which is not even _the one_ unknown. But if _the one_ is the last
thing known, we know nothing of that which is beyond _the one_; so
that the present rhapsody is vain. Or shall we say we know that these
things are unworthy to be asserted, if it be lawful so to speak, of the
first hypothesis [in the Parmenides of Plato,] since, not yet knowing
even intelligible forms, we despise the images which subsist in us of
their eternal and impartible nature; since these images are partible,
and multifariously mutable. Again, being ignorant of the contracted
subsistence of intelligible species and genera, but possessing an image
of this, which is a contraction of the genera and species in us, we
suspect that being itself resembles this contraction, but is at the
same time something more excellent; and this must be especially the
case with that which has an united subsistence. But now we are ignorant
of _the one_, not contracting, but expanding all things to it; and
in us simplicity itself consists, with relation to the all which we
contain, but is very far from coming into contact with the all-perfect
nature of _the one_. For _the one and the simple_ in our nature, are
in the smallest degree that which they are said to be, except that
they are a sign or indication of the nature which is there. Thus also
assuming in intellect every thing which can be in any respect known or
suspected, we think fit to ascribe it as far as to _the one_; if it be
requisite to speak of things unspeakable, and to conceive things which
are inconceivable. At the same time also, we think fit to make that the
subject of hypothesis, which cannot be compared, and is unco-ordinated
with all things, and which is so exempt that neither in reality does
it possess the exempt. For that which is exempt is always exempt from
something, and is not in every respect exempt, as possessing habitude
to that from which it is exempt, and in short, preceding in a certain
co-ordination. If, therefore, we intend to make that which is truly
exempt the subject of hypothesis, we must not even suppose it to be
exempt. For, accurately speaking, its proper name will not be verified
when ascribed to _the exempt_; since in this case it would at the same
time be co-ordinated; so that it is necessary even to deny this of it.
Likewise, negation is a certain sentence, and that which is denied is
a certain thing: but that of which we are now endeavouring to speak
is not any thing. Neither therefore, can it be denied, nor spoken of,
nor be in any way known: so that neither is it possible to deny the
negation; but that which appears to us to be a demonstration of what
we say, is a perfect subversion of language and conception. What end
therefore, will there be of the discourse, except the most profound
silence, and an acknowledgement that we know nothing of that which it
is not lawful, since impossible, to lead into knowledge?”

In another part, near the beginning of the same admirable work, he
remarks that _the one_ in every thing is the more true thing itself.
“Thus for instance, _the one_ of man [or the summit and flower of his
nature,] is the more true man, that of soul is the more true soul, and
that of body the more true body. Thus also _the one_ of the sun, and
_the one_ of the moon, are the more true sun and moon.” After which
he observes as follows: “Neither _the one_, nor _all things_ accords
with the nature of _the one_. For these are opposed to each other, and
distribute our conceptions. For, if we look to the simple and _the
one_, we destroy its immensely great perfection; and if we conceive all
things subsisting together, we abolish _the one_ and _the simple_. But
this is because we are divided, and look to divided peculiarities. At
the same time however, aspiring after the knowledge of it, we connect
all things together, that we may thus be able to apprehend this mighty
nature. But fearing the introduction of all multitudes, or contracting
the peculiar nature of _the one_, and rejoycing in that which is
simple and the first in speaking of the most ancient principle, we
thus introduce _the one itself_ as a symbol of simplicity; since we
likewise introduce _all things_ as a symbol of the comprehension of
all things. But that which is above or prior to both we can neither
conceive nor denominate. And why is it wonderful that we should suffer
these things about it, since the distinct knowledge of it is unical,
which we cannot perceive? Other things too of this kind we suffer
about _being_. For endeavouring to perceive _being_, we dismiss it,
but run round the elements of it, bound and infinity. But if we form
a more true conception of it, that it is an united plenitude of all
things, in this case the conception of _all things_ draws us down to
multitude, and the conception of _the united_ abolishes that of all
things. Neither however is this yet wonderful. For with respect to
forms also, when we wish to survey any one of these, we run round the
elements of it, and, striving to perceive its unity, we obliterate its
elements. At the same time however, every form is one and many; not
indeed partly one, and partly many, but the whole of it is through the
whole a thing of this kind. Not being able, therefore, to apprehend
this collectively, we rejoice in acceding to it with a distribution
of our conceptions. But always adhering in our ascent, like those who
climb clinging with their hands and feet, to things which extend us to
a more impartible nature, we obtain in a certain respect a co-sensation
in the distribution of that which is uniform. We despise therefore
this, with respect to the collected apprehension of it, which we cannot
obtain, unless a certain vestige of collected intelligence in our
nature is agitated. And this is the light of truth, which is suddenly
enkindled, as if from the collision of fire stones. For our greatest
conceptions, when exercised with each other, verge to a uniform and
simple summit as their end, like the extremities of lines in a circle
hastening to the centre. And though even thus they subsist indeed with
distribution, yet a certain vestige of the knowledge of form which we
contain is pre-excited; just as the equal tendency of all the lines
in a circle to terminate in the middle affords a certain obscure
representation of the centre. After the same manner also we ascend to
being, in the first place, by understanding every form which falls
upon us as distributed, not only as impartible, but also as united,
and this by confounding, if it be proper so to speak, the multitude
in each. In the next place, we must collect every thing separated
together, and take away the circumscriptions, just as if making many
streams of water to be one collection of water, except that we must
not understand that which is united from all things, as one collection
of water, but we must conceive that which is prior to all things, as
the form of water prior to divided streams of water. Thus therefore,
we must expand ourselves to _the one_, first collecting and afterwards
dismissing what we have collected, for the super-expanded transcendency
of _the one_. Ascending therefore, shall we meet with it as that which
is known? Or, wishing to meet with it as such shall we arrive at the
unknown? Or may we not say that each of these is true? For we meet
with it afar off as that which is known, and when we are united to it
from afar, passing beyond that in our nature which is gnostic of _the
one_, then are we brought to be one, that is, to be unknown instead of
being gnostic. This contact therefore, as of one with one, is above
knowledge, but the other is as of that which is gnostic with that which
is known. As however, the crooked is known by the straight, so we form
a conjecture of the unknown by the known. And this indeed is a mode
of knowledge. _The one_ therefore, is so far known, that it does not
admit of an approximating knowledge, but appears afar off as known, and
imparts a gnostic indication of itself. Unlike other things however,
the nearer we approach to it, it is not the more, but on the contrary,
less known; knowledge being dissolved by _the one_ into ignorance,
since as we have before observed, where there is knowledge, there also
is separation. But separation approaching to _the one_ is inclosed in
union; so that knowledge also is refunded into ignorance. Thus too, the
analogy of Plato requires. For first we endeavour to see the sun, and
we do indeed see it afar off; but by how much the nearer we approach
to it, by so much the less do we see it; and at length we neither see
other things, nor it, the eye becoming spontaneously dazzled by its
light. Is therefore _the one_ in its proper nature unknown, though
there is something else unknown besides _the one_? _The one_ indeed
wills to be by itself, but with no other; but the unknown beyond _the
one_ is perfectly ineffable, which we acknowledge we neither know, nor
are ignorant of, but which has about itself super-ignorance. Hence by
proximity to this _the one itself_ is darkened: for being very near to
the immense principle, if it be lawful so to speak, it remains as it
were in the adytum of that truly mystic silence. On this account, Plato
in speaking of it finds all his assertions subverted: for it is near
to the subversion of every thing, which takes place about the first.
It differs from it however in this, that it is _one_ simply, and that
according to _the one_ it is also at the same time all things. But
the first is above _the one_ and _all things_, being more simple than
either of these.”

P. 113. _Origen who was a partaker of the same erudition with
Plotinus._ This Origen was not the Christian father of that name,
but was somewhat junior to him.

P. 190. _And Plotinus, exhibiting in a most divinely inspired manner,
the peculiarity of eternity, according to the theology of Plato,
defines it to be infinite life, at once unfolding into light the whole
of itself, and its own being._ The 7th book of the 3rd Ennead of
Plotinus is concerning Eternity, and the following beautiful extract
from it contains the definition of eternity alluded to by Proclus.

“Perhaps we ought to conceive of eternity, as a certain one collected
from many; viz. either as one intelligence or one nature, whether
consequent to things in the intelligible world, or existing together
with it, or beheld as situated in the depths of its essence. All these,
I say, reduced into eternity as one, which is also many, and is endued
with a various capacity. Indeed, he who beholds a various capacity,
when he considers it as a subject denominates its essence; but so
far as he perceives life, he denominates its motion; and afterwards
permanency, considered as abiding in a manner entirely the same. He
will likewise behold difference and sameness, so far us they are many,
bound in one. So that he who contracts the difference, subsisting
in things which are many, into one life alone, and contemplates an
unceasing sameness of energy, never passing its intelligence or life,
from one thing into another, but ever abiding in the same manner in
itself far remote from all interval; he I say, who beholds all these,
contemplates eternity, viewing life ever possessing a present whole,
where all things abide together in sameness, without the order of first
and last, and are comprehended in an indivisible bound. Where all
things are collected into one, as into a point, not yet proceeding into
a linear flux, but abiding in sameness, that is, in itself, in an ever
present _now_; because nothing of its nature is past, nothing in it is
future; but what it is, it always is. Hence eternity is not a subject,
but that which beams as it were from its subject, according to the
possession of an ever present identity; promising itself that its ever
abiding nature, will never be changed. For what should happen to this
in future which it is not at present? Since it is a perfect and present
plenitude of all things. Nor can the term was, the appellation of time
past, belong to eternity. For what can that be, which _was_ present
with its nature, and is _past_? It is in like manner independent of
all connection with futurity. And hence eternity is that which neither
_was_ nor _will be_, but alone _is_, which it possesses in a stable
manner; because it is neither changed into a future, nor altered from a
past duration. So that the eternity which we are now investigating, is
life total and full, abiding in its essence about being itself; and is
every where without interval and one.

Hence, eternity is something especially venerable, and a God, as
inherent intelligence affirms. But intelligence likewise dictates,
that eternity is the same with that God whom we denominate being and
life. And it may with the greatest propriety be said, that eternity is
a deity shining and unfolding himself in intelligible light, such as
he is in his essence; in an essence, I say, perfectly unchangeable and
the same, and thus firmly abiding in an unceasing energy of life. Nor
ought any one to wonder that we speak of eternity, as consisting of
many things. For every thing which abides in the intelligible world,
is called many, on account of its infinite power; since infinite
there receives its denomination, because it never falls off from the
consummate intellectual plenitude of its nature. And indeed, it is
particularly called after this manner, because it loses nothing of its
own. And if any one should describe eternity, as life already infinite
because universal, and because it never deserts the integrity of its
nature; (since it cannot be diminished by the past, nor increased by
the future, because it is a perfect whole)----if any one should thus
describe eternity, he will approach very near to its true definition.
For what is afterwards added, that it is a perfect whole, and loses
nothing of its integrity, is only a certain exposition of the
definition which affirms it to be infinite life. But because a nature
of this kind, thus all-beautiful and eternal, abides about _the one
itself_, emanating and in no respect departing from it, but ever
abiding about and in it, and living with it in indissoluble union;
hence it is said by Plato, not rashly, but in a manner truly beautiful
and profound, that _eternity abides in one_. So that he not only
reduces that which eternity contains into one; but the life of being
in like manner reduces itself, about _the one itself_. This then
is what we investigate, and that is eternity, which thus abides. For
that which is the energy of life abiding from itself, and residing
in the depths of unity, without any deception, either in essence or
life, is without all controversy eternity. Since _truly to be_,
is _never not to be_, and to possess no diversity of being. But
when in discoursing on eternity, we use the term _ever_; and
also when we say it is not sometimes being, and sometimes non-being,
we must consider these appellations as adopted only for the purpose
of explanation. For the term ever is not perhaps principally assumed,
but is employed, in order to show an incorruptible and never-failing
nature.”

P. 215. _Let us in the next place speak in common about all the
intelligible triads, &c._ For the further information of the reader
on this most profound subject the intelligible triad, the following
observations are added, being an extract from the Introduction to my
translation of the Parmenides of Plato.

As the first cause then is _the one_, and this is the same with _the
good_, the universality of things must form a whole, the best and
the most profoundly united in all its parts which can possibly be
conceived: for _the first good_ must be the cause of the greatest
good, that is, the whole of things; and as goodness is union, the
best production must be that which is most united. But as there is a
difference in things, and some are more excellent than others, and this
in proportion to their proximity to the first cause, a profound union
can no otherwise take place than by the extremity of a superior order
coalescing through intimate alliance with the summit of the proximately
inferior. Hence the first of bodies, though they are essentially
corporeal, yet κατα σχεσιν, through _habitude_ or _alliance_, are most
vital, or lives. The highest of souls are after this manner intellects,
and the first of beings are gods. For as _being_ is the highest of
things after _the first cause_, its first subsistence must be according
to a superessential characteristic.

Now that which is superessential, considered as participated by
the highest or _true being_, constitutes that which is called
_intelligible_. So that every true being depending on the gods is a
_divine intelligible_. It is _divine_ indeed, as that which is deified;
but it is _intelligible_, as the object of desire to intellect, as
perfective and connective of its nature, and as the plenitude of
_being_ itself. But in the first being life and intellect subsist
according to _cause_: for every thing subsists either according to
_cause_, or according to _hyparxis_, or according to _participation_.
That is, every thing may be considered either as subsisting occultly
in its cause, or openly in its own order (or according to what it is,)
or as participated by something else. The first of these is analogous
to light when viewed subsisting in its fountain the sun; the second to
the light immediately proceeding from the sun; and the third to the
splendour communicated to other natures by this light.

The first procession therefore from the first cause, will be the
intelligible triad, consisting of _being_, _life_, and _intellect_,
which are the three highest things after the first god, and of
which _being_ is prior to _life_, and _life_ to _intellect_. For
whatever partakes of life partakes also of being: but the contrary
is not true, and therefore being is above life; since it is the
characteristic of higher natures to extend their communications
beyond such as are subordinate. But _life_ is prior to _intellect_,
because all intellectual natures are vital, but all vital natures
are not intellectual. But in this intelligible triad, on account of
its superessential characteristic, all things may be considered as
subsisting according to cause: and consequently number here has not a
proper subsistence, but is involved in unproceeding union, and absorbed
in superessential light. Hence, when it is called a triad, we must
not suppose that any _essential distinction_ takes place, but must
consider this appellation as expressive of its ineffable perfection.
For as it is the nearest of all things to _the one_, its union must be
transcendently profound and ineffably occult.

All the gods indeed considered according to their unities are all in
all, and are at the same time united with the first god like rays to
light, or lines to a centre. And hence they are all established in the
first cause (as Proclus beautifully observes) like the roots of trees
in the earth; so that they are all as much as possible superessential,
just as trees are eminently of an earthly nature, without at the same
time being earth itself: for the nature of the earth as being a whole,
or subsisting according to the eternal, is different from the partial
natures which it produces. The intelligible triad, therefore, from its
being wholly of a superessential idiom, must possess an inconceivable
profundity of union, both with itself and its cause, so as to subsist
wholly according to _the united_, το ηνωμενον; and hence it appears to
the eye of pure intellect, as one simple indivisible splendour beaming
from an unknown and inaccessible fire.

He then who is able, by opening the greatest eye of the soul, to
see that perfectly which subsists without distinction, will behold
the simplicity of the intelligible triad subsisting in a manner so
transcendent as to be apprehended only by a superintellectual energy,
and a deific union of the perceiver with this most arcane object of
perception. But since in our present state it is impossible to behold
an object so astonishingly lucid with a perfect and steady vision, we
must be content, as Damascius well observes,[405] with a far distant,
scarcely attainable, and most obscure glimpse; or with difficulty
apprehending a trace of this light, like a sudden coruscation bursting
on our sight. Such then is the pre-eminence of the intelligible order,
to which on account of the infirmity of our mental eye, we assign a
triple division, beholding in our phantasy as in a mirror a luminous
triad, beaming from a uniform light; just, says Damascius, as the
uniform colour of the sun appears in a cloud which possesses three
catoptric intervals, through the various coloured nature of the rainbow.

But when we view this order in a distributed way, or as possessing
distinction in order to accommodate its all-perfect mode of subsistence
to our imperfect conceptions, it is necessary to give the triad itself
a triple division. For we have said that it consists of _being_,
_life_, and _intellect_. But in _being_ we may view life and intellect,
according to cause; in _life_ being according to participation, and
intellect according to cause; and in _intellect_ both being and life
according to participation; while at the same time in reality the whole
is profoundly one, and contains all things occultly, or according to
cause. But when viewed in this divided manner, each triad is said in
the Chaldaic theology to consist of _father_, _power_, and _intellect_;
_father_ being the same with _hyparxis_, _unity_, _summit_, or _that
which is superessential_; _power_ being a certain pouring forth, or
infinity of _the one_[406] (or the summit); and on this account, says
Damascius, it is present with _father_, as a diffused with an abiding
one, and as pouring itself forth into a true chaos: but _intellect_,
that is _paternal intellect_, subsisting according to a conversion to
the paternal one; a conversion transcending all other conversions, as
being neither gnostic, nor vital, nor essential, but an indistinct
surpassing energy, which is union rather than conversion.

Such then is the intelligible triad, considered according to an
all-perfect distribution, in accommodation to the imbecility of our
mental eye. But if we are desirous, after having bid adieu to corporeal
vision, and the fascinating but delusive forms of the phantasy, which,
Calypso-like, detain us in exile from our fathers’ land: after having
through a long and laborious dialectic wandering gained our paternal
port, and purified ourselves from the baneful rout of the passions,
those domestic foes of the soul; if after all this we are desirous of
gaining a glimpse of the surpassing simplicity and ineffable union of
this occult and astonishing light, we must crowd all our conceptions
together into the most profound indivisibility, and, opening the
greatest eye of the soul, entreat this all-comprehending deity to
approach: for then, preceded by unadorned Beauty, silently walking on
the extremities of her shining feet, he will suddenly from his awful
sanctuary rise to our view.

But after such a vision, what can language announce concerning this
transcendent object? That it is perfectly indistinct and void of
number. “And,” as Damascius[407] beautifully observes, “since this is
the case, we should consider whether it is proper to call _this_ which
belongs to it _simplicity_, απλοτης; _something else, multiplicity_
πολλοτης; and _something besides this, universality_ παντοτης. For
that which is intelligible is _one_, _many_, _all_, that we may triply
explain a nature which is one. But how can one nature be _one_ and
_many_? Because _many_ is the infinite power of _the one_. But how
can it be _one_ and _all_? Because _all_ is the every way extended
energy of _the one_. Nor yet is it to be called an energy, as if it
was an extension of power to that which is external; nor power, as an
extension of hyparxis abiding within; but again, it is necessary to
call them three instead of one: for one appellation, as we have often
testified, is by no means sufficient for an explanation of this order.
And are all things then here indistinct? But how can this be easy to
understand? For we have said that there are three principles consequent
to each other; viz. _father_, _power_, and _paternal intellect_. _But
these in reality are neither one, nor three, nor one and at the same
time three._[408] But it is necessary that we should explain these
by names and conceptions of this kind, through our penury in what is
adapted to their nature, or rather through our desire of expressing
something proper on the occasion. For as we denominate this triad
_one_, and _many_, and _all_, and _father_, _power_, and _paternal
intellect_, and again _bound_, _infinite_, and _mixed_--so likewise
we call it a _monad_, and _the indefinite duad_, and _a triad_, and
a paternal nature composed from both these. And as in consequence
of purifying our conceptions we reject the former appellations, as
incapable of harmonizing with the things themselves, we should likewise
reject the latter on the same account.”

But in order to convince the reader that this doctrine of the
intelligible triad is not a fiction devised by the latter Platonists, I
shall present him with the following translation from Damascius (περι
αρχων) _Concerning Principles_,[409] in which the agreement of all
the ancient theologists concerning this triad is most admirably evinced.

“The theology contained in the Orphic rhapsodies concerning the
intelligible Gods is as follows _Time_ is symbolically placed for
the one principle of the universe; but _æther_ and _chaos_, for
the two posterior to this one: and _being_, simply considered, is
represented under the symbol of an egg. And this is the first triad
of the intelligible Gods. But for the perfection of the second triad,
they establish either a conceiving and a conceived egg as a God, or
a white garment, or a cloud: because from these Phanes leaps forth
into light. For indeed they philosophize variously concerning the
middle triad. But Phanes here represents intellect. But conceiving
him over and above this, as father and power, contributes nothing to
Orpheus. But they call the third triad Metis as _intellect_,[410]
Ericapæus as _power_, and Phanes as _father_. But sometimes[411] the
middle triad is considered according to the three-shaped God, while
conceived in the egg: for the middle always represents each of the
extremes; as in this instance, where the egg and the three-shaped God
subsist together. And here you may perceive that the egg is that which
is united; but that the three-shaped and really multiform God is the
separating and discriminating cause of that which is intelligible.
Likewise the middle triad subsists according to the egg, as yet united;
but the third[412] according to the God who separates and distributes
the whole intelligible order. And this is the common and familiar
Orphic theology. But that delivered by Hieronymus and Hellanicus is
as follows. According to them _water_ and _matter_ were the first
productions, from which earth was secretly drawn forth: so that water
and earth are established as the two first principles; the latter of
these having a _dispersed_ subsistence; but the former conglutinating
and connecting the latter. But they are silent concerning the
principle prior to these two, as being ineffable: for as there are no
illuminations about him, his arcane and ineffable nature is from hence
sufficiently evinced. But the third principle posterior to these two,
_water_ and _earth_, and which is generated from them, is _a dragon_,
naturally endued with the heads of a bull and a lion, but in the middle
having the countenance of the God himself. They add likewise that he
has wings on his shoulders, and that he is called _undecaying Time_,
and _Hercules_; that _Necessity_ resides with him, which is the same
as _Nature_, and incorporeal _Adrastia_, which is extended throughout
the universe, whose limits she binds in amicable conjunction. But as
it appears to me, they denominate this third principle as established
according to essence; and assert, besides this, that it subsists as
male and female, for the purpose of exhibiting the generative causes of
all things.

“But I likewise find in the Orphic rhapsodies, that neglecting the two
first principles, together with the one principle who is delivered in
silence, the third principle, posterior to the two, is established
by the theology as the original; because this first of all possesses
something effable and commensurate to human discourse. For in the
former hypothesis, the highly reverenced and undecaying _Time_, the
father of æther and chaos, was the principle: but in this _Time_ is
neglected, and the principle becomes _a dragon_. It likewise calls
triple æther, moist; and Chaos, infinite; and Erebus, cloudy and
dark; delivering this second triad analogous to the first: this being
potential, as that was paternal. Hence the third procession of this
triad is dark Erebus: its paternal and summit æther, not according to
a simple but intellectual subsistence: but its middle infinite chaos,
considered as a progeny or procession, and among these parturient,
because from these the third intelligible triad proceeds. What then
is the third intelligible triad? I answer, the egg; the duad of the
natures of male and female which it contains, and the multitude of
all-various seeds, residing in the middle of this triad: And the
third among these is an incorporeal God, bearing golden wings on his
shoulders; but in his inward parts naturally possessing the heads of
bulls, upon which heads a mighty dragon appears, invested with the
all-various forms of wild-beasts. This last then must be considered
as the _intellect_ of the triad; but the middle progeny, which are
_many_ as well as _two_, correspond to _power_, and the egg itself is
_the paternal principle_ of the third triad: but the third God of this
third triad, this theology celebrates as _Protogonus_, and calls him
_Jupiter_, the disposer of all things and of the whole world; and on
this account denominates him _Pan_. And such is the information which
this theology affords us, concerning the genealogy of the intelligible
principles of things.

But in the writings of the Peripatetic Eudemus, containing the Theology
of Orpheus, the whole intelligible order is passed over in silence,
as being every way ineffable and unknown, and incapable of verbal
enunciation. Eudemus therefore commences his genealogy from _Night_,
from which also Homer begins: though Eudemus is far from making the
Homeric genealogy consistent and connected, for he asserts that Homer
begins from Ocean and Tethys. It is however apparent, that _Night_
is according to Homer the greatest divinity, since she is reverenced
even by Jupiter himself. For the poet says of Jupiter--“that he feared
lest he should act in a manner displeasing to swift _Night_.” So that
Homer begins his genealogy of the Gods from _Night_. But it appears
to me that Hesiod, when he asserts that Chaos was first generated,
signifies by Chaos the incomprehensible and perfectly united nature
of that which is intelligible: but that he produces earth[413] the
first from thence, as a certain principle of the whole procession of
the Gods. Unless perhaps Chaos is the second of the two principles:
but Earth,[414] Tartarus, and Love, form the triple intelligible. So
that _Love_ is to be placed for the third monad of the intelligible
order, considered according to its convertive nature; for it is thus
denominated by Orpheus in his rhapsodies. But _Earth_ for the first,
as being first established in a certain firm and essential station.
But _Tartarus_ for the middle, as in a certain respect exciting
and moving forms into distribution. But Acusilaus appears to me to
establish _Chaos_ for the first principle, as entirely unknown; and
after this, two principles, _Erebus_ as male, and _Night_ as female;
placing the latter for _infinity_, but the former for _bound_. But
from the mixture of these, he says that _Æther_, _Love_, and _Counsel_
are generated, forming three intelligible hypostases. And he places
_Æther_ as the summit; but _Love_ in the middle, according to its
naturally middle subsistence; but _Metis_ or _Counsel_ as the third,
and the same as highly-reverenced intellect. And, according to the
history of Eudemus, from these he produces a great number of other
Gods. But Epimenides establishes _Air_ and _Night_ as the two first
principles; manifestly reverencing in silence the one principle prior
to these two. But from air and night _Tartarus_ is generated, forming
as it appears to me the third principle, as a certain mixed temperature
from the two. And this mixture is called by some an intelligible
medium, because it extends itself to both the summit and the end. But
from the mixture of the extremes with each other, an egg is generated,
which is truly an intelligible animal: and from this again another
progeny proceeds. But according to Pherecydes Syrius, the three first
principles are a _Perpetually-abiding Vital Nature_, _Time_,[415] and
_an Earthly Nature_: one of these subsisting, as I conceive, prior to
the other two. But he asserts that _Time_ generates from the progeny of
itself, _Fire_, _Spirit_, and _Water_: which signify, as it appears to
me, the triple nature of that which is intelligible. But from these,
distributed into five profound recesses, a numerous progeny of Gods
is constituted, which he calls _five-times animated_ (πεντεμψυχος):
and which is perhaps the same as if he had said πεντεκοσμος, or a
_five-fold world_. But we may probably discourse on this subject
at some other opportunity. And thus much may suffice at present
concerning the hypotheses derived from the Grecian fables, which are
both many and various.

But with respect to the theology of the Barbarians, the Babylonians
seem to pass over in silence the one principle of the universe. But
they establish two principles, Tauthe and Apasoon. And they consider
Apasoon as the husband of Tauthe, whom they denominate the mother of
the Gods; from whom an only-begotten son _Mooumis_ was produced: which,
as it appears to me, is no other than the intelligible world deduced
from two principles.[416] But from these another procession is derived,
_Dache_ and _Dachus_. And likewise a third from these, _Kissare_ and
_Assoorus_. And from these again three deities are produced, _Anus_,
_Illinus_, and _Aus_. But from _Aus_ and _Dache_ a son called Belus is
produced, who they say is the demiurgus of the world. But with respect
to the Magi, and all the Arion race, as we are informed by Eudemus,
some of them call all the intelligible and united world _Place_,
and some of them _Time_: from which _a good divinity_ and _an evil
dæmon_ are distributed; _Light_ and _Darkness_ subsisting prior to
these, according to the assertions of others. However, both the one
and the other, after an undistributed nature, consider that nature
as having a subsistence which distributes the two-fold co-ordination
of better natures: one of which co-ordinations _Orosmades_ presides
over, and the other _Arimanius_. But the Sidonians, according to the
same historian, place before all things, _Time_, _Desire_, and _cloudy
Darkness_. And they assert that from the mingling of _Desire_ and
_Darkness_ as two principles, _Air_ and _a gentle Wind_ were produced:
_Air_ evincing the summit of the intelligible triad; but _the gentle
Wind_ raised and proceeding from this, the vital prototype of the
intelligible. And again that from both these the bird _Otus_, similar
to a night raven, was produced; representing, as it appears to me,
intelligible intellect. But as we find (without the assistance of
Eudemus) the Phœnician mythology, according to Mochus, places _Æther_
and _Air_ as the two first principles, from which the intelligible
god _Oulomus_ was produced; who, as it appears to me, is the summit
of the intelligible order. But from this god (yet proceeding together
with him) they assert that _Chousorus_ was produced, being the first
unfolding procession. And after this _an egg_ succeeds; which I think
must be called intelligible intellect. But the unfolding _Chousorus_ is
intelligible power, because this is the first nature which distributes
an undistributed subsistence: unless perhaps after the two principles
_Æther_ and _Air_, the summit is _One Wind_: but the middle _Two
Winds_, the _south-west_ and the _south_; for in a certain respect they
place these prior to _Oulomus_. But _Oulomus_ himself is intelligible
intellect: and unfolding _Chousorus_[417] the first order after the
intelligible series. But the _egg itself_ is heaven: from the bursting
of which into two parts, the sections are said to have become heaven
and earth. But with respect to the Egyptians, nothing accurately is
related of them by Eudemus: we have, however, by means of some Egyptian
philosophers resident among us, been instructed in the occult truth
of their theological doctrine. According to these philosophers then,
the Egyptians in certain discourses celebrate _an unknown Darkness_
as the one principle of the universe, and this _thrice pronounced
as such_: but for the two principles after the first they place
_Water_ and _Sand_, according to Heraiscus; but according to the more
ancient writer Asclepiades, _Sand_ and _Water_; from which and after
which the first _Kamephis_ is generated. But after this _a second_,
and from this again _a third_; by all which, the whole intelligible
distribution is accomplished. For thus Asclepiades determines. But the
more modern Heraiscus says that the Egyptians, denominating the third
Kamephis from his father and grandfather, assert that he is _the Sun_;
which doubtless signifies in this case intelligible intellect. But a
more accurate knowledge of these affairs must be received from the
above-mentioned authors themselves. It must however be observed, that
with the Egyptians there are many distributions of things according to
union; because they unfold an intelligible nature into characteristics,
or peculiarities of many gods, as may be learned from such as are
desirous of consulting their writings on this subject.”

Thus far Damascius; from which curious and interesting relation
the reader may not only perceive at one view the agreement of the
ancient theologists with each other in celebrating the intelligible
triad, and venerating in silence the ineffable principle of things,
but may likewise see that the Christian trinity is essentially
different from this triad, because according to Plato and the ancient
theologists, the first cause is not a part of any triad, or order of
things. Consonant too with the above relation is the doctrine of the
Chaldeans concerning the intelligible order, as delivered by Johannes
Picus, in his _Conclusions according to the opinion of the Chaldean
Theologists_.[418] “The intelligible co-ordination (says he) is not
in the intellectual co-ordination, as Amasis the Egyptian asserts,
but is above every intellectual hierarchy, imparticipably concealed
in the abyss of the first unity, and under the obscurity of the first
darkness.” Co-ordinatio intelligibilis non est in intellectuali
co-ordinatione, ut dixit Amasis Ægyptius, sed est super omnem
intellectualem hierarchium, in abysso primæ unitatis, et sub caligine
primarum tenebrarum imparticipaliter abscondita.

But from this triad it may be demonstrated, that all the processions
of the Gods may be comprehended in six orders, viz. the _intelligible
order_, the _intelligible and at the same time intellectual_,
the _intellectual_, the _supermundane_, the _liberated_, and the
_mundane_.[419] For the _intelligible_, as we have already observed,
must hold the first rank, and must consist of _being_, _life_,
and _intellect_; _i.e._ must _abide_, _proceed_, and _return_; at
the same time that it is characterised, or subsists principally
according to _permanent being_. But in the next place that which is
both _intelligible_ and _intellectual_ succeeds, which must likewise
be triple, but must principally subsist according to _life_, or
_intelligence_. And in the third place the _intellectual_ order must
succeed, which is _triply convertive_. But as in consequence of the
existence of the sensible world, it is necessary that there should be
some demiurgic cause of its existence, this cause can only be found in
_intellect_, and in the last hypostasis of the _intellectual triad_.
For all forms in this hypostasis subsist according to all-various
and perfect divisions; and forms can only fabricate when they
have a perfect intellectual separation from each other. But since
_fabrication_ is nothing more than _procession_, the demiurgus will be
to the posterior orders of Gods what _the one_ is to the orders prior
to the _demiurgus_: and consequently he will be that secondarily which
the first cause of all is primarily. Hence his first production will
be an order of Gods analogous to the _intelligible_ order, and which
is denominated _supermundane_. After this he must produce an order of
Gods similar to the _intelligible_ and _intellectual_ order, and which
are denominated _liberated_ Gods. And in the last place, a procession
correspondent to the _intellectual_ order, and which can be no other
than the mundane Gods. For the demiurgus is chiefly characterised
according to diversity, and is allotted the boundary of all universal
hypostases.

All these orders, as is shown by Proclus in this work, are unfolded by
Plato in the conclusions of the second hypothesis of the Parmenides;
and this in a manner perfectly conformable to the Chaldaic theology. In
proof of this I refer the reader to my collection of Chaldean oracles,
in the Old Monthly Magazine.

P. 348. _It is difficult to discover the fabricator and father of
this universe, and when found, it is impossible to speak of him to all
men._

The following admirable developement by Proclus of the difficulty of
discovering the maker of the universe, is extracted from p. 91, &c. of
his Commentaries on the Timæus of Plato.

“Father and fabricator differ from each other, so far as the former is
the cause of matter,[420] but the latter of the world and order, and
in short, of the formal cause; and so far indeed, as the former is the
supplier of being and union, but the latter of powers and a multiform
essence; and so far as the one stably contains all things in himself,
but the other is the cause of progression and generation: and so far as
the former signifies ineffable and divine providence, but the latter
an abundant communication of productive principles. Porphyry however
says, that father is he who generates the universe from himself, but
fabricator he who receives the matter of it from another. Hence Aristo
indeed, is said to be the _father_ of Plato, but the builder of a house
is the _maker_ or fabricator of it, as not himself generating the
matter of which it consists. If however, this is true, there was no
occasion to call the demiurgus father, because according to Timæus, he
does not give subsistence to matter. Is not the demiurgus therefore,
rather the fabricator as producing form? For we call all those makers
who produce any thing from a non-existent state into existence. But so
far as the demiurgus produces that which he produces, in conjunction
with life, he is father. For fathers are the causes of animals, and of
certain living beings, and impart seed together with life. And thus
much concerning this particular.

But ‘_this universe_’ signifies indeed, the corporeal masses, and
the whole spheres [of which it consists] and the plenitudes of each.
It also signifies the vital and intellectual powers, which ride as
it were in the corporeal masses. It also comprehends all the mundane
causes[421] and the whole divinity of the world, about which the
number of the mundane Gods proceeds; likewise, the one divinity,
the divine soul, and the whole bulk of the world, together with the
divine, intellectual, psychical, and corporeal-formed number that is
conjoined with the world. For every monad has a multitude co-ordinate
to itself. All these therefore must be assumed for the _universe_;
since it signifies all these. Perhaps likewise the addition of the
pronoun _this_, is significant of the universe being in a certain
respect sensible and partial. For the intelligible universe is not
_this_, because it is comprehensive of _all intellectual forms_. But
the term _this_ is adapted to the visible universe which is allotted a
sensible and material nature. It is difficult therefore, as Plato says,
to discover the demiurgus of this universe. For since with respect to
discovery, one kind proceeds scientifically from such things as are
first,[422] but another journeys on from things of a secondary nature,
according to reminiscence; the discovery from such things as are first
may be said to be difficult, because the invention of the intermediate
powers, pertains to the highest theory. But the discovery from such
things as are secondary, is nearly more difficult than the former. For
if we intend from these to survey the essence of the demiurgus, and
his other powers, it is necessary that we should have beheld all the
nature of the things generated by him, all the visible parts of the
world, and the unapparent natural powers which it contains, according
to which the sympathy and antipathy of the parts in the world subsist.
Prior to these also, we must have surveyed the stable physical reasons,
and natures themselves, both the more total and the more partial,[423]
and again, the immaterial and material, the divine and dæmoniacal, and
the natures of mortal animals. And farther still, the genera which
are under life, the perpetual and the mortal, the undefiled and the
material, such as are wholes, and such as are parts, the rational
and the irrational, and the prerogatives which are superior to ours,
through which every thing between the Gods and the mortal nature are
bound together. We must likewise have beheld the all-various souls,
the different numbers of Gods according to the different parts of
the universe, and the ineffable and effable impressions of the world
through which it is conjoined with the father. For he who without
having seen these is impelled to the survey of the demiurgus, is more
imperfect than is requisite to the intellectual perception of the
father. But it is not lawful for any thing imperfect to be conjoined
with that which is all-perfect.

Moreover, it is necessary,[424] that the soul becoming an intellectual
world, and being assimilated as much as possible to the whole
intelligible world, should introduce herself to the maker of the
universe; and from this introduction, should in a certain respect
become familiar with him through a continued intellectual energy. For
uninterrupted energy about any thing, calls forth and resuscitates
our [dormant] ideas. But through this familiarity, becoming stationed
at the door of the father, it is necessary, that we should be united
to him. For discovery is this, to meet with him, to be united to him,
to associate alone with the alone, and to see him himself, the soul
hastily withdrawing herself from every other energy to him. For then
she is present with her father, banquets together with him on the truth
of real being, and in pure splendour is purely initiated in entire and
stable visions. Such therefore is the discovery of the father, not that
which is doxastic; for this is dubious, and not very remote from the
irrational life. Neither is it scientific; for this is syllogistic and
composite, and does not come into contact with the intellectual essence
of the intellectual demiurgus. But it is that which subsists according
to intellectual vision itself, a contact with the intelligible, and
a union with the demiurgic intellect. For this may properly be
denominated difficult, either as hard to obtain, presenting itself to
souls after every evolution of life; or as the true labour of souls.
For after the wandering about generation, after purification, and the
light of science, intellectual energy and the intellect which is in
us shine forth, placing the soul in the father as in a port, purely
establishing her in demiurgic intellections, and conjoining light
with light, not such as that of science, but more beautiful, more
intellectual, and partaking more of the nature of _the one_ than
this. For this is the paternal port,[425] and the discovery of the
father, viz. an undefiled union with him.

But to _say that when found it is impossible to speak of him to all
men_,[426] perhaps indicates the custom of the Pythagoreans, who had
arcane assertions about divine natures, and did not divulge them to
all men. For as the Elean guest says, the eyes of the multitude are
not strong enough to look to truth. Perhaps also this may be said
which is much more venerable, that it is impossible for him who has
discovered the maker and father of the universe to speak of him to
certain persons such as he has seen him. For the discovery was not made
by the soul speaking, but closing her eyes, and being converted[427]
to the divine light. Nor was it made by her being moved with her own
proper motion, but through being silent with a silence which leads the
way [to union]. For since the essence of other things is not naturally
adapted to be spoken of, either through a name, or through definition,
or through science, but is seen through intellection alone, as Plato
says in his Epistles, in what other way can it be possible to discover
the essence of the demiurgus, than by intellectual energy? And how
when having thus found it, is it possible to tell what is seen, and
explain it to others, through nouns and verbs? For the evolution which
is conversant with composition, cannot exhibit a uniform and simple
nature. What then, some one may say, do we not assert many things about
the demiurgus, and about the other Gods, and even of _the one itself_?
To this we reply, we speak indeed _about_ them, but we do not speak _of
each of them itself_. And we are able indeed to speak _scientifically_
of them, but not _intellectually_. For this, as we have before
observed, is to discover them. But if the discovery is a silence of the
soul, how can speech flowing through the mouth, be sufficient to lead
that which is discovered into light?”

The following extracts from the _Manuscript Scholia of_ PROCLUS On the
_Cratylus of Plato_, are added on account of their great importance;
and that the reader may be furnished with all the information on the
recondite theology of Greece, that it was in my power to obtain.

This manuscript is so rare that, if I am not mistaken, no copy of it is
to be found in any of the colleges either of Oxford or Cambridge. My
copy of it is a transcript of that which is now in the possession of
Mr. HEBER of Oxford.

The reader, however, must be careful to remember that the design of
Plato in the Cratylus was to unfold those peculiarities only of the
Gods that are apparent in their names.

That Jupiter is not _said to be_, but _is_ the father of those who
genuinely preserve the proper form of life, such as Hercules and the
Dioscuri; but of those who are never at any time able to convert
themselves to a divine nature, he never _is_, nor _is said to be_
the father. Such therefore as having been partakers of a certain
energy above human nature, have again fallen into _the sea of
dissimilitude_,[428] and for honour among men have embraced error
towards the Gods,--of these Jupiter is _said to be_ the father.

That the paternal cause originates supernally from the intelligible
and occult gods; for there the first fathers of wholes subsist; but it
proceeds through all the intellectual Gods into the demiurgic order.
For Timæus celebrates this order as at the same time _fabricative_ and
_paternal_; since he calls Jupiter the _demiurgus_ and _father_. The
fathers however who are superior to the one fabrication are called
Gods of Gods, but the demiurgus is the father of Gods and men. Farther
still, Jupiter is said to be _peculiarly_ the father of some, as of
Hercules, who immutably preserve a Jovian and ruling life during
their converse with the realms of generation. Jupiter therefore, is
triply father, of Gods, partial souls, and of souls that embrace an
intellectual and Jovian life. The intellectual order of the Gods
therefore, is supernally bounded by the king[429] of the total divine
genera, and who has a paternal transcendency with respect to all the
intellectual Gods. This king according to Orpheus is called by the
blessed immortals that dwell on lofty Olympus Phanes Protogonus. But
this order proceeds through the three Nights, and the celestial orders,
into the Titanic or Saturnian series, where it first separates itself
from the fathers and changes the kingdom of the _Synoches_,[430] for a
distributive government of wholes, and unfolds every demiurgic genus
of the Gods, from all the above-mentioned ruling and royal causes,
but proximately from Saturn the leader of the Titannic orders. Prior
however to other fabricators (δημιουργοι) it unfolds Jupiter, who is
allotted the unical strength of the whole demiurgic series, and who
produces and gives subsistence to all unapparent and apparent natures.
And he is indeed intellectual according to the order in which he
ranks, but he produces the species and the genera of beings into the
order of sensibles. He is likewise filled with the Gods above himself,
but imparts from himself a progression into being to all mundane
natures. Hence Orpheus represents him fabricating every celestial race,
making the sun and moon and the other starry Gods, together with the
sublunary elements, and diversifying the latter with forms which before
had a disordered subsistence. He likewise represents him presiding
over the Gods who are distributed about the whole world, and who are
suspended from him; and in the character of a legislator assigning
distributions of providence in the universe according to desert to all
the mundane Gods.[431] Homer too, following Orpheus, celebrates him
as the common father of Gods and men, as leader and king, and as the
supreme of rulers. He also says that all the multitude of mundane Gods
is collected about him, abides in and is perfected by him. For all the
mundane Gods are converted to Jupiter through Themis,

    Ζευς δε θεμιστα κελευσε θεους, αγορην δε καλεσσαι
                                    ----ηδ’ αρα παντη
    φοιτησασα κελευσε Διος προς δωμα νεεσθαι.

i.e. “But Jupiter orders Themis to call the Gods to council; and she
directing her course every where commands them to go to the house of
Jupiter.”[432] All of them therefore are excited according to the one
will of Jupiter, and become διος ενδον,[433] _within Jupiter_,
as the poet says. Jupiter too again separates them within himself,
according to two co-ordinations, and excites them to providential
energies about secondary natures; he at the same time as Timæus says,
abiding after his accustomed manner;

    ως εφατο κρονιδης πολεμον δ’ αλιαστον εγειρεν.[434]

i.e. “Thus spoke Saturnian Jupiter, and excited inevitable war.”
Jupiter however is separate and exempt from all mundane natures; whence
also the most total and leading of the other Gods, though they appear
to have in a certain respect equal authority with Jupiter, through a
progression from the same causes, yet call him father. For both Neptune
and Juno celebrate him by this appellation. And though Juno speaks to
him as one who is of the same order,

    και γαρ εγω θεος ειμι· γενος δε μοι ενθεν οθεν σοι,
    και με πρεσβυτατην τεκετο κρονος αγκυλομητις,[435]

i.e. “For I also am a divinity, and Saturn, of inflected counsel,
endowed me with the greatest dignity, when he begot me:”

And though Neptune says

    τρεις γαρ τ’εκ κρονου ειμεν αδελφεοι, ους τεκε Ρειη,
    Ζευς και εγω, τριτατος δ’Αΐδης ενεροισιν ανασσων,[436]

i.e. “For we are three brothers from Saturn, whom Rhea bore, Jupiter
and I, and the third is Pluto, who governs the infernal realms:”

Yet Jupiter is called father by both these divinities; and this
because he comprehends in himself the one and impartible cause of all
fabrication; is prior to the Saturnian triad;[437] connectedly contains
the three fathers; and comprehends on all sides the vivification of
Juno. Hence, at the same time that this goddess gives animation to the
universe, he also together with other Gods gives subsistence to souls.
Very properly therefore do we say that the demiurgus in the Timæus is
the mighty Jupiter. For he it is who produces mundane intellects and
souls, who adorns all bodies with figures and numbers, and inserts in
them one union, and an indissoluble friendship and bond. For Night
also in Orpheus advises Jupiter to employ things of this kind in the
fabrication of the universe.

    αυταρ επην δεσμον κρατερον περι πασι τανυσσης.

    i.e. But when your power around the whole has spread
          A strong coercive bond.--

The proximate bond indeed of mundane natures, is that which subsists
through analogy; but the more perfect bond is derived from intellect
and soul. Hence Timæus calls the communion of the elements through
analogy, and the indissoluble union from life, a bond. For he says
animals were generated bound with animated bonds. But a more venerable
bond than these subsists from the demiurgic will. “For my will, says
Jupiter in the Timæus, is a greater and more principal bond, &c.”

Firmly adhering therefore to this conception respecting the mighty
Jupiter, viz. that he is the demiurgus and father of the universe, that
he is an all-perfect imparticipable[438] intellect, and that he fills
all things both with other goods, and with life, let us survey how
from names Socrates unfolds the mystic truth concerning this divinity.
Timæus then says that it is difficult to know the essence of the
demiurgus, and Socrates now says that it is not easy to understand his
name, which manifests his power and energy.

That our soul knows partibly the impartible nature of the energy of the
Gods, and that which is characterised by unity in this energy, in a
multiplied manner: and this especially takes place about the demiurgus
who expands intellectual forms, and calls forth intelligible causes,
and evolves them to the fabrication of the universe. For Parmenides
characterises him by sameness and difference. According to Homer two
tubs are placed near him; and the most mystic tradition, and the
oracles of the Gods say that the duad is seated with him. For thus
they speak: “He possesses both; containing intelligibles in intellect,
but introducing sense to the worlds.” These oracles likewise call
him _twice beyond_, and _twice there_ (δις επεκεινα και δις εκει).
And in short they celebrate him through the duad. For the demiurgus
comprehends in himself unitedly every thing _prolific_,[439] and which
gives subsistence to mundane natures. Very properly therefore is his
name two-fold, of which δια manifests _the cause through which_, and
this is paternal goodness; but ζηνα signifies _vivification_, the first
causes of which in the universe the demiurgus unically comprehends. The
former too, is a symbol of the Saturnian and paternal series; but the
latter of the vivific and maternal Rhea. So far likewise as Jupiter
receives the whole of Saturn, he gives subsistence to a triple essence,
the impartible, the partible, and that which subsists between these;
but according to the Rhea which he contains in himself, he scatters as
from a fountain, intellectual, psychical, and corporeal life. But by
his demiurgic powers and energies, he gives a formal subsistence to
these and separates them from forms of a prior order, and from each
other. He is also the ruler and king of all things: and is exempt from
the three demiurgi. For they, as Socrates says in the Gorgias, divide
the kingdom of their father; but Jupiter the demiurgus at once, without
division reigns over the three, and unically governs them.

He is therefore the cause of the paternal triad, and of all
fabrication; but he connectedly contains the three demiurgi. And he
is _a king_ indeed, as being co-ordinated with the fathers; but _a
ruler_, as being proximately established above the demiurgic triad, and
comprehending the uniform cause of it. Plato therefore by considering
his name in two ways evinces that images receive partibly the unical
causes of paradigms, and that this is adapted to him who establishes
the intellectual duad in himself. For he gives subsistence to twofold
orders, the celestial, and the supercelestial; whence also the
theologist Orpheus says, that his sceptre consists of four and twenty
measures; as ruling over a twofold twelve.[440]

That the soul of the world gives life to alter-motive natures; for to
these it becomes the fountain and principle of motion, as Plato says in
the Phædrus and Laws. But the demiurgus simply imparts to all things
life divine, intellectual, psychical, and that which is divisible about
bodies. No one however should think that the Gods in their generations
of secondary natures are diminished; or that they sustain a division of
their proper essence in giving subsistence to things subordinate; or
that they expose their progeny to the view, externally to themselves,
in the same manner as the causes of mortal offspring. Nor in short,
must we suppose that they generate with motion or mutation, but that
abiding in themselves, they produce by their very essence posterior
natures, comprehend on all sides their progeny, and supernally perfect
the productions and energies of their offspring. Nor again when it is
said that Gods are the sons of more total Gods, must it be supposed
that they are disjoined from more ancient causes, and are cut off
from a union with them; or that they receive the peculiarity of their
hyparxis through motion, and an indefiniteness converting itself to
bound. For there is nothing irrational and without measure, in the
natures superior to us. But we must conceive that their progressions
are effected through similitude; and that there is one communion of
essence, and an indivisible continuity of powers and energies, between
the sons of Gods and their fathers; all those Gods that rank in the
second order, being established in such as are more ancient; and the
more ancient imparting much of perfection, vigour, and efficacious
production to the subordinate. And after this manner we must understand
that Jupiter is said to be the son of Saturn. For Jupiter being the
demiurgic intellect proceeds from another intellect, superior and more
uniform, which increases indeed its proper intellections, but converts
the multitude of them to union; and multiplies its intellectual powers,
but elevates their all-various evolutions to impartible sameness.
Jupiter therefore proximately establishing a communion with this
divinity, and being filled from him with total intellectual good,
is very properly said to be the son of Saturn, both in hymns and in
invocations, as unfolding into light that which is occult, expanding
that which is contracted, and dividing that which is impartible in
the Saturnian monad; and as emitting a second more partial kingdom,
instead of that which is more total, a demiurgic instead of a paternal
dominion, and an empire which proceeds every where instead of that
which stably abides in itself.

Why does Socrates apprehend the name of king Saturn to be υβριστικον
_insolent_, and looking to what does he assert this? We reply that
according to the poets _satiety_ (κορος) is the cause of _insolence_;
for they thus denominate immoderation and repletion; and they say
that _Satiety_ brought forth _Insolence_. (υβριν φασιν τικτει κορος).
He therefore who looks without attention to the name of Saturn, will
consider it as signifying _insolence_. For to him who suddenly hears
it, it manifests satiety and repletion. Why therefore, since a name
of this kind is expressive of insolence, do we not pass it over in
silence, as not being auspicious and adapted to the Gods? May we not
say that the royal series[441] of the Gods, beginning from Phanes and
ending in Bacchus, and producing the same sceptre supernally as far
as to the last kingdom, Saturn being allotted the fourth royal order;
appears according to the fabulous pretext, differently from the other
kings, to have received the sceptre insolently from Heaven, and to have
given it to Jupiter? For Night receives the sceptre from Phanes; Heaven
derives from Night, the dominion over wholes; and Bacchus who is the
last king of the Gods receives the kingdom from Jupiter. For the father
(Jupiter) establishes him in the royal throne, puts into his hand the
sceptre, and makes him the king of all the mundane Gods. “Hear me ye
Gods, I place over you a king.”

    κλυτε θεοι τον δ’υμμιν βασιλεα τιθημι,

says Jupiter to the junior Gods. But Saturn alone perfectly deprives
Heaven of the kingdom, and concedes dominion to Jupiter, cutting
and being cut off as the fable says. Plato therefore seeing this
succession, which in Saturn is called by theologists _insolent_
(υβριστικη) thought it worth while to mention the appearance of
insolence in the name; that from this he might evince the name is
adapted to the God, and that it bears an image of the insolence which
is ascribed to him in fables. At the same time he teaches us to refer
mythical devices to the truth concerning the Gods, and the apparent
absurdity which they contain, to scientific conceptions.

That _the great_ when ascribed to the Gods, must not be considered as
belonging to interval, but as subsisting intellectually, and according
to the power of cause, but not according to partible transcendency.
But why does Plato now call Saturn διανοια the dianoetic part of the
soul? May we not say, that it is because he looks to the multitude of
intellectual conceptions in him, the orders of intelligibles, and the
evolution of forms which he contains; since also in the Timæus, he
represents the demiurgic intellect as reasoning, and making the world,
dianoetically energising: and this in consequence of looking to his
partible and divided intellections, according to which he fabricates
not only wholes but parts. When Saturn, however, is called intellect,
Jupiter has the order of the dianoetic part: and when again, Saturn is
called the dianoetic part, we must say that he is so called according
to analogy with reference to a certain other intellect of a higher
order. Whether therefore you are willing to speak of intelligible and
occult intellect, or of that which unfolds into light (εκφαντορικος
νους) or of that which connectedly contains (συνεκτικος νους) or of
that which imparts perfection,[442] (τελεσιουργος νους) Saturn will be
as the dianoetic part to all these. For he produces united intellection
into multitude, and fills himself wholly with excited intelligibles.
Whence also, he is said to be the leader of the Titannic race, and the
source of all-various separation and diversifying power. And perhaps
Plato here primarily delivers twofold interpretations of the name of
the Titans, which Jamblichus and Amelius afterwards adopted. For the
one interprets this name from the Titans extending their powers to all
things; but the other from _something insectile_ (παρα το τι ατομον)
because the division and separation of wholes into parts receives its
beginning from the Titans. Socrates therefore now indicates both these
interpretations, by asserting of the king of the Titans that he is a
_certain great dianoetic power_. For the term _great_ is as symbol
of power pervading to all things; but the term _a certain_, of power
proceeding to the most partial natures.

That the name Saturn is now triply analysed; of which the first
asserting this God to be the plenitude of intellectual good, and to
be the satiety of a divine intellect, from its conveying an image
of the satiety and repletion which are reprobated by the many, is
ejected as insolent. The second also which exhibits the imperfect
and the puerile, is in like manner rejected. But the third, which
celebrates this God as full of purity, and as the leader of undefiled
intelligence, and an undeviating life, is approved. For king Saturn
is intellect, and the supplier of all intellectual life; but he is
an intellect exempt from co-ordination with sensibles, immaterial
and separate, and converted to himself. He likewise converts his
progeny and after producing them into light again embosoms and firmly
establishes them in himself. For the demiurgus of the universe,
though he is a divine intellect, yet he orderly arranges sensibles,
and provides for subordinate natures. But the mighty Saturn is
essentialized in separate intellections, and which transcend wholes.
“For the fire which is beyond the first, says the Chaldean Oracle,
does not incline its power downwards.” But the demiurgus is suspended
and proceeds from Saturn, being himself an intellect subsisting about
an immaterial intellect, energizing about it as the intelligible,
and producing that which is occult in it, into the apparent. For the
maker of the world is an intellect of intellect. And it appears to me,
that as Saturn is the summit of those Gods, that are properly called
intellectual, he is intellect, as with reference to the intelligible
genus of Gods. For all the intellectual adhere to the intelligible
genus of Gods, and are conjoined with them through intellections.
“Ye who understand the supermundane paternal profundity,” says the
hymn to them. But Saturn is intelligible, with reference to all the
intellectual Gods. _Purity_ therefore indicates this impartible
and imparticipable transcendency of Saturn. For the not coming into
contact with matter, the impartible, and an exemption from habitude,
are signified by purity. Such indeed is the transcendency of this
God with respect to all co-ordination with things subordinate, and
such his undefiled union with the intelligible, that he does not
require a Curetic guard, like Rhea, Jupiter, and Proserpine. For all
these, through their progressions into secondary natures, require the
immutable defence of the Curetes. But Saturn being firmly established
in himself, and hastily withdrawing himself from all subordinate
natures is established above the guardianship of the Curetes. He
contains however, the cause of these uniformly in himself. For this
purity, and the undefiled which he possesses, give subsistence to all
the progressions of the Curetes. Hence in the Oracles, he is said to
comprehend the first fountain of the Amilicti, and to ride on all the
others. “The intellect of the father riding on attenuated rulers, they
become refulgent with the furrows of inflexible and implacable fire.”

    Νους πατρος αραιοις εποχουμενος ιθυντηρσιν
    Ακναμπτου αστραπτουσιν αμειλικτου πυρος ολκοις.

He is therefore _pure intellect_, as giving subsistence to the
undefiled order, and as being the leader of the whole intellectual
series.

    Αυτου γαρ εκθρωσκουσιν αμειλικτοι τε κεραυνοι,
    Και πρηστηροδοχοι κολποι παμφεγγεος αλκης.
    Πατρογενους Εκατης, και υπεζωκος πυρος ανθος,
    Ηδε κραταιον πνευμα πολων πυριων επεκεινα.

i.e. “From him leap forth the implacable thunders, and the
prester-capacious bosoms of the all-splendid strength of the
father-begotten Hecate, together with the environed flower of fire, and
the strong spirit which is beyond the fiery poles.”

For he convolves all the hebdomad of the fountains,[443] and gives
subsistence to it, from his unical and intelligible summit. For he is,
as the Oracles says, αμιστυλλευτος uncut into fragments, uniform, and
undistributed, and connectedly contains all the fountains, converting
and uniting all of them to himself, and being separate from all things
with immaculate purity. Hence he is κορονους, as an immaterial and pure
intellect, and as establishing himself in the paternal silence. He is
also celebrated as the father of fathers. Saturn therefore is a father,
and intelligible, as with reference to the intellectual Gods.

That every intellect either abides, and is then intelligible, as being
better than motion; or it is moved, and is then intellectual; or it is
both, and is then intelligible, and at the same time intellectual. The
first of these is Phanes; the second which is alone moved is Saturn;
and the third which is both moved and permanent is Heaven.

That Saturn from his impartible, unical, paternal, and beneficent
subsistence in the intellectual orders has been considered by some as
the same with the one cause of all things. He is however only analogous
to this cause, just as Orpheus calls the first cause _Time_ (χρονος)
nearly homonymously with Saturn. (κρονος) But the Oracles of the Gods
characterise this deity by the epithet of _the once_; (τῳ απαξ) calling
him _once beyond_ (απαξ επεκεινα). For _the once_ is allied to _the
one_.

That _Heaven_ the father of Saturn, is an intellect understanding
himself indeed, but united to the first intelligibles; in which he is
also firmly established; and connectedly contains all the intellectual
orders, by abiding in intelligible union. This God too is _connective_,
just as Saturn is of a _separating_ idiom; and on this account he
is _father_. For connecting precede separating causes; and the
intelligible and at the same time intellectual such as are intellectual
only. Whence also _Heaven_ being the _Synocheys_ (συνοχευς) of wholes,
according to one union gives subsistence to the Titannic series,
and prior to this, to other orders of the Gods; some of which abide
only in him, which he retains in himself, but others both abide and
proceed, which he is said to have concealed, after they were unfolded
into light. And after all these he gives subsistence to those divine
orders, which proceed into the universe, and are separated from their
father. For he produces twofold monads, and triads, and hebdomads equal
in number to the monads. These things however will be investigated
more fully elsewhere. But this deity is denominated according to the
similitude of the apparent Heaven. For each of them compresses and
connects all the multitude which it contains, and causes the sympathy
and connection of the whole world to be one. For connection is second
to unifying power, and proceeds from it. In the Phædrus therefore Plato
delivers to us the production of all secondary natures by Heaven, and
shows us how this divinity leads upwards and convolves all things to
the intelligible. He likewise teaches us what its summit is, what the
profundity of its whole order, and what the boundary of the whole of
its progression. Here therefore investigating the truth of things from
names, he declares its energy with respect to things more elevated and
simple, and which are arranged nearer to _the one_. He also clearly
appears here to consider the order of Heaven, as intelligible and at
the same time intellectual. For if it sees things on high, it energizes
intellectually, and there is prior to it the intelligible genus of
Gods, to which looking it is intellectual; just as it is intelligible
to the natures which proceed from it. What then are the things on high
which it beholds? Is it not evident that they are, the supercelestial
place, an essence without colour, without figure, and without the
touch, and all the intelligible extent? An extent comprehending as
Plato would say intelligible animals, the one cause of all eternal
natures, and the occult principles of these; but as the followers of
Orpheus would say, bounded by æther upwards, and by Phanes downwards.
For all between these two gives completion to the intelligible order.
But Plato now calls this both singularly and plurally; since all things
are there united, and at the same time each is separated peculiarly;
and this according to the highest union and separation.

With respect to the term μετεωρολογοι, i.e. _those who discourse on
sublime affairs_, we must now consider it in a manner adapted to
those who chuse an anagogic life, who live intellectually, and who
do not gravitate to earth, but sublimely tend to a theoretic life.
For that which is called Earth there, maternally gives subsistence to
such things as Heaven, which is co-ordinate to that Earth, produces
paternally. And he who energizes there, may be properly called
μετεωρολογος, or, _one who discourses about things on high_. Heaven
therefore, being of a _connective_ nature, is expanded above the
Saturnian orders, and all the intellectual series; and produces from
himself all the Titannic race; and prior to this, the perfective and
defensive orders: and in short is the leader of every good to the
intellectual Gods. Plato therefore, having celebrated Saturn, for his
intelligence which is without habitude to mundane natures, and for
his life which is converted to his own exalted place of survey, now
celebrates Heaven for another more perfect energy. For to be conjoined
to more elevated natures is a greater good than to be converted
to oneself. Let no one however think, that on this account the
above-mentioned energies are distributed in the Gods; as for instance,
that there is providence alone, in Jupiter, a conversion alone to
himself, in Saturn, and an elevation alone to the intelligible, in
Heaven. For Jupiter no otherwise provides for mundane natures than
by looking to the intelligible; since as Plato says in the Timæus,
intellect understanding ideas in animal itself, thought it requisite
that as many and such as it there perceived should be contained in the
universe; but as Orpheus[444] says with a divinely inspired mouth,
“Jupiter swallows his progenitor Phanes, embosoms all his powers,
and becomes all things intellectually which Phanes is intelligibly.”
Saturn also imparts to Jupiter the principles of fabrication, and of
providential attention to sensibles, and understanding himself, he
becomes united to first intelligibles, and is filled with the goods
which are thence derived. Hence also the theologist (Orpheus) says
“that he was nursed by Night.”[445] If therefore the intelligible
is nutriment, Saturn is replete not only with the intelligibles
co-ordinated with him, but also with the highest and occult
intellections. Heaven himself also fills all secondary natures with
his proper goods, but guards all things by his own most vigorous
powers; and the father supernally committed to him the connecting and
guarding the causes of eternal animal. But he intellectually perceives
himself, and is converted to the intelligibles which he contains; and
this his intelligence, Plato in the Phædrus calls _circulation_. For
as that which is moved in a circle is moved about its own centre, so
Heaven energizes about its own intelligible, according to intellectual
circulation. But all the Gods subsisting in all, and each possessing
all energies, one transcends more in this, and another in a different
energy, and each is particularly characterised according to that in
which it transcends. Thus Jupiter is characterised by providence,
and hence his name is now thus analysed; but Saturn by a conversion
to himself, whence also he is _inflected counsel_ αγκυλομητις; and
Heaven by habitude to things more excellent; from which also he
receives his appellation. For his giving subsistence to a pure and
the Saturnian intellect, represents his energy to the other part. But
as there are many powers in Heaven, such as the connective, guardian,
and convertive, you will find that this name is appropriately adapted
to all these. For the connective is signified through bounding the
intellectual Gods; since the connective bounds the multitude which
he contains. The power which guards wholes subsists through the
termination and security of an intellectual essence. And the convertive
power subsists through converting seeing, and intellectually-energizing
natures, to things on high. But all these are adapted to Heaven. For
there is no fear that the Gods will be dissipated, and that on this
account they require connective causes; or that they will sustain
mutation, and that on this account they stand in need of the saving aid
of guardian causes; but now Socrates at once manifests all the powers
of Heaven, through convertive energy. For this is to behold things
on high, to be converted to them, and through this to be connected
and defended. And it appears to me that Heaven possesses this idiom
according to analogy to the intelligible eternity and the intelligible
wholeness. For Timæus particularly characterizes eternity by this,
viz. by abiding in the one prior to it, and by being established in
the summit of intelligibles; and Socrates says that Heaven surveys
things on high, viz. the supercelestial place, and such things as are
comprehended in the god-nourished silence of the fathers. (και οσα τῃ
θεοθρεμμονι σιγῃ περιειληπται των πατερων). As therefore Parmenides
signifies each of these orders through _wholeness_, the one through
intelligible, and the other through intellectual wholeness; in like
manner both Timæus and Socrates characterise them by a conversion to
more excellent natures. But the conversion as well as the wholeness
is different. For that of eternity is intelligible, on which account
Timæus does not say that it looks to its intelligible, but only that
it stably abides. But the conversion of Heaven is intellectual, and on
this account Socrates says that it sees things on high, and through
this converts, guards, and connects all things posterior to itself.
Whence also in the Phædrus, it is said by the circulation of itself,
to lead all things to the supercelestial place, and the summit of the
first intelligibles.

That there being three fathers and kings of which Socrates here
makes mention, Saturn alone appears to have received the government
from his father, and to have transmitted it to Jupiter, by violence.
Mythologists therefore celebrate the sections of Heaven and Saturn.
But the cause of this is, that Heaven is of the connective, Saturn
of the Titannic, and Jupiter of the demiurgic order. Again, the
Titannic genus rejoices in separations and differences, progressions
and multiplications of powers. Saturn therefore, as a dividing God,
separates his kingdom from that of Heaven; but as a pure intellect he
is exempt from a fabricative energy proceeding into matter. Hence also
the demiurgic genus is again separated from him. Section therefore
is on both sides of him. For so far as he is a Titan, he is cut off
from the connective causes, but so far as he does not give himself to
material fabrication, he is cut off from the demiurgus Jupiter.

That with respect to the supercelestial place to which Heaven extends
his intellectual life, some characterise it by ineffable symbols; but
others after giving it a name celebrate it as unknown, neither being
able to speak of its form, or figure. And proceeding somewhat higher
than this, they have been able to manifest the boundary[446] of the
intelligible Gods by name alone. But the natures which are beyond this,
they signify through analogy alone, these natures being ineffable and
incomprehensible. Since that God who closes the paternal order, is
said by the wise to be the only deity among the intelligible Gods,
that is denominated: and theurgy ascends as far as to this order.
Since therefore the natures prior to Heaven, are allotted such a
transcendency of uniform subsistence, that some of them are said to
be effable, and at the same time ineffable, known, and at the same
time unknown, through their alliance to _the one_, Socrates very
properly restrains the discourse about them, in consequence of names
not being able to represent their hyparxes; and in short, because
it requires a certain wonderful employment, to separate the effable
and ineffable, of their hyparxis or power. He accuses therefore his
memory, not as disbelieving in the fables, which assert that there are
certain more ancient causes beyond Heaven, nor as not thinking it worth
while to mention them. For in the Phædrus he himself celebrates the
supercelestial place. But he says this, because the first of beings
cannot become known by the exercise of memory and through phantasy, or
opinion, or the dianoetic part. For we are alone naturally adapted to
be conjoined to them, with the flower of intellect and the hyparxis
of our essence; and through these we receive the sensation of their
unknown nature. Socrates therefore says, that what in them is exempt,
both from our gnostic and recollective life, is the cause of our
inability to give them a name; for they are not naturally adapted to be
known through names. Theologists likewise would not remotely signify
them, and through the analogy of things apparent to them, if they could
be named, and apprehended by knowledge.

That Homer[447] does not ascend beyond the Saturnian order, but
evincing that Saturn is the proximate cause of the demiurgus, he
calls Jupiter, who is the demiurgus, the son of Saturn. He also calls
the divinities co-ordinate with him Juno, Neptune, and Mars; and he
denominates Jupiter, the father of men and Gods. But he does not
introduce Saturn, as either energizing, or saying any thing, but as
truly αγκυλομητις in consequence of being converted to himself.

That Orpheus greatly availed himself of the licence of fables, and
manifests every thing prior to Heaven by names, as far as to the
first cause. He also denominates the ineffable, who transcends the
intelligible unities, _Time_; whether because _Time_ pre-subsists as
the cause of all generation, or because, as delivering the generation
of true beings, he thus denominates the ineffable, that he may indicate
the order of true beings, and the transcendency of the more total to
the more partial; that a subsistence according to Time may be the same
with a subsistence according to cause; in the same manner as generation
with an arranged progression. But Hesiod venerates many of the divine
natures in silence, and does not in short name the first. For that what
is posterior to the first proceeds from something else, is evident from
the verse,

    “Chaos of all things was the first produced.”

For it is perfectly impossible that it could be produced without a
cause; but he does not say what that is which gave subsistence to
Chaos. He is silent indeed with respect to both the fathers[448] of
intelligibles, the exempt, and the co-ordinate; for they are perfectly
ineffable. And with respect to the two co-ordinations, the natures
which are co-ordinate with the one, he passes by in silence, but those
alone which are co-ordinate with the indefinite duad, he unfolds
through genealogy. And on this account Plato now thinks Hesiod deserves
to be mentioned, for passing by the natures prior to Heaven, as being
ineffable. For this also is indicated concerning them by the Oracles,
which likewise add “they possess mystic silence,” σιγ’ εχε μυστα. And
Socrates himself in the Phædrus, calls the intellectual perception of
them μυησις and εποπτεια, _in which nearly the whole business is
ineffable and unknown_.

That Saturn in conjunction with Rhea produced Vesta and Juno who are
co-ordinate to the demiurgic causes. For Vesta imparts from herself
to the Gods an uninclining permanency, and seat in themselves,
and an indissoluble essence. But Juno imparts progression, and a
multiplication into things secondary. She is also the vivifying
fountain of wholes, and the mother of prolific powers; and on this
account she is said to have proceeded together with Jupiter the
demiurgus; and through this communion she generates maternally, such
things as Jupiter generates paternally. But Vesta abides in herself,
possessing an undefiled virginity, and being the cause of sameness to
all things. Each of these divinities however together with her own
proper perfection, possesses according to participation the power of
the other. Hence some say that Vesta is denominated from essence (απο
της εστιας) looking to her proper hyparxis. But others looking to her
vivific and motive power which she derives from Juno say that she
is thus denominated ως ωσεως ουσαν αιτιαν _as being the cause of
impulsion_. For all divine natures are in all, and particularly such
as are co-ordinate with each other, participate of, and subsist in each
other. Each therefore of the demiurgic and vivific orders, participates
the form by which it is characterised, from Vesta. The orbs of the
planets likewise possess the sameness of their revolutions from her;
and the poles and centres are always allotted from her their rest.

That Vesta does not manifest essence, but the abiding and firm
establishment of essence in itself; and hence this goddess proceeds
into light after the mighty Saturn. For the divinities prior to
Saturn have not a subsistence in themselves and in another,[449] but
this originates from Saturn. And a subsistence in _self_ is the
peculiarity of Vesta, but in _another_ of Juno.

That the theology of Hesiod from the monad Rhea produces according
to things which are more excellent in the co-ordination, Vesta, but
according to those which are subordinate Juno; and according to those
which subsist between, Ceres. But according to Orpheus, Ceres is in
a certain respect the same with the whole of vivification, and in a
certain respect is not the same. For on high she is Rhea, but below in
conjunction with Jupiter, she is Ceres: for here the things begotten
are similar to the begetters, and are nearly the same.

That we ought to receive with caution what is now said concerning
effluxions and motions. For Socrates does not descend to the material
flowing of Heraclitus; for this is false,[450] and unworthy the
dianoetic conceptions of Plato. But since it is lawful to interpret
things divine analogously, through appropriate images, Socrates very
properly assimilates fontal and Saturnian deities to streams; in so
doing jesting and at the same time acting seriously, because good is
always derived as it were in streams from on high, to things below.
Hence, according to the image of rivers, after the fontal deities,
who eternally devolve streams of good, the deities who subsist as
principles are celebrated. For after the _fountain_ of a river the
place where it _begins_ to flow is surveyed.

That those divinities who are peculiarly denominated total intellectual
gods, of whom the great Saturn is the father, are properly called
fontal. For “from him leap forth the implacable thunders,” says the
oracle concerning Saturn. But concerning the vivific fountain Rhea
from which all life, divine, intellectual, psychical and mundane is
generated, the Chaldean oracles thus speak.

    Ρειη τοι νοερων μακαρων πηγη τε ροη τε.
    Παντων γαρ πρωτη δυναμεις κολποισιν αφραστοις
    Δεξαμενη, γενεην επι παν προχεει τροχαουσαν.

i.e. “Rhea[451] is the fountain and river of the blessed intellectual
Gods. For first receiving the powers of all things in her ineffable
bosoms, she pours running generation into every thing.”

For this divinity gives subsistence to the infinite diffusion of all
life, and to all never-failing powers. She likewise moves all things
according to the measures of divine motions, and converts them to
herself; establishing all things in herself, as being co-ordinate to
Saturn. Rhea therefore is so called from causing a perpetual influx of
good, and through being the cause of divine _facility_, since the
life of the gods is attended with _ease_ (θεοι ρεια ζωντες).

That Ocean is the cause to all the Gods of acute and vigorous energy,
and bounds the separations of the first, middle, and last orders;
converting himself to himself, and to his proper principles, through
swiftness of intellect, but moving all things from himself, to energies
accommodated to their natures; perfecting their powers, and causing
them to have a never-failing subsistence. But Tethys imparts permanency
to the natures which are moved by Ocean, and stability to the beings
which are excited by him to the generation of secondary natures. She is
also the source of purity of essence to those beings who perpetually
desire to produce all things; as sustaining every thing in the divine
essences which as it were _leaps forth and percolates_. For each
of first causes, though it imparts to secondary natures a participation
of good, yet at the same time retains with itself that which is
undefiled, unmingled and pure from participation. Thus for instance,
intellect is filled with life, being, and intelligence, with which also
it fills soul; but establishing in itself that which in each of these
is genuine and exempt, it also illuminates from itself to beings of
a subordinate rank, inferior measures of these goods. And vigour of
energy indeed, is present with more ancient natures, through Ocean;
but the leaping forth and percolating through Tethys. For every thing
which is imparted from superior to subordinate natures, whether it be
essence, life, or intelligence, is _percolated_. And such of these
as are primary, are established in themselves; but such as are more
imperfect, are transferred to things of a subject order. Just as with
respect to streams of water, such of them as are nearer their source
are purer, but the more remote are more turbid. Both Ocean and Tethys
therefore, are fontal Gods, according to their first subsistence.
Hence Socrates now calls them the fathers of streams. But they also
proceed into other orders of Gods, exhibiting the same powers among
the Gods who rank as principles or rulers, among those of a liberated,
and those of a celestial characteristic; and appropriately in each of
these. Timæus, however, celebrates their sublunary orders, calling them
fathers of Saturn and Rhea, but the progeny of Heaven and Earth. But
their last processions are their divisible allotments about the earth;
both those which are apparent on its surface, and those which under the
earth, separate the kingdom of Hades, from the dominion of Neptune.

That Saturn is conjoined both to Rhea and Jupiter, but to the
former as father to prolific power, but to the latter, as father to
intelligible[452] intellect.

That Ocean is said to have married Tethys, and Jupiter Juno, and
the like, as establishing a communion with her, conformably to the
generation of subordinate natures. For an according co-arrangement of
the Gods, and a connascent co-operation in their productions, is called
by theologists _marriage_.

That Tethys is denominated from leaping forth and _straining_ or
_cleansing_, being as it were _Diatethys_, and by taking away the first
two syllables _Tethys_.[453]

That Saturn is the monad of the Titannic order of the Gods, but Jupiter
of the demiurgic. This last divinity however is twofold, the one exempt
and co-ordinated with Saturn, being a fontal God, and in short ranking
with the intellectual fathers, and convolving the extremity of them;
but the other being connumerated with the sons of Saturn, and allotted
a Saturnian summit and dominion in this triad; concerning which also
the Homeric Neptune says,

    τρεις γαρ τ’ εκ Κρονου ειμεν αδελφεοι, ους τεκε Ρειη.[454]

    As brother Gods we three from Saturn came,
    And Rhea bore us.

And the first Jupiter indeed, as being the demiurgus of wholes, is the
king of things first, middle, and last, concerning whom Socrates also
had just said, that he is the ruler and king of all things; and life
and salvation are imparted to all things through him.

But the ruling Jupiter, who ranks as a principle, and who is
co-ordinate with the three sons of Saturn governs the third part of the
whole of things, according to that of Homer,

    τριχθα δε παντα δεδασται----[455]

    A triple distribution all things own.

He is also the summit of the three, has the same name with the fontal
Jupiter, is united to him, and is monadically called Jupiter. But the
second is called dyadically, marine Jupiter, and Neptune. And the third
is triadically denominated, terrestrial Jupiter, Pluto, and Hades.
The first of these also preserves, fabricates, and vivifies summits,
but the second, things of a second rank, and the third those of a
third order. Hence this last is said to have ravished Proserpine, that
together with her he might animate the extremities of the universe.

That the Titannic order dividing itself from the connecting order of
Heaven, but having also something in itself abiding, and connascent
with that order, Saturn is the leader of the separation, and on
this account he both arms others against his father, and receives
the scythe[456] from his mother, through which he divides his own
kingdom from that of Heaven. But Ocean is co-ordinated with those that
abide[457] in the manners of the father, and guards the middle of the
two orders; so far as a Titan being connumerated with the Gods that
subsist with Saturn; but so far as rejoicing in a co-ordination with
Heaven conjoining himself with the Synoches. For it is fit that he who
bounds the first and second orders, should be arranged in the middle
of the natures that are bounded. But every where this god is allotted
a power of this kind, and separates the genera of the Gods, the
Titannic from the connecting (των συνοχικων) and the vivific from the
demiurgic. Whence also ancient rumor calls Ocean the God who separates
the apparent part of Heaven from the unapparent; and on this account
poets say, that the sun and the other stars rise from the ocean. What
is now said therefore by Plato comprehends all the Titannic order
through these two conjunctions; this order abiding and at the same time
proceeding. And through the Saturnian order indeed, it comprehends
every thing separated from the fathers; but through that of Ocean,
every thing conjoined with the connecting Gods. Or if you had rather
so speak, through the Saturnian order, he comprehends every maternal
cause, but through the other, every thing subservient to the paternal
cause. For the female is the cause of progression and separation, but
the male of union and stable permanency.

That of the demiurgic triad[458] which divides the whole world, and
distributes the indivisible, one and whole fabrication of the first
Jupiter, the summit, and which has the relation of father is Jupiter,
who through union with the whole demiurgic intellect having the same
appellation with it, is for this reason not mentioned here by Plato.
But Neptune is allotted the middle and that which binds together both
the extremes; being filled indeed from the essence of Jupiter, but
filling Pluto. For of the whole of this triad, Jupiter indeed is the
father, but Neptune the power, and Pluto the intellect. And all indeed
are in all; but each receives a different character of subsistence.
Thus Jupiter subsists according to _being_; but Neptune according to
_power_, and Pluto according to _intellect_. And though all these
divinities are the causes of the life of all things, yet one is so
_essentially_, another _vitally_, and another _intellectually_. Whence
also the theologist Orpheus says, that the extremes fabricate in
conjunction with Proserpine things first and last; the middle being
co-arranged with generative cause from his own allotment, without
Proserpine. Hence _violence_ is said to have been offered to Proserpine
by Jupiter; but she is said to have been _ravished_ by Pluto. (διο
και φασι την κορην υπο μεν τον διος βιαζεσθαι, υπο δε του πλοντωνος
αρπαζεσθαι.) But the middle is said to be the cause of motion to all
things. Hence also, he is called _earth-shaker_, as being the origin
of motion. And among those who are allotted the kingdom of Saturn, the
middle allotment, and the agile sea (η ευκινηγος θαλaσσa) are assigned
to him. According to every division therefore, the summits are Jovian,
the middles belong to Neptune, and the extremes to Pluto. And if you
look to the centres, such as the east, that of mid-heaven and the west;
if also you divide the whole world, as for instance into the inerratic,
planetary and sublunary spheres;--or again, if you divide that which is
generated into the fiery, terrestrial, and that which subsists between;
or the earth into its summits, middle, and hollow, and subterranean
parts, this triad every where distributes the first, middle and last
differences of things fabricated in demiurgic boundaries.

That the name Neptune is now triply analysed. For Neptune is the
trident-bearer, and the Tritons, and Amphitrite are the familiars of
this God. And the first analyzation of his name is from the allotment
over which he presides, and from souls coming into generation, in whom
the circle of sameness is fettered; since the sea is analogous to
generation. But the second is from communion with the first.

    αλλα Ζευς προτερος γεονει, και πλειονα ηδει.[459]

But Jove was born the first, and more he knew. For a Jupiter of this
kind, is the proximate intelligible of Neptune. But the third analysis
of his name is from his energy in externals. For he is motive of
nature, and vivific of things last. He is also the guardian of the
earth, and excites it to generations.

That Neptune is an intellectual demiurgic God, who receives souls
descending into generation; but Hades is an intellectual demiurgic
God, who frees souls from generation. For as our whole period
receives a triple division, into a life prior to generation, which
is Jovian, into a life in generation which is Neptunian, and into
a life posterior to generation which is Plutonian; Pluto, who is
characterised by intellect, very properly converts ends to beginnings,
effecting a circle without a beginning, and without an end, not only
in souls, but also in every fabrication of bodies, and in short, of
all periods;--which circle also, he perpetually convolves. Thus for
instance, he converts the ends to the beginnings of the souls of
the stars, and the convolutions of souls about generation, and the
like. And hence Jupiter is the guardian of the life of souls prior to
generation.

That some badly analyze the name of Pluto into wealth from the earth,
through fruits and metals; but Hades into the invisible, dark and
dreadful. These Socrates now reprobates, bringing the two names to
the same signification; referring the name of Pluto, as intellect,
to the wealth of prudence, but that of Hades to an intellect
knowing all things. For this God is a sophist, who purifying souls
after death, frees them from generation. For Hades is not, as some
improperly explain it, evil: for neither is death evil; though Hades
to some appears to be attended with perturbations (εμπαθως); but it
is invisible and better than the apparent; such as is every thing
intelligible. Intellect therefore, in every triad of beings, convolves
itself to being, and the paternal cause, imitating in its energy the
circle.

That men who are lovers of body, badly refer to themselves the passions
of the animated nature, and on this account consider death to be
dreadful, as being the cause of corruption. The truth however is, that
it is much better for man to die, and live in Hades a life according to
nature, since a life in conjunction with body is contrary to nature,
and is an impediment to intellectual energy. Hence it is necessary to
divest ourselves of the fleshly garments with which we are clothed,
as Ulysses did of his ragged vestments, and no longer like a wretched
mendicant together with the indigence of body, put on our rags. For as
the Chaldean Oracle says, “Things divine cannot be obtained by those
whose intellectual eye is directed to body; but those only can arrive
at the possession of them, who stript of their garments hasten to the
summit.”

That Neptune when compared with Jupiter is said to know _many_ things;
but Hades compared with souls to whom he imparts knowledge is said to
know _all_ things; though Neptune is more total than Hades.

That as it is necessary to analyse Pluto, not only into the obvious
wealth from the earth, but also into the wealth of wisdom, so likewise
Ceres must be analysed not only into corporeal nutriment; but beginning
from the Gods themselves it is requisite to conceive her to be the
supplier of aliment, first to the Gods themselves, afterwards to the
natures posterior to the Gods; and in the last place, that the series
of this beneficent energy extends as far as to corporeal nutriment. For
the characteristic of love shines forth first of all in the Gods: and
this is the case with the medicinal and prophetic powers of Apollo, and
with those of every other divinity. But nutriment, when considered with
reference to the Gods, is the communication of intellectual plenitude
from more exalted natures to those of an inferior rank. Gods therefore,
are nourished, when they view with the eye of intellect Gods prior to
themselves; and when they are perfected and view intelligible beauties,
such as justice itself, temperance itself, and the like, as it is said
in the Phædrus.

That from sportive conceptions about the Gods, it is possible for those
to energize entheastically, or according to a divinely inspired energy,
who apply themselves to things in a more intellectual manner. Thus
for instance, according to the material conceptions of the multitude,
Venus derives her origin from foam; and foam corresponds to seed.
Hence according to them the pleasure arising from this in coition is
Venus. Who however, is so stupid, as not to survey primary and eternal
natures, prior to such as are last and corruptible? I will therefore
unfold the divine conception respecting Venus.

They say then that the first Venus was produced from twofold
causes, the one as that _through which_,[460] co-operating with her
progression, as calling forth the prolific power of the father, and
imparting it to the intellectual orders; but Heaven as the maker
and cause unfolding the goddess into light, from his own generative
abundance. For whence could that which congregates different genera,
according to one desire of beauty, receive its subsistence except
from the _synochical_ power of Heaven? From the foam therefore of his
own prolific parts thrown into the sea, Heaven produced this goddess,
as Orpheus says. But the second Venus, Jupiter produces from his
own generative powers, in conjunction with Dione; and this goddess
likewise proceeds from foam, after the same manner with the more
ancient Venus, as Orpheus evinces. These goddesses therefore differ
from each other, according to the causes of their production, their
orders and their powers. For she that proceeds from the genitals of
Heaven is supermundane, leads upwards to intelligible beauty, is the
supplier of an unpolluted life, and separates from generation. But
the Venus that proceeds from Dione governs all the co-ordinations
in the celestial world and the earth, binds them to each other, and
perfects their generative progressions, through a kindred conjunction.
These divinities too, are united with each other through a similitude
of subsistence: for they both proceed from generative powers; one
from that of the connectedly-containing power of Heaven, and the
other from Jupiter the demiurgus. But the sea signifies an expanded
and circumscribed life; its profundity, the universally-extended
progression of such a life; and its foam, the greatest purity of
nature, that which is full of prolific light and power, and that which
swims upon all life, and is as it were its highest flower.

That according to Orpheus Ceres is the same with Rhea. For he says
that subsisting on high in unproceeding union with Saturn, she is
_Rhea_, but that by emitting and generating Jupiter, she is _Ceres_.
For thus he speaks,

    Ρειην το πριν εουσαν, επει διος επλετο μητηρ
    Γεγονε δημητηρ.[461]

    i.e. The goddess who was _Rhea_, when she bore Jove became Ceres.

But Hesiod says that Ceres is the daughter of Rhea. It is however
evident, that these theologists harmonize: for whether this goddess
proceeds from union with Saturn to a secondary order, or whether she
is the first progeny of Rhea, she is still the same. Ceres therefore,
thus subsisting, and receiving the most ancient and ruling order from
the whole vivific Rhea, (της ολης Ζωογονου ρεας) and comprehending the
middle centres of whole vivification, (της ολης Ζωογονιας) she fills
all supermundane natures with the rivers of all-perfect life, pouring
upon all things vitally, indivisibly, and uniformly.

Prior however to all this, she unfolds to us the demiurgic intellect,
(Jupiter) and imparts to him the power of vivifying wholes. For as
Saturn supplies her from on high with the cause of being; so Ceres from
on high, and from her own prolific bosoms, pours forth vivification to
the demiurgus. But possessing herself the middle of all vivific deity,
she governs the whole fountains which she contains, and comprehends the
one bond of the first and last powers of life. She stably convolves
too, and contains all secondary fountains. But she leads forth the
uniform causes of prior natures to the generation of others. This
goddess too comprehends _Vesta_ and _Juno_: in her right hand parts
Juno, who pours forth the whole order of souls; but in her left hand
parts Vesta, who leads forth all the light of virtue. Hence, Ceres
is with great propriety called by Plato,[462] _mother_, and, at the
same time the _supplier of aliment_. For, so far as she comprehends in
herself the cause of Juno, she is a mother; but as containing Vesta in
her essence, she is the supplier of aliment. But the paradigm of this
goddess is _Night: for immortal Night is called the nurse of the Gods_.
Night however is the cause of aliment intelligibly:[463] for that which
is intelligible is, according to the oracle,[464] the aliment of the
intellectual orders of Gods. But Ceres first of all separates the two
kinds of aliment in the Gods, as Orpheus says:

    Μησατο γαρ προπολους, και αμφιπολους, και σπαδους·
    Μησατο δ’ αμβροσιην, και ερυθρου νεκταρος αρθρον·
    Μησατο δ’ αγλαα εργα μελισσαων εριβομβων.[465]

    i.e. She cares for pow’rs ministrant, whether they
    Or Gods _precede_, or _follow_, or _surround_:
    _Ambrosia_, and _tenacious nectar red_
    Are too the objects of her bounteous care.
    Last to the bee her providence extends,
    Who gathers honey with resounding hum.

Ceres therefore, our sovereign mistress (δεσποινα) not only generates
life, but that which gives perfection to life; and this from supernal
natures to such as are last: _for virtue is the perfection of souls_.
Hence mothers who are connected with the circulations of time, bring
forth their offspring in imitation of this twofold and eternal
generation of Ceres. For, at the same time that they send forth their
young into the light, they extend to them milk naturally produced as
their food.

That the conjunction of the demiurgic intellect with the vivific causes
is triple: for it is conjoined with the fountains prior to itself; is
present with its kindred co-ordinate natures; and co-energizes with
the orders posterior to itself. For it is present with the mother
prior to itself, _convertively_; (επιστρεπτικως) with Proserpine
posterior to itself, _providentially_; (προνοητικως) and with Juno
co-ordinate to itself with an _amatory energy_ (ερασμιως). Hence
Jupiter is said to be enamoured of Juno,

    ως σεο νυν εραμαι[466]

    As now I love thee,----

And this love indeed is legal, but the other two appear to be illegal.
This goddess therefore produces from herself in conjunction with the
demiurgus and father all the genera of souls, the supermundane and
mundane, the celestial and sublunary, the divine, angelic, dæmoniacal,
and partial. After a certain manner too, she is divided from the
demiurgus, but in a certain respect she is united to him: for Jupiter
is said, in the Philebus, to contain a royal intellect and a royal
soul. For he contains uniformly the paternal and maternal cause of the
world; and the fountain of souls is said to be in Jupiter; just as
again, the intelligence of Jupiter is said to be first participated by
Juno. For no other divinity, says Jupiter in Homer, knows my mind prior
to Juno. Through this ineffable union therefore of these divinities,
the world participates of intellectual souls. They also give
subsistence to intellects who are carried in souls, and who together
with them give completion to the whole fabrication of things.

That the series of our sovereign mistress Juno, beginning from on high
pervades to the last of things; and her allotment in the sublunary
region is the air. For _air_ is a symbol of _soul_, according to which
also, soul is called a _spirit_ (πνευμα); just as _fire_ is an image of
_intellect_, but _water_ of _nature_, by which the world is nourished,
(της κοσμοτρφου φυσεως) through which all nutriment and increase are
produced. But _earth_ is the image of _body_, through its gross and
material nature. Hence Homer obscurely signifying this, represents Juno
suspended with two anvils under her feet: for the air is allotted two
heavy elements beneath itself.

For

    ηλιον δ’ ακαμαντα βοωπις ποτνια ηρη
    πεμψεν επ’ ωκεανοιο ροας

i.e. “Fair-eyed venerable Juno sent the sun to the streams of the
ocean,”--is from the same conception.

For he calls the thick cloud produced by Juno, the setting of the sun.
The assertion likewise that the end of this name will be conjoined
with the beginning, if any one frequently repeats the name of the
goddess, evinces the conversion of rational souls to her which proceed
from her; and that voice is air that is struck. On this account also
the voice of rational animals is especially dedicated to this goddess,
who made the horse of Achilles to become vocal. But Socrates now
delivers these three vivific monads in a consequent order, viz. Ceres,
Juno, Proserpine; calling the first the mother, the second the sister,
and the third the daughter of the demiurgus. All of them however are
partakers of the whole of fabrication; the first in an exempt manner
and intellectually, the second in a fontal manner and at the same time
in a way adapted to a principle (αρχικως) and the third, in a manner
adapted to a principle and leader (αρχικως και ηγεμονικως).

Of these goddesses the last possesses triple powers, and impartibly
and uniformly comprehends three monads of Gods. But she is called
Core (κορη) through the purity of her essence, and her undefiled
transcendency in her generations. She also possesses a first, middle
and last empire. And according to her summit indeed, she is called
Diana by Orpheus; but according to her middle Proserpine; and according
to the extremity of the order Minerva. Likewise, according to an
hyparxis transcending the other powers of this triple vivific order,
the dominion of Hecate is established; but according to a middle power,
and which is generative of wholes, that of Soul; and according to
intellectual conversion that of virtue.[467] Core therefore, subsisting
on high, and among the supermundane Gods, uniformly extends this triple
order of divinities; and together with Jupiter generates Bacchus,
who impartibly presides over partible fabrication. But beneath, in
conjunction with Pluto, she is particularly beheld according to the
middle peculiarity; for it is this which proceeding every where imparts
vivification to the last of things. Hence she is called Proserpine,
because she especially associates with Pluto, and together with him
orderly distributes the extremities of the universe. And according
to her extremities indeed, she is said to be a virgin, and to remain
undefiled; but according to her middle, to be conjoined with Hades,
and to beget the Furies in the subterranean regions. She therefore is
also called Core, but after another manner than the supermundane and
ruling Core. For the one is the connective unity of the three vivific
principles; but the other is the middle of them, in herself possessing
the peculiarities of the extremes. Hence in the Proserpine conjoined
with Pluto, you will find the peculiarities of Hecate and Minerva; but
these extremes subsist in her occultly, while the idiom of the middle
shines forth, and that which is characteristic of ruling soul, which
in the supermundane Core _was of a ruling_[468] nature, but here
subsists according to a mundane peculiarity.

That Proserpine is denominated, either through judging of forms
and separating them from each other, thus obscurely signifying the
ablation of slaughter (δια το κρινειν τα ειδη και χωριζειν αλληλων,
ως του φονου την αναιρεσιν αινιττομενον) or through separating souls
perfectly from bodies, through a conversion to things on high, which
is the most fortunate slaughter and death, to such as are worthy
of it. (η δια το χωριζειν τας ψυχας τελεως εκ των σωματων δια της
προς τα ανω επιστροφης, οπερ εστιν ευτυχεστατος φονος και θανατος
τοις αξιουμενοις τουτου.) But the name φερεφαττα _Pherephatta_,
according to a contact with generation is adapted to Proserpine; but
according to wisdom and counsel to Minerva. At the same time however
all the appellations by which she is distinguished are adapted to the
perfection of soul. On this account also she is called Proserpine,
and not by the names of the extremes; since that which was ravished
by Pluto is the middle; the extremes at the same time being firmly
established in themselves, according to which Core is said to remain a
virgin.

With respect to our sovereign mistress Diana, Plato delivers three
peculiarities of her, the undefiled, the mundane, and the anagogic.
And through the first of these indeed, the goddess is said to be a
lover of virginity; but through the second, according to which she is
perfective of works (τελεσιουργος) she is said to be the inspective
guardian of virtue; and through the third she is said to hate the
impulses arising from generation. Of these three likewise, the first
is especially adapted to the progression of the goddess, according
to which she is allotted an hyparxis in the vivific triad of the
supermundane Gods; whether we call this deity Hecatic, as Theurgists
say, or Diana with Orpheus. For there being established, she is filled
with undefiled powers from the Gods called _Amilicti_.[469] But
she looks to the fountain of virtue, and embraces its virginity. For
the virginity which is there does not proceed forth, as the Oracle
says, but abiding gives subsistence to Diana, and to supermundane
virtue, and is exempt from all communion, conjunction and progression,
according to generation. Hence Core also, according to the Diana and
Minerva which she contains, is said to remain a virgin; but according
to the prolific power of Proserpine, she is said to proceed forth, and
to be conjoined with the third demiurgus, and to bring forth as Orpheus
says, “nine azure-eyed, flower-producing daughters;”

    εννεα θυγατερας γλαυκωπιδας ανθεσιουργους.

since the Diana and the Minerva which she contains preserve their
virginity always the same. For the former of these is characterised
according to her stability, but the latter according to her convertive
energy. But that which is generative is allotted in her a middle order.
They say too, that she aspires after virginity, since the form of her
is comprehended in the vivific fountain, and she understands fontal
virtue, gives subsistence to supermundane and anagogic virtue, and
despises all material sexual connexion, though she inspects the fruits
arising from it.

She appears also to be averse to the generations and progressions of
things, but to introduce perfections to them. And she gives perfection
indeed to souls through a life according to virtue; but to mortal
animals she imparts a restitution to form. But that there is a great
union between Diana, the mundane Hecate, and Core, is evident to
those that are in the least degree conversant with the writings of
Orpheus; from which it appears that Latona is comprehended in Ceres,
and together with Jupiter gives subsistence to Core, and the mundane
Hecate. To which we may also add that Orpheus[470] calls Diana Hecate.
So that it is nothing wonderful, if we should elsewhere call the Diana
contained in Core Hecate.

“Again, theologists especially celebrate two powers of our sovereign
mistress Minerva, the _defensive_, and the _perfective_; the former
preserving the order of wholes undefiled, and unvanquished by
matter, and the latter filling all things with intellectual light,
and converting them to their cause. And on this account, Plato also
in the Timæus, analogously celebrates Minerva as _philopolemic_ and
_philosophic_. But three orders of this Goddess are delivered by
theologists; the one fontal and intellectual, according to which she
establishes herself in her father Jupiter, and subsists in unproceeding
union with him; but the second ranks among the supermundane Gods,
according to which she is present with Core, and bounds and converts
all the progression of that Goddess to herself. And the third is
_liberated_, according to which she perfects and guards the whole
world, and circularly invests it with her powers, as with a veil;
binding together all the mundane summits, and giving subsistence
to all the allotments in the heavens, and to those which proceed
into the sublunary region. Now therefore Socrates celebrates her
_guardian_ power, through the name of _Pallas_; but her perfective
power through that of _Minerva_. She is the cause therefore of orderly
and measured motion, which she first imparts to the Curetic order, and
afterwards to the other Gods. For Minerva according to this power is
the leader of the Curetes, as Orpheus says, whence also, as well as
those divinities she is adorned with empyrean arms, through which she
represses all disorder, preserves the demiurgic series immoveable, and
unfolds dancing through rhythmical motion. She also guards reason as
it proceeds from intellect; through this power vanquishing matter.
For the visible region, says Timæus, is mingled from intellect and
necessity, the latter being obedient to the former, and all material
causes being in subjection to the will of the father. It is this
goddess therefore, who arranges necessity under the productions of
intellect, raises the universe to the participation of Jupiter, excites
and establishes it in the port of its father, and eternally guards and
defends it. Hence, if the universe is said to be indissoluble, it is
this goddess who supplies its permanency; and if it moves in measured
motion, through the whole of time, according to one reason and order,
she is the source of this supply. She watchfully surveys therefore all
the fabrication of her father, and connects and converts it to him; and
vanquishes all material indefiniteness. Hence she is called _Victory_
and _Health_; the former because she causes intellect to rule over
necessity, and form over matter; and the latter, because she preserves
the universe perpetually whole, perfect, exempt from age, and free from
disease. It is the property therefore of this goddess to elevate and
distribute, and through an intellectual dance as it were, to connect,
establish, and defend inferior natures in such as are more divine.”[471]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] For γονων, it is necessary to read γενων.

[2] It appears to me that πρωτως is in this place omitted in the
original.

[3] For αριστα, I read αριστην.

[4] For κατα τουτο, it is necessary to read κατα ταυτον.

[5] For διακρινον, it is necessary to read διατεινον.

[6] For αυτο, I read αυτῳ.

[7] Instead of εκ της διακοσμησεως, it is necessary to read εκ ταυτης
διακοσμησεως.

[8] For οπως, it is necessary to read πως, and in consequence of this,
the sentence should not be, as it is in the original, interrogatory.

[9] From the version of Portus, it appears necessary after the words
τους μεν, αφ’εαυτου τε, to supply the words του νοερου πατρος, τους δε
αφ’εαυτου τε κ. τ. λ.

[10] For της ολης, it is necessary to read τοις ολοις.

[11] For τοις ολοις, it is necessary to read τοις πολλοις.

[12] The word αστρον is omitted in the original.

[13] εν is omitted in the original.

[14] For παντος it is necessary to read πατρος.

[15] αφ’ου signifies an occult, but υφ’ου, a manifest progression.

[16] For εξῃρηται, it is necessary to read εξηρτηται.

[17] For επιστησωμεν, I read επισκεψωμεν.

[18] For γονιμου, it is necessary to read μονιμου.

[19] For νεαρας, it is necessary to read νοερας.

[20] The following observations were written in the margin of the
manuscript copy of this work of Proclus, by some scholiast or
commentator: “For end and that which is perfected, and the possession
of beginning, middles and end, first subsist in the intelligible and
at the same time intellectual Gods. And on this account figure, also,
there presents itself to the view. This triad, therefore, in the whole
assimilative series is analogous to intelligibles and intellectuals, as
having from them[21] the beginning, middles, and end. For the demiurgus
produced this triad according to the similitude of the perfective
triad, and connected the straight and the circular with motion. For to
bound in a direct path, and to proceed circularly, are definitive of
motion, as was said by Proclus in the Chapter prior to this. And as
this triad has these properties from intelligibles and intellectuals,
thus also the whole series of assimilative Gods possess them from
this triad. Hence this triad of partial demiurgi, is analogous to the
intelligible and intellectual fathers, i.e. to the perfective power.”

[21] For απ’ αυτης, it is necessary to read απ’ αυτων.

[22] For δε ὄντως, it is necessary to read δεοντως.

[23] It appears to me that after και αι ζητησεις in the original, there
are wanting the words των προνοουντων, ωσπερ.

[24] For τριας here, it is necessary to read τριαδος.

[25] The word μιας is omitted in the original.

[26] For των αγαθων, it is necessary to read τῳ αγαθῳ.

[27] For θειον νοητον, it is necessary to read θειον γεννητον; every
perpetually circulating body being thus denominated by Plato.

[28] For νοητοις here, it is necessary to read γεννητοις.

[29] For περιοδοις, it is necessary to read προοδοις.

[30] For υπ’ αλληλων it is necessary to read υπ’ αλλων.

[31] For πασης, it is necessary to read πασι.

[32] For παρα τι, it is necessary to read περατι.

[33] It is necessary here to supply the word ομοιου.

[34] For εαυτῳ, it is necessary to read εαυτο.

[35] For υλικης, it is necessary to read ολικης.

[36] It is necessary here to substitute και for το.

[37] Instead of περι αυτων, it is necessary to read περι αυτην.

[38] i.e. Phanes, or in Platonic language animal itself, subsisting at
the extremity of the intelligible order.

[39] i.e. Imitating Saturn and Phanes.

[40] The Greek scholiast observes on this part of the text of
Proclus as follows: “By the _intellectual_, Proclus means the
_ruling_ Gods; but by an immaterial and separate intellect the
whole demiurgus. And by _essence_ he means a partial hypostasis,
such as that of soul, of a dæmon, and of the intellect which is
co-ordinate to partial souls.”

[41] For νοητου here, it is necessary to read νοερου.

[42] viz. The genera of being, essence, sameness, difference, motion
and permanency.

[43] For εσχατον, it is necessary to read εχουσιν.

[44] For εν δε, if is necessary to read αι δε.

[45] By intelligible souls, we must understand partial, but undefiled
souls.

[46] For χωρικον, it is necessary to read χωριστον.

[47] Instead of περι τον κοσμον, it is necessary to read υπερ τον
κοσμον.

[48] For περιοδους, it is necessary to read προοδους.

[49] For δυαδος, it is necessary to read δυναμεως.

[50] For εξηςτηται, it is necessary to read εξηρηται.

[51] For ουτε, it is necessary to read ουκουν.

[52] For οχετον, I read οχλον.

[53] For την απογεννησιν, it is necessary to read της απογεννησεως.

[54] For γονιμον, it is necessary to read μονιμον.

[55] For αφαιρησωμεθα, it is necessary to read αφορισωμεθα.

[56] For αρρητον, it is necessary to read αρρηκτον.

[57] For αυτοτελες, it is necessary to read ατελες.

[58] For περιφορας, I read περιγραφας.

[59] For μερων, it is necessary to read Μοιρων.

[60] In the original το δε μελλον is omitted.

[61] For τα παραγοντα, it is necessary to read τα παροντα.

[62] In the original ουχ απτομενον is omitted.

[63] In the original χωριστον εστι, is wanting.

[64] For περιοδῳ, it is necessary to read προοδῳ.

[65] Vid. Sallust. de Diis et Mundo, Cap. 6.

[66] Vid. Procl. in Tim. p. 45.

[67] Vid. Jamblich. de Mysteriis Sect. I. Cap. 8.

[68] Vid. Jamblich. de Myst. Sect. I. Cap. 9.

[69] Vid. Jamblich. de Myst. Sect. I. Cap. 17.

[70] Vid. Jamblich. de Myst. Sect. I. Cap. 19.

[71] See the 5th Book of this work, in which this speech is admirably
discussed by Proclus, though not so fully as in these extracts.

[72] For μεν ειναι το παμπαν αθανατους in the original, it is necessary
to read μη ειναι κ. τ. λ.

[73] Instead of νοητον, it is requisite to read νοητῳ.

[74] This divinity is Vulcan.

[75] παρ’ ετερου is omitted in the original.

[76] The words και λυτον απλως παρ’ εαυτου και παρ’ ετερου, are omitted
in the original.

[77] For ενδοσιν, it is necessary to read ενωσιν.

[78] Κεχαρασμενην is erroneously printed for κεχαλασμενην.

[79] After την παραδειγματικην it is necessary to supply the words δια
του καλως, την δημιουργικην, which are wanting in the original.

[80] The words και λυτοι are omitted in the original.

[81] For αυτου φυσιν, it is necessary to read αυτων φυσιν.

[82] Instead of του μη θνητου, it is necessary to read του θνητου.

[83] The original has erroneously μονας instead of μονον.

[84] For μετα βουλης, I read μεταβολης. For the mundane Gods are in no
part of the Timæus represented as consulting about the fabrication of
things.

[85] i.e. Proserpine.

[86] For τελειοτατα, it is necessary to read τελειοτητα.

[87] For τα θειοτα, it is necessary to read τα θειοτατα.

[88] Iliad xx. v. 24.

[89] Instead of δια τινων εγκοσμιων, it is necessary to read δια τι των
εγκοσμιων.

[90] αθανατως is omitted in the original.

[91] For εξ ου σωματος, it is necessary to read εξω σωματος.

[92] For λυπης, it is requisite to read λοιπης.

[93] i.e. Jupiter, who is so called in this place by Proclus, because
he contains in himself by participation, the Phanes or Protogonus who
is the paradigm of the universe.

[94] For πονηρια, it is necessary to read πενια.

[95] For ιδρυαν, it is necessary to read ιδρυσιν.

[96] σαφῃ is erroneously printed for αφῃ.

[97] For και βαθεων, it is necessary to read και βαθμων.

[98] For πατρος, it is necessary to read παντος.

[99] Here also for πατρι, it is necessary to read παντι.

[100] Vid. Proclum in Tim. p. 275.

[101] These ολοτητες, according to the Platonic philosophy, have so
far as they are wholes, a perpetual subsistence, and are the spheres
of the fixed stars, the spheres of the planets, the sphere of air, the
globe on which we live, and the ocean. See more on this subject in my
Dissertation on the Philosophy of Aristotle.

[102] Vid. Procl. in Tim. p. 257 and 279.

[103] Hence, we may perceive at one view, as I have elsewhere observed,
why the sun in the Orphic hymns is called Jupiter, why Apollo is called
Pan, and Bacchus the Sun; and why the moon seems to be the same with
Rhea, Ceres, Proserpine, Juno, Venus, &c. For from this theory it
follows, that every sphere contains a Jupiter, Neptune, Vulcan, Vesta,
Minerva, Mars, Ceres, Juno, Diana, Mercury, Venus, Apollo, and in
short, every deity,--each sphere at the same time conferring on these
Gods the peculiar characteristics of its nature; so that for instance,
in the sun they possess a solar property; in the moon a lunar one; and
so of the rest.

This theory too is one of the grand keys to the theology of the Greeks;
as it shows why one God is so often celebrated by the appellations of
another; an ignorance of the cause of which led Macrobius to think that
all the Gods were nothing more than the different powers of the sun,
and has been one great source of the idle conjectures of the moderns
about the divinities of the ancients.

[104] Vid. Procl. in Tim. lib. 4. p. 263.

[105] For περιοδον, it is necessary to read προοδον.

[106] For γνωριζειν, it is necessary to read οριζει.

[107] According to the Chaldaic dogmas, as explained by Psellus, there
are seven corporeal worlds, one empyrean and the first; after this
three etherial; and then three material worlds, viz. the inerratic
sphere, the seven planetary spheres, and the sublunary region. They
also assert that there are two solar worlds; one which is subservient
to the etherial profundity; the other zonaic, being one of the seven
spheres.

[108] Viz. The supermundane Gods.

[109] It must be carefully observed, however, that this is only true of
the Gods characteristically called supermundane. For it does not apply
to the Gods who are _primarily_ intellectual, since they are above
the supermundane order, to which the sun and Apollo belong.

[110] That is, according to the Chaldæan oracles, the sun is the middle
of the empyrean, etherial, and material worlds, the two last of which,
as I have observed in a former note, receive a triple division.

[111] These verses are not in Gesner’s collection of the Orphic
fragments.

[112] These lines are from Empedocles, and in the original are as
follow:

    Ενθα κοτος τε φονος τε και αλλων εθνεα κηρων,
    Αυχμηραι τε νοσοι, και σηψεις, εργα τε ρευστα.


[113] Vide Jamblich. de Myst. lib. i. cap. 18.

[114] In Tim, lib. i. p. 51.

[115] For χορευτων in this place, it is necessary to read χορων των.

[116] Iliad. viii.

[117] Iliad. viii.

[118] In Tim. p. 48.

[119] This triad consists of Minerva, Diana, and Proserpine.

[120] The former part of this inscription is to be found in Plutarch’s
treatise of Isis and Osiris; but the latter part, viz. _the fruit
which I brought forth was the sun_, is only to be found in the above
Commentary of Proclus. The original is, ον εγω καρπον ετεκον ηλιος
εγενετο.

[121] viz. In _ether_ or _bound_, the summit of the intelligible triad.

[122] Instead of σχηματος, it is necessary to read οχηματος.

[123] For according to Plato, plants also, as having life, are animals.

[124] For δαιμονικας here, it is necessary to read ηγεμονικας.

[125] παντικα is erroneously printed in the original for μαντικα.

[126] For αιωνιοι, it is evidently necessary to read in this place
παιωνιοι.

[127] Apud Porphyr. de Abstin.

[128] It is necessary here to supply the word θειον.

[129] It is requisite to read κατ εκεινον, instead of κατ εκεινην.

[130] The word ουρανιων is omitted in the original.

[131] It is obviously necessary here for εαυτων to read εαυτου.

[132] εγγονοι is omitted in the original.

[133] This is doubtless the Sibyl, of whom Proclus also observes (in
Tim. p. 325.) “that proceeding into light, she knew her own order, and
manifested that she came from the Gods, saying I am the medium between
Gods and men.” ειδε γαρ τοι Σιβυλλα εις φως, και την ταξιν εαυτης, και
ως εκ θεων ηκει δεδηλwκεν, ειμι δ’ εγω μεση τε θεων εἰπουσα μεση τ’
ἀνθρωπων.

[134] For επιπορευοντων, it is necessary to read επιτροπευοντων.

[135] Some of the moderns, from being profoundly ignorant of this
circumstance, have stupidly supposed that the Gods of the ancients were
nothing more than dead men deified; taking for their guides on this
important subject, mere historians, philologists, and rhetoricians,
instead of philosophers.

[136] For επι της, it is necessary to read επι γης.

[137] For αποκαταστασεως, it is requisite to read αποστασεως.

[138] In the original αλογων is erroneously printed for αναλογων.

[139] This is a very ancient Egyptian doctrine. And hence Kircher in
his Oedipus Egyptiacus says that he read the following words engraved
in a stone near Memphis: _Coelum sursum, coelum deorsum, quod sursum id
omne deorsum, hæc cape et beaberis_, _i.e._ _Heaven is above and heaven
is Beneath. Every thing which is above is also beneath. Understand
this, and you will be blessed._ Conformably to this also the celebrated
Smaragdine Table, which is of such great authority with the Alchemists,
and which whether originally written or not by Hermes Trismegistus, is
doubtless of great antiquity, says that all that is beneath resembles
all that is above. But the Table itself is as follows: “Verum sine
mendacio, certum et verissimum: quod est inferius, est sicut id quod
est superius, et quod est superius, est sicut id, quod est inferius
ad perpetrandum miraculum unius rei. Et sicut res omnes fuerunt ab
uno mediatione unius, sic omnes res natæ ab hac re adoptatione. Pater
ejus est sol, mater ejus luna. Portavit illud ventus in ventre suo.
Nutrix ejus terra, pater omnis telesmi totius mundi est hic. Virtus
ejus integra est, si versa fuerit in terram. Separabis terram ab igne,
subtile a spisso suaviter cum magno ingenio. Ascendit a terra in
coelum, iterumque descendit in terram, et recipit vim superiorum et
inferiorum. Sic habebis gloriam totius mundi, ideo fugiet à te omnis
obscuritas. Hæc est totius fortitudinis fortitudo fortis, quia vincet
omnem rem subtilem, omniaque solida penetrabit. Sic mundus creatus est.
Hinc erunt adoptationes mirabiles, quarum modus hic est. Itaque vocatus
sum Hermes Trismegistus habens tres partes philosophiæ totius mundi.
Completum est quod dixi de opere solis.” i.e. “It is true without a
lie, certain, and most true, that what is beneath is like that which is
above, and what is above is like that which is beneath, for the purpose
of accomplishing the miracle of one thing. And as all things were
from one through the mediation of one, so all things were generated
from this thing by adoption [i.e. by participation.] The sun is its
father, and the moon its mother. The wind carried it in its belly.
The earth is its nurse. This is the father of all the perfection of
the whole world. Its power is entire when it is converted into earth.
You must separate the earth from the fire, the subtil from the thick
sweetly with great genius. It ascends from earth to heaven, and again
descends to the earth, and receives the power of things superior and
inferior. Thus you will have the glory of the whole world, and thus
all obscurity will fly from you. This is the strong fortitude of all
fortitude, because it vanquishes every subtile thing, and penetrates
all solid substances. Thus the world was fabricated. Hence admirable
adoptions will take place of which this is the mode. I am therefore
called Hermes Trismegistus possessing three parts of the philosophy of
the whole world. That which I have said concerning the work of the sun
is complete.”

[140] Instead of και γαρ ουρανιαν και την σεληγην Ορφευς προσηγορευσεν,
the sense requires we should read και γαρ ουρανιαν γην την σεληνην, κ.
λ.

[141] For εκ τ’ αυτου, it is necessary to read εκ τ’ αγαθου.

[142] Instead of λεγω δη τοις του Ουρανου τουδε συνοχικης μεσοτηρος, it
is requisite to read λεγω δια της του Ουρανου, κ. λ.

[143] For τριαδην, it is necessary to read τριαδαις.

[144] For νοερων, read νοητων.

[145] For αποριαν, read απειριαν.

[146] For ενιαυτον here, it is necessary to read ενιαιον.

[147] Plato, in the 10th book of the Laws, distinguishes the genus of
motions into ten species, viz. circulation about an immoveable centre,
local transition, condensation, rarefaction, increase, decrease,
generation, corruption, mutation or alteration, produced in another by
another, and a mutation produced from a thing itself, both in itself,
and in another. This last is the motion of an essence separate from
bodies, and is the motion of soul.

[148] For γονιμον here, it is necessary to read μονιμον.

[149] πατρος is erroneously printed instead of πατερες.

[150] As this is a remarkably curious Orphic fragment, and is not to be
found in Gesner’s collection of the Orphic remains, I shall give the
original for the sake of the learned reader. και τοι γε οτι ο κρονος
υπερτερος εστι του ωκεανου, δεδηλωκεν ο θεολογος παλιν λεγων· τον μεν
κρονον αυτον καταλαμβανειν τον ουρανιον ολυμπον, κᾳκει θρονισθεντα,
βασιλευειν των τιτανων· τον δε ωκεανον την ληξιν απασαν την μεσην·
ναιειν γαρ αυτον εν τοις θεσπεσιοις ρειθροις τοις μετα τον ολυμπον, και
τον εκει περιεπειν ουρανον, αλλ’ου τον ακροτατον, ως δε φησιν ό μυθος,
τον εμπεσοντα του ολυμπου, και εχει τεταγμενον.
                                                 Procl. in Tim. p. 296.

[151] For μετ’αυτου, it is necessary to read μετ’αυτης.

[152] For Θαυμαντα, it is requisite to read Θαυμαντος; and for ποντον,
ποντῳ.

[153] The original here is evidently erroneous; for it is, ου γαρ εστιν
ο φορκυς ουρανιδης αλλα ο φορκυς, ως εστι δηλον εκ της θεογονιας. For
αλλα ο φορκυς, therefore, I read αλλα ο Ωκεανος; Ocean, according to
the Theogony of Hesiod, being the progeny of Heaven and Earth.

[154] Κρονος is erroneously printed for χρονος.

[155] For της υγρας υλης ουσιας, I read της υγρας ολης ουσιας.

[156] The words ημεις δε εκομενως are omitted in the original.

[157] For διανοηθεις, it is necessary to read διακινηθεις.

[158] For αφανη here it is necessary to read εμφανη.

[159] The meaning of Proclus in asserting that the ennead proceeds
from the monad as far as to the extremities without retrogression is
as follows: The ennead, according to the Pythagoreans, circulates
all numbers within itself, and there can be no number beyond it. For
the natural progression of numbers is as far as to 9, but after it
their retrogression takes place. For 10 becomes as it were again the
monad. Thus, if from each of the numbers 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, and 19, the number 9 is subtracted, the numbers that remain
will be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And vice versa, the progression
will receive an increase by the addition of 9. For, if to each of the
numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, &c. 9 is added, the numbers produced will be 10,
11, 12, 13, &c. Likewise by subtracting from 20 twice 9, from 30 thrice
9, from 40 four times 9, from 50 five times 9 &c, the numbers 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, &c will be produced. By taking likewise from 100 eleven times 9,
we again return to the monad. And after the same manner we may proceed
to infinity. Hence it is not possible there should be any elementary
number beyond the ennead. Hence too the Pythagoreans, called it Ocean
and the Horizon, because all numbers are comprehended by and revolve
within it. On this account likewise, it was called by them Halios,
(παρα το αλιζειν) and Concord and Perseïa because it congregates
all numbers, and collects them into one, and does not permit the
conspiration of the numbers beyond it to be dissipated. Vid. Anonym. in
opere quod inscripsit τα θεολογουμενα της αριθμητικης.

[160] For εισι, it is requisite to read προεισι.

[161] προοδους is omitted in the original.

[162] In the original it is παραπετα instead of παραπετασματα.

[163] These thirty-six decadarchs are the divinities alluded to by the
Emperor Julian in his Oration to the Sun, when he says, “that the Sun
divides the zodiac into twelve powers of Gods, and each of these into
three others, so that thirty-six are produced in the whole.”

[164] This is implied by Socrates telling him that he inquires about
_great_ things.

[165] In Tim. p. 184.

[166] This is according to the psychical mode of interpreting fables.
See my translation of Sallust On the Gods and the World.

[167] This is a life pertaining to her own will; for the soul in this
case gives herself up to the will of divinity.

[168] For an account of divine fables, and specimens of the mode in
which they ought to be explained, see the Introduction to the second
Book of the Republic, in Vol. I. of my translation of Plato.

[169] Iliad. lib. viii.

[170] For the irrational soul is an _immaterial body_, or in other
words, _vitalized extension_, such as the mathematical bodies
which we frame in the phantasy; and the celestial bodies are of this
kind.

[171] It is necessary here to supply the word θειων.

[172] For τρεφει here, it is necessary to read στρεφει.

[173] For δεσμων here read θεσμων.

[174] In Tim. p. 59.

[175] Lib. ii. p. 81.

[176] i.e. Angels, dæmons, and heroes.

[177] Lib. iv. p. 240, &c.

[178] Viz. the Sun considered as subsisting in the supermundane order
of Gods.

[179] “But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our
own mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our
kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem: for _then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and
saw no evil_. But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of
heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, _we have wanted all
things_, and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.”
Jeremiah, Chap. xliv, v. 17, 18.

[180] In this dialogue, Plato assimilates the intimate form of the soul
to a winged chariot and charioteer, drawn by two horses; and says,
“that all the horses and chariots of the Gods are good, and composed of
things that are good.” In which passage, by the chariots of the Gods
are to be understood all the inward discursive powers of their souls,
which pursue the intelligence of all things, and can at the same time
equally contemplate and provide for inferior concerns. But the horses
signify the efficacy and motive vigour of these powers. And the wings
are elevating powers, which particularly belong to the charioteer, or
intellect.

[181] I. e. In the summit of that order which is called intelligible
and at the same time intellectual.

[182] ποιμαινων πραπεδεσσιν ανομματον ωκυν ερωτα.

[183] The author of these verses comprehends the triple genera that
are more excellent than man, viz. angels, dæmons and heroes, under the
appellation of illustrious heroes.

[184] It must however, be carefully observed, that this divine cause
illuminates, invigorates, and excites these circles in the most
unrestrained and impassive manner, without destroying freedom of energy
in the circles themselves, or causing any partial affection, sympathy
or tendency in illuminating deity.

[185] See a most masterly defence of the character of Achilles as a
hero in my translation of Proclus’s noble apology for Homer, in the
first Volume of my Plato.

[186] Vid. Iamblich. de vita Pythag. Cap. 2.

[187] And this essence, as is shown in the 4th book, subsists at the
summit of the intelligible and at the same time intellectual order.

[188] This forms the middle of the above-mentioned order.

[189] This forms the extremity of that order.

[190] Viz. to Saturn, who subsists at the summit of the intellectual
order.

[191] Instead of και δια το μη λεγειν, το διδον αει γινομενος, it is
necessary to read δια το μη ληγειν το διδον, αει γινομενος.

[192] For ορωμενος here, it is necessary to read ορμωμενος.

[193] Wholes whether corporeal or incorporeal are thus denominated.

[194] For συνεκτεινατο, it is necessary to read συνετεκταινετο.

[195] i.e. a circular motion.

[196] Proclus elsewhere informs us in these Commentaries, that the soul
of the world is called by Orpheus _Ippa_.

[197] i.e. Vesta.

[198] i.e. Juno.

[199] i.e. Having a good dæmon.

[200] Instead of εις δαιμων εγενετο μεγας αρχος απο παντων, it is
requisite to read εις δαιμων γενετο μεγας αρχος απαντων.

[201] For αφανη here, it is necessary to read εμφανη.

[202] For συμβολικης των θεων παρουσιας, it is requisite to read
συμβολικα της των, κ. λ.

[203] After του οντως here, it is requisite to supply οντος.

[204] The part within the brackets is wanting in the original, in which
there is evidently a defect, as the stars at the end of the proposition
indicate.

[205] Here also the part within the brackets is wanting in the original.

[206] For εαυτῳ here it is necessary to read εαυτο.

[207] It is here necessary to supply the words αφ’ εαυτου.

[208] This is asserted by Aristotle in his Posterior Analytics.

[209] In Prop. 5.

[210] For τοις αιτιοις here, it is obviously necessary to read τοις
αιτιατοις.

[211] For ων το μεν αυτην διδωσι, it is necessary to read ων το μετ’
αυτην διδωσι.

[212] From the 11th Proposition.

[213] From the 7th Proposition.

[214] ει is wanting in the original.

[215] This is asserted in the Phædrus of Plato.

[216] That if an essence is inseparable from body, it is impossible
that the energy proceeding from this essence should be separate from
body, Aristotle also demonstrates in his treatise On the Soul.

[217] The words within the brackets are wanting in the original, though
perfectly necessary to the demonstration of the Proposition. Hence, the
words ολον κινει, μερος δε κινειται, η, must be supplied.

[218] For if the whole moves, the part which is moved will at the same
time be motive.

[219] The truth of this may be exemplified in light. Thus for instance
we see many species of light; one kind emanating from the sun, another
from fire and the stars, another from the moon, and another from
the eyes of many animals. But this light though various, is every
where similar, and discovers in its operations a unity of nature. On
account of its uniformity therefore, it requires one principle and not
different principles. But the sun is the only principle of all mundane
light. And though there are many participants of light posterior to
the solar orb, yet they scatter their uniform light, through one solar
nature, property and power. But if we again seek for the principle of
light in the sun, we cannot say that the solar orb is this principle;
for the various parts of it diffuse many illuminations. There will
therefore, be many principles. But we now require one first principle
of light. And if we say that the soul of the sun generates light, we
must observe that this is not effected by her psychical multiplicity,
or she would diffuse different lights. Hence we must assert that she
generates visible by intellectual light. But again this production does
not subsist through intellectual variety, but rather through the unity
of intellect which is its flower and summit. This unity is a symbol
of that simple unity which is the principle of the universe. And to
this principle the solar intellect is united by its unity; and through
this it becomes a God. This divine unity of the sun therefore, is the
principle of the uniform light of the world, in the same manner as
simple unity and goodness is the source of intelligible light to all
intelligible natures.

[220] The imparticipable is that which is not consubsistent with a
subordinate nature. Thus imparticipable intellect is the intellect
which is not consubsistent with soul, but is exempt from it. And
imparticipable soul is the soul which is not consubsistent with body.
And so in other things.

[221] Instead of ει γαρ αγονον, it is necessary to read η γαρ αγονον.

[222] The original here is both defective and incorrect. Instead
therefore of τινος γενομενον υφ’ ου μαχεται, I read παν δε τινος
γενομενον υφ’ ου μετεχεται.

[223] Instead of και οτι αλλο in this place, it appears to me to be
necessary to read και οτι αλλως.

[224] Instead of μετ’ αυτου here, it is necessary to read μετ’ αυτο.

[225] For παρον here, it is necessary to read παραγον.

[226] Instead of προς παν here, it is necessary to read προς αιτιον.

[227] Instead of πως το διακριθεν, it is necessary to read πως το μη
διακριθεν.

[228] For το απ’ αυτου here, it is necessary to read τῳ απ’ αυτου.

[229] For το επιστρεφον, it is requisite to read το μη επιστερφον.

[230] There is a defect here in the original, which may be supplied, if
instead of εστι την απο της ουσιας προς εαυτο επιστρεπτικον we read ει
ουν εστι κατα την απο της ουσιας ενεργειαν προς εαυτο επιστρεπτικον.

[231] ουπω is omitted in the original.

[232] For μεριστην εαυτου, it is requisite to read μεριστον εαυτον.

[233] The truth of this reasoning may be evinced by the following
considerations. Every thing which is measured by time, and such is
every corporeal nature, depends on time for the perfection of its
being. But time is composed of the past, present and future. And if
we conceive that any one of these parts is taken away from the nature
with which it is connected, that nature must immediately perish. Time
therefore is so essentially and intimately united with the natures
which it measures, that their being such as it is, depends on the
existence of time. But time, as is evident, is perpetually flowing,
and this in the most rapid manner imagination can conceive. It is
evident therefore, that the natures to which it is so essential, must
subsist in a manner equally transitory and flowing; since, unless they
flowed in conjunction with time, they would be separated from it, and
would consequently perish. Hence, as we cannot affirm with propriety
of any part of time, that it _is_; since even before we can form
the assertion, the present time is no more; so with respect to all
corporeal natures, from their subsistence in time, before we can say
they exist, they lose all identity of being.

Such then is the unreal condition of every thing existing in time, or
of every thing corporeal, and entangled with matter. But this shadowy
essence of body is finely unfolded by Plotinus, in the 6th book of
his 3rd Ennead, as follows: “Being (says he) properly so called is
neither body, nor is subject to corporeal affections; but body and
its properties belong to the region of non-entity. But you will ask,
how is it possible, that visible matter should possess no real being;
that matter in which stones and mountains reside, the solid earth, and
bodies which mutually resist; since bodies which impel each other,
confess by their collision, the reality of their existence? You will
likewise ask after what manner things which neither strike against,
nor resist each other, which neither externally act, nor internally
suffer, nor are in any respect the objects of sight, viz. soul and
intellect, are to be reckoned true and real beings. We reply, that on
the contrary, things more corpulent are more sluggish and inert, as is
evident in bulky masses of earth. But whatever is less ponderous is
more moveable, and the more elevated the more moveable. Hence fire, the
most moveable of all the elements, flies as it were from a corporeal
nature. Besides, as it appears to me, whatever is more sufficient to
itself, disturbs others less and brings less inconvenience; but such
things as are more ponderous and terrene, unable from their defect of
being to raise themselves on high and becoming debile and languid,
strike and oppress surrounding bodies, by their falling ruin and
sluggish weight. Since it is evident that bodies destitute of life,
fall with molestation on any proximate substance, and more vehemently
impel and pain whatever is endued with sense. On the contrary, animated
beings, as participating more of entity, by how much the more of
being they possess, by so much the more harmless they impinge their
neighbouring bodies. Hence motion, which is a kind of life, or soul, or
an imitation of life in bodies, is more present with whatever is less
corpulent; as if more of body was necessarily produced where a defect
of being happens in a greater degree.

Again, it will more manifestly appear from passivity, that whatever
is more corpulent is more passive; earth in a greater degree than
the other elements; and the rest in a similar proportion. For some
things when divided, suddenly return to their former union, when no
obstacle prevents their conjunction. But from the section of a terrene
body, the divided portions always remain separate, as if destitute
of natural vigour, and without any inherent desire of union and
consent. Hence, they are ready by every trifling impulse, to remain
as they are impelled; to rush from the embraces of bound, and hasten
into multitude and non-entity. So that whatever becomes corporeal in
an eminent degree, as falling fast into non-entity, has but little
power of recalling itself into one. And on this account ponderous and
vehement concussions are attended with ruin, when by mutual rushing
one thing impels another. But when debility runs against debility,
the one is valid against the other, in the same manner as non-entity
rushing on non-entity. And this we think a sufficient confutation of
their opinion, who only place being in the genus of body, persuaded by
the testimony of impulses and concussions, and the phantasms perceived
through the senses, which testify that sense is the only standard of
truth. Such as these are affected in a manner similar to those in a
dream, who imagine that the perceptions of sleep are true. For sense is
alone the employment of the dormant soul; since as much of the soul as
is merged in body, so much of it sleeps. But a true elevation, and true
vigilance are a resurrection from, and not with the dull mass of body.
For indeed a resurrection with body, is only a transmigration from
sleep to sleep, and from dream to dream, like a man passing in the dark
from bed to bed. But that elevation is perfectly true, which entirely
rises from the dead weight of bodies. For these possessing a nature
repugnant to soul, possess something opposite to essence. And this is
farther evident, from their generation, and their continual flowing and
decay, which are properties entirely foreign from the nature of being
substantial and real.”

[234] ποτε is omitted in the original.

[235] It is necessary here to supply the word αυθυποστατων.

[236] For εις το αιτιωτερον, it is necessary to read εις το αιτιατον.

[237] ολον is omitted in the original.

[238] i.e. Any thing which is not universal (το τι).

[239] του οντος seems to be wanting here in the original.

[240] αιτιου is omitted in the original.

[241] i.e. As the Greek Scholiast observes in the margin of this
Proposition, from the efficacious cause of that which acts, and the
aptitude of that which suffers.

[242] The words το ποιουν ενεργειᾳ ον ο αυτο δυναμει, are wanting in
the original.

[243] The Proposition ends here in the Greek, though very erroneously;
and its conclusion forms the beginning of the next Proposition, which
should begin at the words εαν το οντως ον. But instead of εαν, we must
read παν.

[244] i.e. With natures rising into existence, or becoming to be, as
opposed to the things which are, or to beings _truly_ so called
(τα οντως οντα).

[245] Instead of παντως το οντως ον, it is doubtless necessary to read
παν το οντως ον.

[246] Instead of δει πρωτον εξ αμφοιν ειναι, it is necessary to read
δει προ του εξ αμφοιν ειναι.

[247] τι is omitted in the original.

[248] After οτι, there is a chasm in the original, and the words that
are wanting appear to be δε αϊδιοτης απειρια τις εστιν.

[249] There is evidently a very gross error here in the original which
is as follows: και γαρ εν τοις μεριστοις αι δυναμεις συναγομεναι
μεν, πολλαπλασιαζονται, μεριζομεναι δε, αμυδρουνται. For powers when
congregated are not multiplied, but united. Hence it is necessary to
read και γαρ εν τοις μεριστοις αι δυναμεις συναγομεναι μεν, ενιζονται,
μεριζομεναι δε, πολλαπλασιαζονται, και αμυδρουνται.

[250] By a strange mistake the original has απειρον here, instead of
πεπερασμενον, and in the next line πεπερασμενον instead of απειρον.

[251] For αιτιοις here it is necessary to read αιτιατοις.

[252] Hence, as all things proceed from _the ineffable_, that
which is imparticipable proceeds also from it, yet not as from a cause,
but as from that which is better than cause. The procession, therefore,
of the imparticipable from the ineffable is αρρητος εκφανσις, _an
ineffable evolution into light_.

[253] Instead of πολλα γαρ ζῃ μεν, ζῃ, και νοει, it is necessary to
read πολλα γαρ οντα μεν ουδε ζῃ, ουδε νοει.

[254] For του θανατου here, it is necessary to read του αθανατου.

[255] Instead of ως δι’ ομοιων ανομοιον, it is necessary to read ως δι’
ομοιων εις ομοιον.

[256] Instead of πως here it is necessary to read πας, and consequently
the proposition is not interrogatory as in the original.

[257] It is necessary here to supply the word μεθεξεις.

[258] It is here requisite to supply νου.

[259] For υποκειμενοις, it is necessary to read υπερκειμενοις.

[260] There are two chasms in this sentence in the original, which I
have endeavoured to supply in the translation.

[261] That the principle of all things is something beyond intellect
and being itself, was asserted by the most ancient Pythagoreans, as
well as by Plato and his best disciples, as the following citations
will abundantly evince.

And in the first place, this is evident from a fragment of Archytas,
a most ancient Pythagorean, On the Principles of Things, preserved by
Stobæus, Eclog. Phys. p. 82. and in which the following extraordinary
passage occurs: ωστ’ αναγκα τρεις ειμεν τας αρχας, ταν τε εστω των
πραγματων, και ταν μορφω, και το εξ αυτου κινατικον και αορατον
δυναμει· το δε τοιουτον ον ου μονον[262] ειμεν δει, αλλα και νοω τι
κρεσσον· νοω δε κρεσσον εστι, οπερ ονομαζομεν θεον φανερον.--i.e.
“So that it is necessary to assert that there are three principles;
_that which is [the subject] of things (or matter), form, and that
which is of itself motive, and invisible in power_. With respect to
the last of which, it is not only necessary that it should have a
subsistence, _but that it should be something better than intellect_.
But that which is better than intellect is evidently the same with
that which we denominate god.” It must here however be observed, that
by the word _god_ we are not only to understand the first cause, but
every god: for, according to the Pythagoric theology, every deity,
considered according to the characteristic of his nature, is superior
to intellectual essence. Agreeably to the above passage is that also
of Brotinus, as cited by Syrianus in Arist. Meta. p. 102, b. who
expressly asserts that the first cause νου παντος και ουσιας δυναμει
και πρεσβειᾳ υπερεχει--“surpasses every intellect and essence both in
power and dignity.” Again, according to the same Syrianus, p. 103,
b. we are informed “that the Pythagoreans called god the one, as the
cause of union to the universe, and on account of his superiority
to every being, to all life, and to all-perfect intellect. But they
denominated him the measure of all things, on account of his conferring
on all things through illumination, essence and bound; and containing
and bounding all things by the ineffable supereminence of his nature,
which is extended beyond every bound.” Των θειων ανδρων εν μεν λεγοντων
τον θεον ως ενωσεως τοις ολοις αιτιον, και παντος του οντος, και
πασης ζωης, και νου του παντελους επεκεινα. μετρον δε των παντων ως
πασι την ουσιαν, και το τελος επιλαμποντα, και ως παντα περιεχοντα,
και οριζοντα ταις αφραστοις αυτου, και παντος υπερηπλωμεναις περατος
υπεροχαις. And again, this is confirmed by Clinius the Pythagorean, as
cited by Syrianus, p. 104, in which place _præclari_ is erroneously
substituted for _Clinii_. “That which is _the one_, and _the measure
of all things_ (says he), is not only entirely exempt from bodies, and
mundane concerns, but likewise from intelligibles themselves: since he
is the venerable principle of beings, the measure of intelligibles,
ingenerable, eternal, and alone (μονον), possessing absolute dominion
(κυριωδες), and himself manifesting himself (αυτο το εαυτο δηλουν).”
This fine passage I have translated agreeably to the manuscript
corrections of the learned Gale, the original of which he has not
inserted. To this we may likewise add the testimony of Philolaus; who,
as Syrianus informs us, p. 102, knew that cause which is superior to
the two first elements of things, _bound_ and _infinite_. For (says he)
“Philolaus asserts that the deity established _bound_ and _infinite_:
by bound indeed exhibiting every co-ordination, which is more allied
to _the one_; but by infinity a nature subjected to _bound_. And prior
to these two principles he places one, and a singular cause, separated
from the universality of things, which Archainetus (Αρχαινετος)
denominates a cause prior to cause; but which, according to Philolaus,
is the principle of all things.” To all these respectable authorities
for the superessential nature of the first cause, we may add the
testimony of Sextus Empiricus himself. For in his books against the
Mathematicians (p. 425) he informs us “that the Pythagoreans placed
_the one_ as transcending the genus of things which are essentially
understood.” και δη των μεν καθ’ αυτα νοουμενων γενος υπεστησαντο
Πυθαγορικοι παιδες, ως επαναβεβηκος το εν. In which passage, by
things which are essentially understood, nothing more is meant than
intelligible essences, as is obvious to every tyro in the Platonic and
Pythagoric philosophy.

But in consequence of this doctrine of the ancients concerning _the
one_, or the first principle of things, we may discover the meaning
and propriety of those appellations given by the Pythagoreans to
unity, according to Photius and others: such as αλαμπια, σκοτωδια,
αμιξία, βαραθρον υποχθονιον, Απολλων, &c. viz. _obscurity_,
or _without illumination_, _darkness_, _without mixture_, _a
subterranean profundity_, _Apollo_, &c. For, considered as ineffable,
incomprehensible, and superessential, he may be very properly
called _obscurity_, _darkness_, and _a subterranean profundity_;
but considered as perfectly simple and one, he may with no less
propriety be denominated _without mixture_, and _Apollo_; since
Apollo signifies a privation of multitude. “For (says Plotinus) the
Pythagoreans denominated the first God _Apollo_, according to a more
secret signification, implying a negation of many.” Ennead. 5, lib.
5. To which we may add, that the epithets _darkness_ and _obscurity_
wonderfully agree with the appellation of _a thrice unknown darkness_,
employed by the Egyptians, according to Damascius,[263] in their most
mystical invocations of the first God; and at the same time afford
a sufficient reason for the remarkable silence of the most ancient
philosophers and poets concerning this highest and ineffable cause.

This silence is indeed remarkably obvious in Hesiod, when in his
Theogony he says:

    ητοι μεν πρωτιστα Χαος γενετ’,----

That is, “_Chaos was the first thing which was generated_”--and
consequently there must be some cause prior to Chaos, through which
it was produced; for there can be no effect without a cause. Such,
however, is the ignorance of the moderns, that in all the editions
of Hesiod, γενετο is translated _fuit_, as if the poet had said
that _Chaos was the first of all things_; and he is even accused by
Cudworth on this account, as leaning to the atheistical system. But
the following testimonies clearly prove, that in the opinion of all
antiquity, γενετο was considered as meaning _was generated_, and not
_was_ simply. And in the first place, this is clearly asserted by
Aristotle in lib. 3, de Cælo. “There are certain persons (says he)
who assert that there is nothing unbegotten, but that all things are
_generated_.--And this is especially the case with the followers of
Hesiod.”--εισι γαρ τινες οι φασιν ουθεν αγεννητον ειναι, αλλα παντα
γιγνεσθαι.----μαλιστα μεν οι περι τον Ησιοδον. And again, by Sextus
Empiricus in his treatise Adversus Mathemat. p. 383, edit. Steph. who
relates, that this very passage was the occasion of Epicurus applying
himself to philosophy. “For (says he) when Epicurus was as yet but a
young man, he asked a grammarian, who was reading to him this line of
Hesiod,

    Chaos of all things was the first produc’d,

from what Chaos was _generated_, if it was the first thing generated.
And upon the grammarian replying that it was not his business to teach
things of this kind, but was the province of those who are called
philosophers.--To those then, says Epicurus, must I betake myself,
since they know the truth of things.” κομιδη γαρ μειρακισκος ων, ῃρετο
τον επαναγινωσκοντα αυτῳ Γραμματιστην (η τοι μεν πρωτιστα Χαος γενετ’)
εκ τινος το χαος εγενετο, ειπερ πρωτον εγενετο. τουτου δε ειποντος μη
αυτου εργον ειναι τα τοιαυτα διδασκειν, αλλα των καλουμενων φιλοσοφων·
τοινυν εφησεν ο Επικουρος, επ’ εκεινους μοι βαδιστεον εστιν, ειπερ
αυτοι την των οντων αληθειαν ισασιν.

Simplicius too, in commenting on the passage above cited from
Aristotle, beautifully observes as follows: “Aristotle (says he) ranks
Hesiod among the first physiologists, because he sings Chaos was first
_generated_. He says, therefore, that Hesiod in a particular manner
makes all things to be generated, because that which is first is by
him said to be generated. But it is probable that Aristotle calls
Orpheus and Musæus the first physiologists, who assert that _all
things are generated, except the first_. It is, however, evident that
those theologists, singing in fabulous strains, meant nothing more by
_generation_ than the procession of things from their causes; on which
account _all of them consider the first cause as unbegotten_. For
Hesiod also, when he says that _Chaos was first generated_, insinuates
that there was something prior to Chaos, from which Chaos was produced.
For it is always necessary that every thing which is generated should
be generated from something. But this likewise is insinuated by Hesiod,
that the first cause is above all knowledge and every appellation.” (De
Cœlo, p. 147.)

[262] Instead of ον ου μονον, which is evidently the true reading,
ονομον μονον is erroneously printed in Stobæus.

[263] περι αρχων.

[264] Instead of μαλλον here, it is necessary to read ηττον.

[265] η πλειονων is omitted in the original.

[266] δυναμενον is omitted in the original.

[267] By the echo of soul, Proclus means that vital quality by which
the soul is united to the body; and which is nothing more than the
last image and shadow of the soul. The necessity of such a connecting
quality will easily appear, from considering that a truly incorporeal
nature, like that of soul, cannot be connected with body, without a
vital medium. In consequence of this we may consider with Plotinus
(Ennead. 4. lib. 4.) the animated body as resembling illuminated and
heated air. And the pains and pleasures of the body will be conversant
with this shadow of the soul.

[268] The original here is defective: for it is ενωσιν δε θειαν, απο
της μετεχο **** εαυτου υπαρξεως μεταδιδωσι τοις εφεξης. From the
version of Patricius, however, the defect may be supplied as follows:
ενωσιν δε θειαν, απο της μετεχομενης εναδος. εκαστον γαρ τουτων εαυτου
κ. τ. λ. This emendation is adopted in the above translation.

[269] For το υπερουσιον ον, it is necessary to read το υπερουσιον εν.

[270] Thus too Hippocrates, ξυρροια μια, συμπνοια μια, παντα συμπαθεα.
i.e. “_there is one conflux, one conspiration, and all things
sympathize with all_.” He who understands this will see that the
_magic_ cultivated by the ancient philosophers, is founded in a
theory no less sublime than rational and true. Such a one will survey
the universe as one great animal, all whose parts are in union and
consent with each other; so that nothing is foreign and detached;
nothing, strictly speaking, void of sympathy and life. For though
various parts of the world, when considered as separated from the
whole, are destitute of _peculiar_ life; yet they possess some
degree of animation, however inconsiderable, when viewed with relation
to the universe. Life indeed may be compared to a perpetual and
universal sound; and the soul of the world resembles a lyre, or some
other musical instrument, from which we may suppose this sound to be
emitted. But from the unbounded diffusion as it were of the mundane
soul, every thing participates of this harmonical sound, in greater
or less perfection, according to the dignity of its nature. So that
while life every where resounds, the most abject of beings may be said
to retain a faint echo of the melody produced by the mundane lyre. It
was doubtless from profoundly considering this sympathy between the
mundane soul, and the parts of the world, that the ancient philosophers
were enabled to procure the presence of divinity, and perform effects
beyond the comprehension of the vulgar. And that this was the opinion
of Plotinus, the following passage evinces: “It appears to me that
the ancient wise men, who wished to procure the presence of the Gods,
by fabricating statues and performing sacred rites, directed their
intellectual eye to the nature of the universe, and perceived that the
nature of soul was every where easy to be attracted, when a proper
subject was at hand, easily passive to its influence. But every thing
adapted to imitation, is readily passive, and is like a mirror able to
seize a certain form, and reflect it to the view.” Ennead 4. lib. 3.

[271] The word στερησεως is omitted in the original.

[272] For μετα δε παντα θεων, it is necessary to read μεστα δε παντα
θεων.

[273] There is a chasm here in the original. And it appears from the
version of Patricius, that the words και γαρ απειρος εστιν οντως
εκαστος, are wanting.

[274] In Prop. 93.

[275] The words within the brackets are wanting in the original, which
I have supplied from the version of Patricius. In the Greek therefore
it is necessary to supply the words παν το τελειον εν τοις θεοις.

[276] For εξῃρημενων it is necessary to read εξῃρημενον.

[277] Here also we must read ενιδρυμενον for ενιδρυμενων.

[278] The words αιτια γεννητικη, αλλα πασα αιτια γεννητικη ουκ εστι
ζωογονικη, are wanting in the original.

[279] The words within the brackets are wanting in the original, which
I have supplied from the version of Patricius. Hence, in the printed
Greek text it is necessary to supply the words, εν τοις θεοις αρα, η
μεν καθαροτης εστι και πρωτως αγαθον, και η φρουρα, και παν τοιουτον.

[280] For τι εν, it appears requisite to read τι ον.

[281] From the version of Patricius, it is necessary to supply the
words η προς εαυτον, η προς το κρειττον επιστρεφεται which are wanting
in the original.

[282] For νῳ here it is necessary to read νοητον.

[283] For μεθεκτου here, it is necessary to read αμεθεκτου.

[284] For τον νουν, it is necessary to read το ον.

[285] The original in the beginning of this proposition is both
defective and erroneous. For it is as follows: παν το πληθος των εναδων
των μετεχομενων υπο τινος ***** γαρ εστι των του κοσμου μερων, και
δια μεσου, και της ψυχης. From the version of Patricius, however, the
defect and error may be removed by reading παν το πληθος των εναδων των
μετεχομενων υπο τινος αισθητου σωματος εγκοσμιον εστι. επιλαμπει γαρ
των του κοσμου μερων, και δια μεσου νου, και της ψυχης.

[286] Instead of νοητον εστι τουτο here, it is necessary to read νοητον
εστι τουτῳ.

[287] For ει γαρ εαυτον νοει, πας νους, it is requisite to read ἢ γαρ
εαυτον νοει πας νους.

[288] δηλον is omitted in the original.

[289] For ακινητος here, it is requisite to read αιωνιος.

[290] From the version of Patricius, it is here necessary to supply the
words καθεν. ει γαρ.

[291] The word παντα is omitted in the original.

[292] Here also it is requisite to supply the words ομοιως παντα
νοησουσι.

[293] By an intellectual perception of all things _according to
one_, Proclus means a perception of all things in one. For all
intellectual forms are in each; so that a perception of one, is a
perception of all forms, and therefore of all things.

[294] It is here necessary from the version of Patricius to supply the
words και ακινητος, αμεριστος εστι. παν γαρ.

[295] From the version of Patricius, it is likewise necessary to supply
in this place the words κατα την αυτου ουσιαν αρα οριζει.

[296] The words within the brackets are omitted in the original, but
may be supplied from the version of Patricius by reading after το
ειναι, as follows, αει εχει εν τῳ ποιειν. η νοησις αρα εν τῳ ποειν.

[297] αμεγεθει is omitted in the original.

[298] Instead of οι δε μετ’ εκεινους, δια πλειονων, ελασσω κατα την
δυναμιν ουν ελλαμψιν εκεινοι, κ. λ. it is necessary to read οι δε μετ’
εκεινους, δια πλειονων ελασσω, κατα την δυναμεως ελλεεψιν. ει ουν
εκεινοι, κ. λ.

[299] It is here requisite to supply from the version of Patricius, the
words εκ των δευτερων διηρημενως.

[300] It is necessary here to read and supply from the version of
Patricius, πορρωτερον του ενος, ο δε νοερος αριθμος εγγυτερω του ενος.

[301] For ει here it is necessary to read η.

[302] From the version of Patricius, it is here necessary to supply the
words δει τον νουν μη μετεχοντα.

[303] The words και νους θειος are omitted in the original.

[304] θειος is omitted in the original.

[305] θειαι is omitted in the original.

[306] For των νοερων, it is necessary to read το νοερον.

[307] From the version of Patricius, it is here necessary to supply the
words και χωριστος του σωματος.

[308] The words ψυχης ου λογιζομενης are wanting in the original; but
from the version of Patricius ought to be added.

[309] Here too, the words οτι ζωης εξωθεν, are wanting in the original.

[310] The original here is defective, but may be restored to the true
sense by reading αλλα και ουσιας, ειπερ ζωης δηλον. προ γαρ ψυχης κ.λ.
instead of αλλα και ουσιας, ειπερ ζωης. δηλον γαρ ψυχης κ.λ.

[311] Instead of οτι δε και το πρωτως ζωτικον, ουκ εστι φανερον, it is
necessary to read οτι δε και το πρωτως γνωστικον ουκ εστι, φανερον.

[312] It is here requisite to supply the words κατ’ ενεργειαν δε του
χρονου μετεχουσα.

[313] The words ζωη και γνωσις are wanting in the original. And
immediately after, for ου γνωσεται, it is requisite to read ου γαρ
γνωσεται.

[314] For ανους here, it is necessary to read ανουσιος.

[315] ουχ is omitted in the original.

[316] For η διακινησις, it is necessary to read ιδια κινησις.

[317] For φυσικως here, it is necessary to read ψυχικως.

[318] There is a chasm here in the original after the word δεχομενων,
which may be supplied by reading ει γαρ θεια ηγεμονικην κ. λ.; and
γεννητικην must be substituted for γενικην.

[319] For εξῃρηται τοις χρωμενοις αυτῳ ψυχης, it is necessary to read
εξηρτηται της χρωμενης αυτῳ ψυχης.

[320] Instead of ωστε και η μερικη ψυχη, και το αιτιον αρα του οχηματος
αυτης, it appears to me to be necessary to read ωστε και το αιτιον της
μερικης ψυχης, και αρα του οχηματος αυτης.

[321] There is a chasm here in the original, which as it is not
supplied in the version of Patricius, I have filled up by conjecture.
Hence, I have added the words καθαραν, ανατρεχει εις την αυτης αρχαιαν
φυσιν. το γαρ οχημα.

[322] For τας ψυχας here, it is necessary to read των ψυχων.

[323] For εαυτων here, the sense as well as the version of Patricius,
require that we should read εαυτης.

[324] That is, not through the medium of dæmoniacal and divine souls.

[325] From the version of Patricius, it is here necessary to supply the
words και του ποτε νοουντος.

[326] The barbarous version of Morbeka has _insinuare_ here,
but the word employed by Proclus was, I have no doubt, παρεισαγειν
_adducere_.

[327] “Differenter elucidata.” So Morbeka; _differenter_ being
doubtless his version of διαφεροντως.

[328] “Summa enim totorum.” This I suppose was in the Greek ολως γαρ.

[329] “Separavit ejus epistasiam, id est superstationem.” So Morbeka.

[330] Propter meliorem vicinitatem ipsi animam, in Morbeka’s
translation, should doubtless be, propter vicinitatem hujus animæ ad
meliorem naturam.

[331] Accessibus in Morbeka, was I suppose in the original εφοδοις,
expositions or discussions.

[332] “Quia est utrumque,” with Morbeka.

[333] “Qualificat,” with Morbeka.

[334] “Et sunt tria hæc differentia ab invicem, faciens, quod fit,
actio.” So Morbeka. But _actio_ was doubtless in the original
ποιησις.

[335] “Operatio,” with Morbeka; in the original ενεργεια.

[336] ψυχικην, with Morbeka _animalem_.

[337] ολως; _totaliter_ Morbeka.

[338] _aspirantur_ in Morbeka, should evidently be _inspirantur_.

[339] In Morbeka opportunitatem.

[340] “Sed et in hoc omni.” So Morbeka.

[341] “Ubi autem in corporeis penitus.” So Morbeka.

[342] “Intellectu participante necessitati corporum.” _Participante_
here is perhaps an error of the transcriber; for Morbeka I have no
doubt wrote _principante_.

[343] “Velut lumen Sol,” should be _velut lumen sole_.

[344] Iram is omitted here in the version of Morbeka.

[345] “Dicens quod neque audimus, circum nihil, neque videmus.” So
Morbeka.

[346] Virtutes in Morbeka, i.e. δυναμεις in the original.

[347] “Multam habere partem.” So Morbeka.

[348] In Morbeka, sobrietate meliorem.

[349] Divinæ partis. So Morbeka.

[350] In Morbeka, “obtinetur et ab aliorum regnante causa.”

[351] In Morbeka _captat_ instead of _copulat_.

[352] “Quicunque autem pacis opera intelligentes reverendi fient,
sortis fatalem alam effugiunt.” So Morbeka; in which, for _pacis_ read
_patris_, and for _alam_, _aleam_. This oracle in the original is as
follows:

    Νοησασαι τα εργα του πατρος
    Μοιρης ειμαρμενης το πτερον φευγουσιν αναιδες.

See my Collection of Chaldæan Oracles in the Monthly Magazine.

[353] In Morbeka, _concupiscentiæ_; but in the Greek it was
doubtless επιθυμιας. This word as used by Plato and Aristotle,
signifies an appetite of the soul directed to the possession and
enjoyment of eternal good.

[354] “Et nondum purgatus illud,” in Morbeka, i.e. illum oculum.

[355] Morbeka’s version of this part is as follows: “Omnis igitur anima
secundum quod virtute participat, et quod est liberam esse: secundum
quod autem malitia et debilitate et eo quod est servire aliis,” &c.
But it should be, conformably to the above version; Omnis igitur anima
secundum quod virtute participat, et quod est, liberam esse; secundum
quod autem malitia et debilitate, et eo quod non est, servire aliis.

[356] This is barbarously expressed in the version of Morbeka, as
follows, “et servire quidem aut desuper principatum, aut desuptus.”

[357] In the version of Morbeka, “quæ sine causa solam cognoscentem
ipsius quia veritatem.”

[358] In Morbeka, “agibilia;” but in the Greek, I have no doubt, τα
πρακτα.

[359] In Morbeka rejungentem, but I read adaptantem.

[360] In Morbeka “_solvere_,” instead of _scire_.

[361] “Et totaliter agibilium politicam.” So Morbeka. This in the
original was, I suppose, και ολως τοις πρακτοις τῃν πολιτικην.

[362] Instead of “quia et aliis animalibus necesse partibus entibus
omnes et facere, sed et pati,” as in Morbeka, it is necessary to read,
in order to make sense of the passage, quia et aliis animalibus necesse
partibus entibus, non modo et facere, sed et pati.

[363] This in Morbeka is, “neque rursum sequestrare animam a dominis
electionum.”

[364] Morbeka has _quia_ here instead of _nisi_.

[365] _Quando_ in Morbeka, instead of _aliquando_.

[366] Here too Morbeka has _quando_ instead of _aliquando_.

[367] “Inecferribile in universum.” Morbeka.

[368] Morbeka has _differentem_ here, instead of _indifferentem_.

[369] The words _ad seipsam convertitur_, are omitted by Morbeka.

[370] Morbeka has _directionem_, but the original was I have no
doubt κατορθωσιν.

[371] του ουρανου υπεραστρονομουσα. So Plato.

[372] In decisione lineæ. So Morbeka.

[373] The Greek of this, agreeably to my translation, was I have no
doubt τ’ αγαθον μονον εξηρημενον ειναι.

[374] “Mediam habens notitiam, et solummodo scientiam, et eorum qui
non totaliter.” So Morbeka; but the sense requires the following
emendation: Mediam habens notitiam, et solummodo scientiam, et eorum
qui totaliter, et eorum qui non totaliter.

[375] Morbeka has αυτοπεριγραπτον; but it should obviously be
αυτοαπεριγραπτον.

[376] Morbeka has _contra_ here, instead of _nihilominus_.

[377] _Superessentialiter_ is omitted here in the version of
Morbeka.

[378] “Neque enim tua fictio,” should be, neque enim si tua factio,
(i.e. ars mechanica).

[379] See Plutarch’s admirable treatise, concerning those who are
slowly punished by divinity; from which Proclus has derived much in
what follows.

[380] The Pseudo-Dionysius, the Areopagite, in his treatise On the
Divine Names has evidently taken what follows from this passage of
Proclus: ουκ αρα ουδε εν αγγελοις εστι το κακον, αλλα κολαζειν τους
αμαρτανοντας εισι κακοι. τουτῳ γουν τῳ λογῳ και οι σωφρονισται των
πλημμελουντων κακοι. και των ιερεων οι τον βεβηλον των θειων μυστηριων
απειργοντες. καιτοι ουδε το κολαζεσθαι κακον, αλλα το αξιον γενεσθαι
κολασεως. i.e. “Neither, therefore, is there evil in angels, unless
it should be said they are evil because they punish offenders. For
the same reason, however, the castigators of those that act wrong,
are evil. And in a similar manner those priests are evil who prohibit
the profane from divine mysteries. Though indeed it is not evil to
be punished, but to deserve to be punished.” The reader who peruses
the above-mentioned treatise of this Dionysius will find that he has
extracted largely from the present work of Proclus.

[381] In his 2d. Epistle.

[382] διεξοδικως is omitted in the original.

[383] προοδον is omitted in the original.

[384] Viz. self-subsistent superessential natures; for to these the
αυτο, or _itself_ primarily belongs. The next to these are
intellects. Those in the third rank, are souls. Those in the fourth,
the natures that are divided about bodies. And those in the fifth and
last rank are bodies.

[385] Viz. _the one_, and matter.

[386] μη is wanting in the original.

[387] _The good itself_ is prior to being. Nothing or non-being is not
that which is most distant from _the good_; for it is that in which
the procession of being ends, but that which is most distant from _the
good_ is _evil itself_. Hence, _evil itself_ is posterior to non-entity.

[388] For πολυαρατον, it is necessary to read πολυορατον.

[389] For περι here, it is requisite to read παρα.

[390] μοχθηρας is omitted in the original.

[391] For the proper parts of a self-motive whole, are also self-motive.

[392] For απ’ αιτιας here, it is necessary to read απεναντιως.

[393] For το μεν δυναμενον in this place, it is necessary to read, το
μη δυναμενον.

[394] For συμμετριᾳ here, it is necessary to read ασυμμετριᾳ.

[395] viz. angels, dæmons and heroes.

[396] Proclus here alludes to one of the Chaldæan oracles.

[397] The first effable subsists in the god Phanes, or the extremity of
the intelligible order.

[398] See this explained in the notes on my translation of the
Parmenides of Plato.

[399] The _Iynx, Synoches, and Teletarchæ_ of the Chaldæans,
compose that di