This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


^i-ai 


^  < 


^ 

'■  ^  ' 

_^  !!*?^:«5r  L 

J^ 

^ 

^^- 

T^^^- 


<:r^ 


■ 


THIS  BOOK 

FORMS  PART  OF  THE 

OKICINAL  LIBRARY 

OF  THE 

UNIVERSITY  OF  MICHIGAN 

BOUGHT  IN  EUROPE 
1838  TO  1839 

Br 
ASA  CRAY 


Digitized  by 


Go 


~f'  ■■*.l.  ■■ 


I 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


'7-'S 


THE 

SIX  BOOKS  OF  PROCLUS 

ON  THE  THEOLOGY  OF  PLATO, 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GjftEEK ; 

TO    WHICH 

A  SEVENTH  BOOK  IS  ADDED, 

IN  ORDER  TO  SUPPLY  THE  DEnCIBXCY  OF  ANOTHER  BOOK  ON  THIS  SUBJECT, 

WHICH  WAS  WRITTEN  BT  PROCLVS,  BUT  SINCE  LOST. 
ALSO,   A    TRANSLATION    FROM   THE    GREEK    OF 

PROCLUS'  ELEMENTS  OF  THEOLOGY. 

TO  ^HICR  ABE  ADDED 

A  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  TREATISE  OF  PROCLUS, 

0Dn  PtottiDence  ann  iTate; 

A  TRANSLATION  OF  EXTRACTS   FROM  HIS  TREATISE,  ENTITLED, 

TEN  DOUBTS  CONCERNING  PROVIDENCE; 

AND 

A  TBANSLATION  OF  EXTRACTS  FROM  HIS    TREATISE 
ON  THE  SUBSISTENCE  OF  EVIL  | 

As  preserved  in  the  Bibliotkeca  Gr.  of  Fabricim. 


BY  THOMAS  TAYLOR, 


A>Ji  Ttn,  trrt,  *eu  T»f  tyytKif  Xoyy, 

2f»(,  Mtu  9(01,  fifcmm  A«v<rr»yn$  w«iih).  Euripides, 

There  are,  there  are,  though  laugh  the  scoSSer  may, 
Jove  aiid  die  Gods,  who  mortal  ills  survey. 

umf  nvt  (mi  toXAoi,  uu  xugioi  «oXXm.  Corinth.  I.  Cap.  8.  v.  5. 

As  there  be  GoD«  many,  and  Lords  many. 

TWO  VOLUMES.  :".'-• 

VOL.  L  ."rj. 

LONDON: 

PRINTED  FOR  THE  AUTHOR, 

By  J.  J.  Falpy,  Tooke^s  Court,  Chancery  Latu. 

fiXD  SOLD  BY  MESSRS.  LAW  AND  Co.;    LONGMAN  AND  Co.;   BALDWIN  AND  Co.; 

AND  ALL  OTHER  BOOKSELLERS. 


18l6r 

Digitized  by  V3OOQ IC 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TO 


WILLIAM   MEREDITH,   ESQUJRE^ 

yrno  with  a  firmness  and  munificence, 

UNPARALLELED  IN  MODERN  TIMES, 
HAS  PATRONIZED 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  PLATO  AND  ARISTOTLE, 

AND  ITS  ENGLISH  PROMULGATOR; 

AS  AN  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  OF  NO  COMMON  ESTEEM  FOR  HIS  CHARACTER, 

AND  A  TRIBUTE  OF  THE  WARMEST  GRATTTDDE  FOR  HIS  PATRONAGE, 

THIS    WORK    IS    DEDICATED 

BY     THE    TRANSLATOR, 

THOMAS  TAYLOR. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


I  REJOICE  in  the  opportunity  which  is  afforded  me  of  presenting  the  truly  philosophic  reader,  in 
the  present  work,  with  a  treasure  of  Grecian  theology ;  of  a  theology,  which  was  first  mystically 
and  symbolically  promulgated  by  Orpheus,  afterwards  disseminated  enigmatically  through  images 
b^  Pythagoras,  and  in  the  last  place  scientifically  unfolded  by  Plato  and  his  genuine  disciples.  The 
peculiarity  indeed,  of  this  dieology  is,  that  it  is  no  less  scientific  than  sublime ;  and  that  by  a  geo- 
metrical series  of  reasoning  originating  from  the  most  self-evident  truths,  it  developes  all  the  deified 
progressions  fi-om  the  ineffable  principle  of  things,  and  accurately  exhibits  to  our  view  all  the  Imki 
of  that  golden  cham  of  which  deity  is  the  one  extreme,  and  body  the  other. 

That  also  which  is  most  admirable  and  laudable  in  this  theology  is,  that  it  produces  in  the  mind 
properly  prepared  for  its  reception  the  most  pure,  holy,  venerable,  and  exalted  conceptions  of  the 
great  cause  of  all.  For  it  celebrates  this  immense  principle  as  something  superior  even  to  being 
itself;  as  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things,  of  which  it  is  nevertheless  ineffiibly  the  source,  and  does 
not  therefore  tbuik  fit  to  connumerate  it  with  any  triad,  or  order  of  beings.  Indeed,  it  even  apologises 
for  attempting  to  give  an  appropriate  name  to  this  principle,  which  is  in  reality  inefiable,  and 
ascribes  the  attempt  to  the  imbecility  of  human  nature,  which  striving  intently  to  behold  it,  gives 
the  appellation  of  the  most  simple  of  its  conceptions  to  that  which  is  beyond  all  knowledge  and  all 
conception.  Hence  it  denominates  it  the  one,  and  the  good;  by  the  former  of  these  names  indica- 
ting its  transcendent  simplicity,  and  by  the  latter  its  subsistence  as  the  object  of  desire  to  all  beings. 
For  all  things  desire  good.  At  the  same  time  however,  it  asserts  that  these  appelhitions  are  in  reality 
nothmg  more  than,  the  parturitions  of  the  soul  which  standing  as  it  were  in  the  vestibules  of  the 
Prod.  '  Vol.  I.  6 


Digitized  by 


Google , 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

adytum  of  deity,  announce  nothing  pertaining  to  the  ineffable,  but  only  indicate  her  spontaneous 
tendencies  towards  it,  and  belong  rather  to  the  immediate  offspring  of  the  first  God,  than  to  the  first 
itself. 

Hence,  as  the  result  of  this  most  venerable  conception  of  the  supreme,  when  it  ventures  not 
only  to  denominate  the  inefiable,  but  also  to  assert  something  of  its  relation  to  other  things,  it  con- 
siders this  as  pre-eminently  its  peculiarity,  that  it  is  the  principle  of  principles ;  it  being  necessary 
diat  the  characteristic  property  of  principle,  after  the  same  mamier  as  other  things,  should  not  begin 
firom  multitude,  but  should  be  collected  into  one  monad  as  a  summit,  and  which  is  the  principle  of 
all  principles.  Conformably  to  this,  Proclus,  in  the  second  book  of  this  work'  says,  with  match- 
less magnificence  of  diction  :  '^  Let  us  as  it  were  celebrate  the  first  God,  not  as  establishing  the 
earth  and  the  heavens,  nor  as  giving  subsistence  to  souls,  and  the  generation  of  all  animals ;  for  he 
produced  these  indeed,  but  among  the  last  of  things  ;  but  prior  to  these,  let  us  celebrate  him  as 
unfolding  mto  light  the  whole  intelligible  and  intellectual  genus  of  Gods,  together  with  all  the 

fupermundane  and  mundane  divinities as   the  God  of  all  Gods,  the  unity  of  all  unities, 

and  beyond  the  first  adyta,* — as  more  ineffable  than  all  silence,  and  more  unknown  than  all 
e,— as  holy  among  the  holies,  and  concealed  in  the  intelligible  Gods.'* 


The  scientific  reasoning  from  which  this  dogma  is  deduced  is  the  following  :  As  the  principle  of 
dl  things  is  ike  one,  it  is  necessary  that  the  progression  of  beings  should  be  continued,  and  that  no 
mu^uum  should  intervene  either  in  incorporeal  or  corporeal  natures.  It  is  also  necessary  that  every 
thing  which  has  a  naturid  progression  should  proceed  through  similitude.  In  consequence  of  this, 
it  is  likewise  necessary  that  every  producing  principle  should  generate  a  number  of  the  same  order 
with  itself^  viz.  nature,  a  natural  number ;  sotU,  one  that  is  psychical  (i.  e.  belonging  to  soul) ;  and 
intellect,  an  intellectual  number.  For  if  whatever  possesses  a  power  of  generating,  generates  simi- 
lars prior  to  dissimilars,  every  cause  must  deliver  its  own  form  and  characterbtio  peculiarity  to  its 
progeny ;  and  before  it  generates  that  which  gives  subsistence  to  progressions  far  distant  and 
separate  firom  its  nature,  it  must  constitute  diings  proximate  to  itself  according  to  essence,  and  con- 
joined with  it  through  similitude.  It  is  therefore  necessary  firom  these  premises,  since  there  is  one 
umty  the  principle  of  die  universe,  that  this  unity  should  produce  from  itself,  prior  to  every  thing 
else,  a  multitude  of  natures  characterized  by  unity,  and  a  number  the  most  of  all  things  allied  to 
its  cause ;  and  tliese  natures  are  no  other  than  the  Gods. 

According  to  this  theology  tlierefore,  from  the  immense  principle  of  priikciple^^  in  which  all 
'  P.  139.  f  L  e.  The  highest  order  of  intelligibles. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION.  «i 

tfaings  causally  subsist,  absorbed  in  superesseotial  light,  and  involved  in  unfathomable  depths,  a 
beauteous  progeny  of  principles  proceed,  ail  largely  partaking  of  the  ineffable,  all  stamped  widi  the 
occult  characters  of  deitjr,  all  possessing  an  overflowing  fulness  of  good.  From  these  dazzling  sum- 
mits, these  ineffable  blossoms,  these  divine  propagations,  being,  life,  intellect,  soul,  nature,  and  body 
depend;  monads  suspended  from  unities,  deified  natures  proceeding  from  deities.  Each  of  these 
monads  too,  is  the  leader  of  a  series  which  extends  from  itself  to  the  last  of  diings,  add  which  while 
it  proceeds  from,  at  the  same  time  abides  in,  and  returns,  to  its  leader.  And  all  these  principles 
and  all  their  progeny  are  finally  centered  and  rooted  by  their  summits  in  the  first  great  iA-compre« 
bending  one.  Thus  all  beings  proceed  from,  and  are  comprehended  in  the  first  being ;  all  intel^ 
lects  emanate  from  one  first  intellect ;  all  souls  from  one  first  soul ;  all  natures  blossom  from  otie 
first  nature ;  and  aU.  bodies  proceed  from  the  vital  and  luminous  body  of  die  world.  .  And  lastly,  all 
these  great  monads  are  comprdiended  in  the  first  one,  from  which  both  they  and  all  their  depending 
series  are  unfolded  into  light.  Hence  this  first  one  is  truly  the  unity  of  unities,  the  monad  of 
monads,  the  principle  of  principles,  the  God  of  Gods,  one  and  all  things,  and  yet  one  prior  to  aH. 

No  objections  of  any  weight,  no  arguments  but  such  as  are  sophistical,  can  be  urged  against  this 
most  sublime  theory  which  is  so  congenial  to  the  unperverted  conceptions  of  die  human  mind,  that 
it  can  only  be  treated  with  ridicule  and  contempt  in  degraded,  barren,  and  barbarous  ages.  Igno^ 
ranee  and  priestcraft,  however,  have  hitherto  conspired  to  defame  diose  inestimable  wori^s,'  in 
which  this  and  many  odio*  grand  and  important  dogmas  can  alone  be  found ;  and  the  theology  of 
the  Greeks  has  been  attacked  with  all  the  insane  fury  of  ecclesiastical  zeal,  and  all  die  imbecil  flashes 
of  mistaken  wit,  by  men  whose  conceptions  on  the  subject,  like  those  of  a  man  between  sleeping 
mid  waking,  have  been  turbid  and  wild,  phantastic  and  confused,  preposterous  and  vain. 

Indeed,  that  after  the  great  incomprehensible  cause  of  all,  a  divine  multitude  subsists,  co-operating 
with  this  cause  in  the  production  and  government  of  the  universe,  has  always  been,  and  is  still  admitted 
by  all  nations,  and  all  religions,  however  much  they  may  differ  in  dieir  opinions  respecting  the  nature 
of  the  subordinate  deities,  and  the  veneration  which  is  to  be  paid  to  them  by  man ;  and  however 
barbarous  the  conceptions  of  some  nations  ou  this  subject  may  be  when  compared  with  those  of 
others.  Hence,  says  the  elegant  Maximus  Tyrius,  *'  You  will  see  one  according  law  and  assertion 
in  all  the  earth,  that  there  is  one  God,  the  king  and  father  of  all  things,  and  many  Gods,  sons  of  God, 
ruling  together  with  him.  This  the  Greek  says,  and  the  Barbarian  says,  the  inhabitant  of  the  Continent^ 

'  Viz.  the  present  and  other  workt  of  Produs,  together  with  those  of  Plotinus,  Porphyry,  Jamblichus, 
Syrianus,  Ammonius,  Damascius,  Olympiodorus^  and  SimpUcius. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


xii  INTBODUCTIOK. 

and  he  who  dwells  near  the  sea,  the  wise  and  the  unwise.  And  if  you  proceed  as/ar  as  to  the  utmost 
shores  of  the  ocean,  there  also  there  are  Gods,  rising  very  near  to  some,  and  setting  very  near  to 
others." '  This  dogma,  too,  is  so  far  from  heing  opposed  hy  either  the  Old  or  New  Testament,  tliat 
it  is  admitted  by  both,  though  it  forbids  the  religious  veneration  of  the  inferior  deities^  and  enjoins 
the  worship  of  one  God  alone,  whose  portion  is  Jacob,  and  Israel  the  line  of  his  inheritance.  The 
following  testimonies  willj  I  doubt  not,  convuice  the  liberal  reader  of  the  truth  of  this  assertion. 

In  die  first  place  it  appears  from  the  d2d  chapter  of  Deuteronotoy,  v.  8.  in  the  SeptuaginI 
version,  that  **  the  division  of  the  nations  was  made  accerJUng  to  the  number  of  the  angeb  of 
God,**  and  not  according  to  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel,  as  the  present  Hebrew  text 
asserts.  This  reading  was' adopted  by  the  most  celebrated  fathers  of  the  Christian  church,  such  as,i 
among  the  Greeks,  Origen,  Basil,  and  Chrysostom,  and  among  the  Latins,  Jerom  and  Gr^pr^'.. 
That  this  too,  is  the  genuine  reading,  is  evident  from  ^  4th  chapter  of  the  same  book  and  the  ]9tk 
verse,  in  which  it  is  said,  ''  And  lest  thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  heaven,  and  when  thou  seest  the 
sun  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  even  all  the  host  of  heaven,  shouldst  be  driven  to  worship  them, 
and  serve  them,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  divided  unto  all  nations  under  the  whole  heaven/* 
Here  it  is  said  that  the  stars  are  divided  to  all  the  nations,  which  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the 
nations  were  divided  according  to  the  number  of  the  stars  ^  the  Jewish  legislator  at  the  same  time, 
considering  his  own  nation  as  an  exception,  and  as  being  under  the  government  of  the  God  of  Israel 
alone.  For  in  the  following  verse  it  is  added,  ^*  But  the  Lord  hath  taken  you  (i.  e.  the  Jews),,  and 
brought  you  forth  out  of  the  iron  furnace,  even  out  of  Egypt,  to  be  unto  him  a  people  of  inlieri- ' 
tance,  asj^e  are  to  this  day."  By  the  angels  of  God  therefore  (in  Deuteron.32.  v.  8.)  the  stars  are 
signified ;  and  these  in  the  same  book  (chapter  !?•  v»  3.)  are  expressly  called  Gods;  ''  And  hath 
gone  and  served  other  Gods,  and  worshipped  them,  either  the  sun  or  moon,  or  any  of  the  host  of 
heaven,  which  I  have  not  commanded"  In  the  3d  chapter  idso,  and  tiie  £4tk  verse,  it  is  implied 
in  the  question  which  is  there  asked,  that  the  God  of  the  Jews  is  superior  to  all  the  celestial  and 
terrestrial  Gods  :  ''  For  what  God  is  there  in  heaven,  or  in  earth,  that  can  do  according  to  thy 
works,  and  according  to  thy  might  r"  As  the  attention  of  the  Jews  was  solely  confined  to  the 
worship  of  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  they  but  little  regarded  the  powers  whom  they 
conceived  to  be  subordinate  to  this  God,  and  considering  all  of  them  as  merely  the  messengers  of. 
their  God,  they  gave  them  the  general  appellation  of  angels ;  though  as  we  shall  shordy  prove  from 

hip,  Tavr»  mm  «  iXXinr  X«yt<,  xat  •  /Sa^/S»go;  Xiyct,  xai  e  nwu^wmt  Hat  o9a\»rvt9(^  xctt  o  o-ofof  %mt  o  aC9^»  Kai  ivt  rev  itnuavw  iX9i^ 

T  t  n!«v»;,  iMMt  liM,  To»;  fjui  avto-xtw;  <*YX^^  |uu»xo(,  t»k  )'  M»Tc»)(;e|uufo«.  Dissert.  I.  Edit.  Pnnc, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


iKTBODUCTIOir.  xiii 

the  testimony  of  the  Ajpostle  Paid,  they  were  not  consistent  in  confonndmg  angiU  pn>perly  so 
called  with  Gods. 

But  that  the  stars  are  not  called  Gods  by  the  Jewish  legislator  as  thii^  inanimate  like  status 
fashioned  of  wood  or  stone,  is  evident  from  what  is  said  in  the  book  of  Job^  and  the  Psidms : 
*'  Behold  even  the  moon  and  it  sbineth  not,  yea  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  his  sight.  How  much 
less  man  that  is  a  worm,  and  the  son  of  man  which  is  a  worm  P'  (Job.  xxv.  v.  5»  and  6.)  And, 
''  When  I  consider  diy  heavens,  the  work  of  thy  fingers,  the  moon  and  the  stars  which  thou  hast 
ordained  ;  what  is  man  that  thou  art  mmdful  of  him,  and  the  son  of  man  that  thou  visitest  him.'^ 
(Psalm  viii.  v.  3.  and  4.)  It  is  evident  therefore  from  diese  passages,  that  the  heavens  and  the  stars 
are  more  excellent  than  man;  but  nothing  inanimate  can  be  more  excellent  than  that  which  is 
animated.  To  which  may  be '  added,  that  in  the  following  verse  David  says,  that  God  has  made 
man  a  little  lower  than  the  angels.  But  the  stars,  as  we  have  shown,  were  considered  by  Moses  as 
angels  and  Gods ;  and  consequently,  they  are  aniniated  beings,  and  superior  to  man. 

Farther  still,  in  the  Septuagint  version  of  verse  the  4th  of  the  19th  Psalm,  God  is  said  to  have 
placed  kis  tabernacle  in  the  sun,  (fv  r^  i)XMp  iitro  ro  trKifivwiiM  atnov)  which  is  doubdess  the  genuine 
reading,  and  not  that  of  the  vulgar  translation,  ^'  In  them  (i.  e.  the  heavens)  bath  he  set  a  tabemt- 
cle  for  the  sun.''  For  this  is  saying  nothing  more  of  the  sun  than  what  may  be  said  of  any  of 
the  other  stars,  and  produces  in  us  no  exalted  conception  of  the  artificer  of  the  universe.  But  to  say 
that  God  dwells  in  the  sun,  gives  us  a  magnificent  idea  both  of  that  glorious  luminary,  and  the  deity 
who  dweUs  enshrined,  as  it  were,  in  dazzling  splendor.  To  which  we  may  add  in  cofifirmation  of 
this  version  of  the  Septuagint,  that  in  Psalm  xi.  v.  4.  it  is  said,  ^'  The  Lord's  throne  is  in  heaven" 
And  again  in  Isaiah  Ixvi.  v.  1.  ''  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  heaven  is  my  throne,  and  the  earth  is  my 
footstool."  If  therefore  the  heavens  are  the  throne,  and  the  sun  the  tabernacle  of  deity,  they  must 
evidently  be  deified.  For  nothing  can  come  into  immediate  contact  with  divinity  without  bang 
divine.  Hence,  says  Simplicius,'  ''  That  it  is  connascent  with  the  human  soul  to  think  the  celes* 
tial  bodies  are  divine,  is  especially  evident  firom  those,  (the  Jews)  who  look  to  theses  bodies  through 
preconceptions  about  divine  natures.  For  they  ako  say  that  the  heavens  are  the  habitation  of  God, 
and  the  throne  of  God,  and  are  alone  sufficient  to  reveal  the  glory  and  excellence  of  God  to  those 
who  are  worthy ;  than  which  assertions  what  can  be  more  venerable  ?'' 

*  In  his  commentary  on  the  second  book  of  Aristotle's  treutise  Ou  the  Heavens. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XIV  tNTBODVCTION. 

Indeed,  Chat  tbe  heaveiu  are  not  the  inaaimate  throne  and  residence  ef  deitj,  is  also  evident  from 
the  assertion  in  Ae  l^th  Psalm,  '*  That  the  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God."  For  R.  Moses, 
a  very  teamed  Jew,  says,*  ''  that  the  word  saphar,  to  declare  or  set  forth,  is  never  attributed  to 
thinga  inanimate."  Hence  he  concludes, ''  that  the  heavens  are  not  without  some  soul,  which,  says  he, 
is  no  other  than  that  of  those  blessed  intelligences,  who  govern  the  stars,  and  dispose  diem  into  such 
letters  as  God  hat  ordained ;  declaring  unto  us  men  by  means  of  this  writing,  what  events  we  are 
to  expect.  And  hence,  this  same  writing  is  called  by  all  the  ancients  chetab  hamelachim,  that  is  to 
fay,  the  writing  of  the  angeb" 

The  Gods  therefore,  which  were  distributed  to  all  the  nations  but  the  Jews,  were  the  sun  and 
moon,  and  the  other  celestial  bodies,  yet  not  so  far  as  they  are  bodies,  but  so  fiu*  as  they  are  ani- 
snated  beings.  Hence  the  Hebrew  prophets  never  reprobate  and  prohibit  the  worship  of  the  stars  . 
as  things  which  neither  see,  nor  hear,  nor  understand,  as  they  do  the  worship  of  statues.  Thus  in 
Deuteron.  iv.  and  28.  ''  And  there  ye  shall  serve  Gods  die  work  of  men's  hands,  wood  and  stone, 
which  neither  see  nor  hear,  nor  eat^  nor  smell."  And  the  Psalmist,  ''  They  have  a  mouth  but 
apeak  not,  &c/'  These,  and  many  other  things  of  the  like  kind  are  said  by  the  prophets  of  the 
Jews  against  the  worship  of  images  and  statues,  but  never  of  the  sun  and  moon,  and  the  other 
•tars.  But  when  they  blame  the  worship  of  die  heavenly  bodies,  they  assign  as  the  cause 
that  the  people  of  Israel  are  not  attributed  to  them  as  other  nations  are,  in  consequence  of 
being  the  inheritance  of  the  God  that  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  out  of  die  house 
of  bondage.  This  is  evident  from  the  before  cited  passage  in  the  4th  chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  in 
which  it  is  said  that  the  stars  are  divided  unto  all  nations  under  the  whole  heaven  but  the  Jews. 

Indeed,  as  the  emperor  Julian*  justly  observes,  **  unless  a  certain  ethnarchic  God  presides  over 
every  nation,  and  uuder  this  God  there  is  an  angel,  a  daemon,  and  a  peculiar  genus  of  souls,  sub- 
•ervient  and  minbtont  to  more  excellent  natures,  from  which  the  difference  in  laws  and  manners 
arises,-*unle8s  this  is  admitted,  let  it  be  shown  by  any  other  how  this  difference  is  produced.  For 
it  is  not  sufficient  to  say,  ''God  said^ and  it  was  done,"  but  it  is  requisite  that  the  natures  of 
things  whidi  are  produced  should  accord  with  the  mandates  of  divinity.  But  I  will  explain  more 
clearly  what  I  mean.  God,  for  instance,  commanded  that  fire  should  tend  upward,  and  earthly 
masses  downward ;  is  it  not  therefore  requisite,  in.order  that  the  mandate  of  God  may  be  accom* 

>*  >  See  Gaffarei's  Unheard-of  Curiosities,  p.  391.  ^  Apud  Cyril. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION.  XT* 

pUsbed>  that  Uie  foroier  should  be  lights  and  the  latter  heavy  i  Thus  ako  in  a  similar  Hftannef  in 
other  things.  Thus  too^  in  divine  concerns.  But  tfie  reason  of  this  is,  because  the  hamao  race  is  fratt 
and  corruptible.  Hence  also,  the  works  of  nan  are  corruptible  and  oHitable,  and  subject  to  aU-^ariotts 
revolutions.  But  God  being  eternal,  it  is  also  fit  that  his  mandates  should  be  eternal*  And  being 
8Utb«  they  are  eidier  the  natures  of  things,  or  confomiable  to  the  natures  of  tUiigs.  For  how  can 
nature  contend  with  the  mandate  of  divinity  i  Uctw  can  it  fall  off  from  this  concord  i  If,  thero^' 
fore,  as  he  ordered  that  there  should  be  a  confusion  of  tongues,  and  that  they  should  not  accord 
with  each  other,  so  likewise  he  ordered  that  the  political  concerns  of  nations  should  be  dis- 
cordant ;  he  has  not  only  effected  this  by  his  mandate,  but  lias  rendered  us  naturally  adapted  to  this 
dissonance.  For  to  effect  this,  it  would  be  requisite,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  natures  of  those 
should  be  different,  whose  political  concerns  among  nations  are  to  be  different.  This,  indeed^  is 
seen  in  bodies,  if  any  one  directs  his  attention  to  the  Germans  and  Scythians,  and  considers  how 
much  the  bodies  of  these  differ  firom  those  of  the  Lybians  and  Ethiopians.  Is  thb  therefore^  a 
mere  mandate,  and  does  the  air  contribute  nothing,  nor  the  relation  and  position  of  the  r^on  with 
respect  to  the  celestial  bodies  ?'' 

Julian  adds,  ''  Moses,  however,  though  he  knew  the  truth  of  this,  concealed  it ;  nor  does  he 
ascribe  the  confusion  of  tongues  to  God  alone.  For  he  says,  that  not  only  God  descended,  nor  one 
alone  with  him,  but  many,  though  he  does  not  say  who  they  were.  B^t  it  is  veiy  evident,  that  he 
conceived  those  who  descended  with  God  to  be  similar  to  him.  If,  therefor^  not  the  Lord  only, 
but  those  who  were  with  him  contributed  to  this  confusion  of  tongues,  they  may  jusdy  be  consi* 
dered  as  the  causes  of  this  dissonance.^^ 

la  short,  that  the  heavens  and  the  celestial  bodies  are  animated  by  certain  divine  souls,  wa»  not 
only  the  opinion  of  the  ancient  poets  and  philosophers,  but  also  of  the  most  celebrated  fathers  of 
the  church,  and  the  most  learned  and  acute  of  the  schoolmen.  Thus  for  instance,  tliis  is  asserted 
by  Jerom  in  his  exposition  of  the  6tii  verse  of  tlie  first  chapter  of  Ecclesiastes.  And  by  Origen  in 
his  book  On  Principles,  who  says  that  the  heavenly  bodies  must  be  animated,  because  they  are  said 
to  receive  the  mandates  of  God,  which  is  only  consentaneous  to  a  rational  nature.  This  too  is 
asserted  by  Eusebius  in  his  Theological  Solutions,  and  by  Augustine  in  his  Enchiridion.  Among 
the  schoolmen  too,  this  was  the  opinion  of  Albertus  Magnus  in  his  book  De  quatuor  Cosqua^vis ; 
of  Thomas  Aquinas  in  his  treatise  De  Spiritual ibus  Creaturis^  and  of  Johannes  Scotus  Super 
Secundo  Sententiarum.  *To  these  likewise  may  be  added,  the  most  learned  Cardinal  Nicolaus 
Cusanus.      Aureolus  indeed  strenuously  contends  for  the  truth  of  this  opinion,  and  does  not  even 


Digitized  by 


Google 


tm  i^TROOVCTION. 

think  it  improper  to  venemte  the  celestial  bodies  with  outward  worship  (duliae  cuitu)  and  to  implore 
dieir  favour  and  assistance.  And  Thomas  Aquinas  says,  that  he  has  no  other  objection  to  diis 
than  that  it  might  be  the  occasion  of  idolatry.  Hence,  diough  it  may  seem  ridiculous  to  most  of 
the  present  time>  that  divine  sods  should  be  placed  in  the  stars,  and  preside  over  regions  and  cities, 
tribes  and  pe6ple,  nations  and  tongues,  yet  it  did  not  appear  so  to  the  mo^e  intelligent  Christians 
of  former  times. 

I  had  almost  forgotten  however  the  wisest  of  the  ancient  Christiana,  but  as  be  was  the  best  of 
them,  I  have  done  well  in  reserving  him  to  the  last ;  and  this  is  no  other  than  die  Platonic  bishop 
^ynesius.     This  father  of  the  church  therefore,  in  his  third  hymn,  sings  as  follows : 

Se,  irotTsg  xocfMiv, 
xctreq  OLiosvwv^ 
avnvgyi  diwv, 
evonyti  ffivfiv. 
O'f  (itv  01  voe^oi 

(Tff  Sf  xoo-fbayof, 
o/AfMeroA«preif, 
voeg  amqtoij 
u/tvovo'f  fiaxocg, 

'xeura  ire  iMXiret 

01  ITi^l  xoa-fMV, 
01  xetra  xocjttoy, 

01  (oOVMOi, 

01  r'  A^flovof 

XO^fMtl  piAigCtg 

e^nrouo-i,  <rofoi 
»ft4ifiomigtg, 
01  iraga  xKuvovg 
siijxofo^u;. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


T§,  rt  xvft}fii 
€gY»  'Fct  tnffm¥ 

▼iz.  '^  Thee^  father  of  the  worlds,  &dier  of  the  aeoDes,'  artificer  of  die  Gods,  it  is  holy  to  praise. 
Thee,  O  king,  the  intellectual  Gods  sing,  thee,  O  blessed  God,  the  Coimagi^  those  fulgid  eyes,  and 
starry  intellects,  celebrate,  ronnd  which  the  illustrious  body  [of  die  world]  dances.  All  the  race  of 
die  blessed  sing  thy  praise,  those  that  are  about,  and  those  that  are  in  the  world,  the  sonic  Gods, 
and  also  the  azonic,*  who  govern  the  parts  of  the  world,  wise  itinerants,  stationed  about  the  illus- 
trious pilots  [of  the  universe,]  and  which  the  angelic  series  pours  fordi.  Thee  too,  the  renowned 
genus  of  heroes  celebrates,  which  by  occult  paths  pervades  die  works  of  mortals,  and  likewise  the 
soul  which  does  not  incline  to  die  regions  of  mortality,  and  the  soul  which  descends  into  dark  terresr 
trial 


In  another  part  also  of  the  same  hymn,  he  informs  us   that  he  adored  the  powers  that 
preside  over  Thrace  and  Chalcedon. 

'  What  these  are  will  be  shortly  explained,  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  Aposde  Paul 
*  Synesius  does  not  here  speak  conformably  to  the  Chaldean  theologists,  from  whom  he  has  derived  these  ap- 
pellations. For  the  frnww*  and  the  •{mm,  are  according  to  them  Gods,  the  fonner  being  the  divinities  of  the  8^r8, 
and  the  latter  forming  that  order  of  Gods  which  b  called  by  Proclus  in  the  sixth  book  of  this  work  mtoXv**;,  Ik 
berated.  Both  these'Oiderstliev«fine,awsuperk>rtodie  angelic  series.  l/hisunsdenCific  manner 
both  the  highest  and  lowest  divine  powers  by  the  common  name  afaqgels,  lis  ^ot  psKailifir  to  Syoeshi^  |ind  the 
Jews,  but  to  all  the  fathers  of  the  church,  and  all  the  Christian  divines  that  succeeded  them. 

Proe.  Vol.  I.  c 


Digitized  by 


Google 


X^ii  INTRODUCTION. 

01  r*  avrnngaf 

fff fffrovo-i  yvtof. 

i.  e.  ''  I  have  supplicated  the  nuDistrant  Goda  that  possess  die  TbraciaD  soil,  and  also  those  diat, 
in  an  opposite  direction^  govern  the  Chalcedonian  land/' 

And  in  the  last  place  be  says  (in  Hymn  I.) 

oXiya  fiMv,  oXX'  txf  iMoy 

oAof  WTOf,  as  rt  wtamii 

oXof  nf  oAov  ititnuos, 

I.  > 

xtiro^  ov^oNf  1X10*0^* 

TO  9*  oAoy  rouro  ^Ao^o'coy^ 

0  fjLtf,  wmfwf  itffiuus, 
0  S*  ff(  ctyytXmv  x^f^^p 

0  Sf  XOM  ^fSrOITI  8f9/4^ 

Xtovwif  wgnc  [iAffw. 

Hie  substance  of  which  is,  *^  that  incorruptible  intellect  which  is  wholly  an  emanation  of  divinity, 
is  totally  diffused  through  the  whole  world,  convolves  the  heavens,  and  preserves  the  universe  with 
which  it  is  present  distributed  in  various  forms.  That  one  part  of  thb  intellect  is  distributed 
among  the  stars,  and  becomes,  as  it  were,  Aeir  charioteer  ;  but  anodier  part  among  the.  angelic 
choirs ;  and  another  part  is  bound  in  a  terrestrial  form." 

I  confess  I  am  wholly  at  a  loss  to  conceive  what  could  induce  the  modems  to  controvert  the 
dogma,  that  the  stars  and  the  whole  worid  are  animated,  as  it  is  ui  opinion  of  infinite  antiquity,  and 
is  firiendly  to  the  most  unperverted,  spontaneous,  and  accurate  conceptions  of  the  human  mind. 
Indeed^  the  rejectioi|  of  it  appears  to  me  to  be  just  as  absurd  as  it  would  be  m  a  maggot,  if  it 


Digitized  by 


Google 


iNTBODyCTiaN.  xix 

were  capable  of  syllogizing^  to  infer  that  man  is  a  machine  impelled  by  some  external  force  when 
he  walks,  because  it  never  saw  any  animated  reptile  so  large. 

The  sagacious  Kepler,  for  so  he  is  called  even  by  the  most  modem  writers/  appears  to  have  had 
a  conception  (tf  this  great  truth ;  but  as  he  was  more  an  astronomer  than  a  philosopher,  he  saw  this 
truth  only  partially,  4Uid  he  rather  embraced  it  as  subservient  to  his  own  astronomical  opinions,  than 
as  formii^  an  essential  part  of  the  true  Aeory  of  the  universe.  But  from  what  1  have  seen  of  the 
writings  of  Kepler,  I  have  no  doubt,  if  he  had  lived  in  the  time  of  the  Greeks,  or  if  he  had  made 
the  study  of  the  works  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  tiie  business  of  his  life,  he  would  have  become  an 
adept  in,  and  an  illustrious  and  zealous  champion  of  their  philosophy.  Kepler  then  (in  Harmo- 
nices  Mundi,  lib.  4,  p.  158)  says,  ^  That  he  does  not  oppose  the  dogma,  that  there  is  a  soul  of  the 
universe,  >  though  he  shall  say  nothing  about  it  in  that  book,  He  adds,  that  if  titers  is  such 
a  soul,  it  must  reside  in  the  centre  of  the  world,  which,  according  to  him,  b  the  sun,  and 
from  thence  by  the  communication  of  the  rays  of  l^ht,  which  are  in  the  place  of  spirits  in 
an  animated  body,  is  propagated  into  all  the  amplitude  of  the  world.''*  In  the  following  passages 
also  he  confidently  asserts  that  the  earth  has  a  soul.  For  he  says,  ^^  That  the  globe  of  the  earth  is 
a  body  such  as  is  that  of  some  animal ;  and  that  what  its  own  soul  is  to  an  animal,  that  Ae  sublunary 
nature  which  he  investigates  will  be  to  the  earth.*"  He  adds,  **  That  he  sees  for  the  most  part 
eveiy  thing  which  proceediiq;  from  Ae  body  of  an  animal  testifies  that  diere  is  a  soul  in  i^ 
proceeds  also  frmn  the  body  of  the  earth.  For  as  the  animated  body  produces  in  the  super- 
ficies of  the  skin  hairs,  thus  also  the  earth  produces  [on  its  sur&ce]  plants  and  trees ;  and  as  in  the 
former  lice  are  generated,  so  in  the  latter  die  worms  called  erucae,  grasshoppers,  and  various  insects 
and  marine  monsters  are  produced.  As  the  animated  body  likewise  produces  tears,  mucus,  and  the 
recrement  of  the  ears,  and  sometimes  gum  from  the  pustules  of  the  face^  thus  also  the  earth  pro- 

>  Dr.  Gregory,  in  the  70th  piopoiitioii  of.the  first  book  of  bit  Elements  of  Aitronomy,  ai^  of  Kepler,  ^  That  hit 
archetypal  ratioe,  geometrical  concfamitifi,  and  hamoidc  proportioBt,  show  focfa  a  force  of  genns  as  is  not  to  be  foond 
in  any  of  the  writers  of  physical  astronomy  bclors  Urn.  So  that  Jeremiah  Honroz,  a  fery  competent  Jndge  of  Uicse  mat. 
ters,thooi^a  Uttie  averse  to  Kepkr,  in  tfaeb^gfamh^  of  his  astronomical  studies,  after  having  hi  ^ain  tried  othen, 
entirely  falling  in  with  Kepler's  doctrine  and  physical  reasons,  thus  addremes  his  reader:  KefUr  i»  «  pcrton  whum  /mey 
JfuHifmimin  ^boMott  mmUU  hmUet  lmm§  sell  M»igf«a»>dh^«rsimsMMlikMf  siire;  «hM£i3ilir&  SsSeeehiitf 
e6«M<Jbe«A0(«lri6e^pM<oM!|iA«ni    flimelwK  li»<»sterdis<iy  ^.— lijhi  etoa<fe<l*€  pJfci/wiyihmreeii;  M^mlAi^ 

I  quote  this  paMage,  not  from  ^e  Jnstnem  of  the  encomium  it  contains ;  An'  it  is  eztraTagaat,  and  by  no  means  true  * 
but  that  the  reader  may  see  what  an  exalted  opinion  some  of  the  greatest  of  the  modems  hsTo  had  of  the  genius  of 
Kepler. 

**^£tprimnmqttidemdeanhnatotiusnniTersi  etsinonrepngnoynidltamenhoclihrolV.dicam.  Videtnr  enna  (li 
est  talis  aliqna)  in  centre  nrondl,  quod  mihi  sol  est,  residere,  indeqne  in  omnem  ^fus  amplitndinem  commerdo  radiomm 
locis,  qni  sint  loco  spiritnum  in  corpore  animaD  propagari." 

3  <'Deaiqaeterr«gto|M»  tale  corpus  eri^  quale  est  alic4usanimalis:^|nodq«eaai^ 
hSBC,  quam  quwnmus,  natarasabhrnaris.* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


X»  INTMOftVGTION. 

duces  amber  and  bitumen.  As  the  bladder  too  produces  urhie^  thus  likewise  mountams  pour  forth 
rivers.  And  as  the  body  produces  excrement  of  a  sulphureous  odour^  and  crepitus  which  may  also 
be  inflamed^  so  the  earth  produces  sulphur,  subterranean  fires,  thunder,  and  lightning.  And  as  in 
the  terns  of  an  animal  blood  is  generated,  and  together  with  it  sweat  whidi  is  cjcded  o«t  of  the 
body,  so  in  the  veins  of  the  earth,  metals,  and  foss&s,  and  a  raiaiy  vapour  an  geoenited." '  AmI  in 
cap.  7,  p.  162,  after  having  shown  that  there  is  in  the  ear&  die  aense  of  towchmg,  that  it  reqpam,  md 
is  subject  in  certain  parts  to  languors,  and  internal  vicisntucfes  of  the  viscera,  and  that  aubCamneMi 
hesat  proceeds  from  the  soul  of  the  earth,  he  i^ds,  **  That  a  <:ertain  image  of  die  zodiac  ii  resphwid 
ent  in  this  soul,  and  therefore  of  the  whole  finnament,  mi  m  the  bond  of  the  sympadiy  of  tbi^p 
celestial  and  terrestrial.*'* 

Bishop  Berkeley  abo  was  by  no  means  hostile  to  "diis  ffpinion,  that  Ae  wodd  it  ooe  gra«t 
ttiimsl,  as  is  evident  flrom  die  following  extract  from  his  Siris,  (p.  131). 

^  BKnd  Ute  and  Uind  chance  are  at  bottom  mtidi  die  same  (hmg,  aiid  one  no  more  tnteUigible 
dian  the  oiher.  Sudi  is  'the  mutihd  relation,  comiection,  motion,  and  aympathy  of  the  parts  of  tUi 
world,  thatihey  ^eem,  a»  it  wete,  animated  and  held  together  by  one  soul :  and  such  is  their>harmony, 
order,  and  reguliir  course,  as  shows  the  soul  to  be  governed  and'direded  by  a  mind.  It  was  an  qmm 
of  Yemote  UntiquHy  Ait  the  worid  was  va  animal.  If  we  may  trust  Ihe  Hermaie  writings,  the 
.Sgjrptians  diought  all  diings  did  partake  of  life.  This  opinion  was  abo  so  general  and  ounent 
among  the  Greeks,  that  Plutarch  asserts  aB  others  held  the  worid  to  be  an  animal,  and  govtmcd  by 
providence,  except  Leucippus,  Democritns,  and  Epicurus.  And  although  an  animal  oontaining 
all  bodies  withm  itself,  could  not  be  touched  or  sensibly  afiected  from  without ;  yet  it  is  pkin  they 
attributed  to  it  an  inward  sense  and  feeling,  as  well  as  appetites  and  avisrsioiis ;  and  that  ftom  aM 
the  various  tones,  actions,  and  passions  of  the  universe,  they  supposed  one  symphony,  one  animal 
%ct  and  life  to  result. 

**  lambliehus  declares  the  world  to  be  one  animal,  in  vrhich  the  parts,  however  distant  each  from 
other,  are  nevertheless  rdated  and  connected  by  one  common  nature.     And  he  teaches,  what  is 

■  **  Videbam  pleraqne  omnia,  que  ex  corpora  aaimantit  pro? eoientia,  testaatar  auimam  io  iUo  inesse,  proveaire 
•tiam  cz  telloris  corpore.  Ut  enim  eorpat  in  cotit  svperficie  pilot,  tic  terra  plantas  arboretqoe  profert ;  inque  iii  ibi 
pedicali,  bic  enic»,  cicadai,  variaqae  imocta  et  monttra  mari^iiascantar :  et  ut  corpus  lachrymas,  blenuami  anriomqac 
rtcremeata,  eat  nbi  et  ganuni  ex  fiiciei  pastoUfl,  sic  telhis  eleetmiB,  bitomen:  atqae  vesica  arioam,  sic  montes  flumiaa 
Audoat;  et  at  corpus  excrcmeatam  solpbarei  odoris,  crepitnaqoe,  qui  etiam  iaflammari  possant,  sic  terra  solphor,  igaet 
sabtcnraaeas,  toaitraa,  lalgara:  ntqoe  in  veais  aaimantis  geoerator  saofais,  et  com  co  sudor,  extra  corpus  ejectns; 
sic  IB  veais  terrs,  aietalla  et  lossilia,  vaporqne  pluvias." 

*  **  Rebioet  igitar  ia  aaiasa  tcUoris  imaio  qaasdam  circoli  sodiaci  sensibilii,  totieique  adee  firmanieati,  vinculum 
«ympatbiae  reraa  c«lestiam  at  terrestrium.* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


•be  n  recwttd  Bff^m  of  th^  Pj^tb^gorefMos  a«d  Plutaii^  4»l  tiMra  is  «o  chasm  in  ittture,  but  a 
ckam  or  feal*  ^  Maga  mug  l^j  gentk  uMiirrupted  gradAliiMia  fmn  4^  kwesi  ta  Ifaa  lughtat, 
each  mtm^  hmg  »f€»w«d  avd  pctrfected  by  tb«  partibciiMitiaii  of  a  higher.  As  air  beoomea 
ij^ieouaf  ae  lh#  puraMit  jte  beconiea  ai^i^  andlbeaoiiMlapiilbeconieaiQleUeobial,  vhidi  ia  to  be 
widfvrtpod,  wt^Hm  chMge  of  ^we  nalwre  ktp  aoQllMr»  but  of  the  connection  of  different  natures, 
eaeblAwer  tvOure  beiaf^  aceondiag  to  those  phflos^era,  as  it  weee,  a  seceptacle  or  aut^ect  for  the 
•extaboipe  it  lo  reside  and  act  w* 

^  It  is  ab»  the  docteioe  of  Ptoaiac  phitoso|ibew,  tb^t  intdUect  is  the  vary  bfe  of  living  things, 
the  ftrsi  principle  and  esenplftr  of  all,  from  whence,  bjr  diffeiient  degrees,  are  derived  the  inferior 
rlamnn  ^  life ;  first  die  rational,  then  the  sensitive,  afiler  that  the  veg^tMe,  but  so  as  in  die  rational 
nmmid  Ibcre  is  stiU  sopiewbat  inteUodual^  again  in  the  sensitive  there  is  some^at  rational,  and  in 
the  vegetable  somewhat  sensitive,  and  lastly  in  mixed  bodies,  as  m^als  and  minerals,  somewhat  of 
vegetation.  By  which  means  the  whole  b  thou^t  to  be  more  perfectly  connected.  Which  doc- 
trine in^plies  thnt  all  die  fiseubies,  inatinots,  and  motions  <tf  inferior  beings,  in  their  several 
nama^tiirr  aobordinatioiMi,  are  derived  from,  and  depend  upon  int;frilect 

'^  Both  Stoics  and  Platonics  Md  the  world  to  be  alive,  thou|^  sometimes  it  be  mentioned  as  a 
gfntjflnt  animaly  aometinMS  as  a  plant  or  vegetable.  Bui  im  iUi,  notwiihsiariding  what  ha»  been 
immitid  iff  mm€  kttmed  mem,  ihere  9eem$  to  he  no  atheUm.  For  so  Umg  us  the  world  is  sup- 
posed  jSo  be  fuickemed  by  eiemeatary  fire  or  apisrit,  which  (s  itself  animated  by  soul,  and  directed 
by  MmdentemdiiHg,  ii  foSows  that  all  parts  thereof  originally  depend  upon,  and  may  be  reduced 
unto,  the  same  indivisible  stem  or  principle,  to  wit,  a  supreme  mind;  which  is  the  concurrent 
doatrime  af  Pythagoeeaps,  Platomcs,  and  Stoics." 

Compare  now  the  Newtonian  with  this  theory,  ttiat  the  heavenly  bodies  are  vitalized  by  their 
informing  souls,  that  their  orderly  motion  is  the  result  of  this  viHdity,  and  that  the  planets  move 
harmonically  roimd  the  sun,  not  as^  if  urged  by  a  centripetal  force,  but  from  an  animated  tendency 
to  die  principle  and  fountain  of  their  light,  and  from  a  desire  of  partaking  as  largely  as  possible  of 
his  influence  and  power.  In  .the  former  theory  all  the  celestial  motions  are  the  effect  of  violence, 
in  ithe  latter  diey  are  all  natural.  The  former  is  attended  with  insupenlble  difficulties,  the  latl^, 
when  the  principle  on  which  it  is  founded  is  adnutted,  widi  none.  And  the  former  is  unscientific 
and  merely  hypothetical ;  but  the  latter  is  the  progeny  of  the  most  accurate  science,  and  is  fotmded 
op  the  ipoattgeni|ine;aod<uqper verted  ceneeptions  of  *the  huoMnmind. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXli  INTEODUCTIOK. 

I  have  said  that  I  should  prove  from  the  testimony  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  that  the  Jews  were  not 
coasistent  in  confoundiiq;  angeb  properlj  so  called  with  Gods.  And  this  appears  to  me  to  be  evident 
in  the  first  place  from  the  following  passage  in  Hebrews  ii.  v.  3.  iriorfi  voov/tuv  xemifTi^cu  tw^  m$^af 
gmutr^  twOf  fi;  TO  /UM}  ffx  ^yo/xffMpy  ra  fi\ewoiu¥a  ytyoyffvtfi.  Hiis  in  the  English  version  is  erro- 
neously rendered ;  '^  Throi^  faith  we  understand,  diat  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of 
God,  so  that  things  which  are  seen,  were  not  made  of  diings  which  do  appear."  I  say  this  is  erro- 
neously  translated,  because  in  the  first  place,  iht  worlds  is  evidently  a  forced  iiterpretation  of 
mma§ ;  and  even  admitdi^  it  is  not,  leaves  the  passage  very  ambiguous,  from  the  uncertainty  to 
what  woild^  Paul  aHudes.  If  we  adopt  ages,  wfaidi  is  the  general  sense  of  the  word  in  the  New 
Testament,  we  shall  indeed  avoid  a  forced  and  ambiguous  interpretation,  but  we  shall  render  the 
meaning  of  the  Aposde  trifling  in  the  extreme.  For  as  he  has  elsewhere  said,  '^  that  all  things 
were  framed  by  the  word  of  God,''  what  particular  £dth  does  it  require  to  believe,  that  by  the 
same  word  he  framed  die  ages  ? 

In  the  second  place,  from  the  definition  of  fsutb,  given  in  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter,  Aat  it  is 
*^  the  evidence  of  ihingi  not  seen/*  it  is  clear,  that  Paul  is  speaking  in  this  passage  of  somedang 
invisible.  Since  then  euowas  is  neither  fooorlds  nor  ages,  what  shall  we  say  it  is  ?  I  answer,  the 
(tones  of  the  Valentinians.  And  agreeably  to  this,  the  whole  passage  should  be  translated  as 
follows :  '^  By  faith  we  understand,  that  the  aones  were  framed  by  die  word  of  God,  in  order  that 
things  which  are  seen,  might  be  generated  from  such  as  do.  not  appear  (i.  e.  from  things  invisible)" 
Every  one  who  is  much  conversant  with  Greek  audiors,  must  certainly  be  convinced  that  m;  to 
means  in  order  that;  and  Bishop  Pearson  translates  as  I  have  done  the  latter  part  of  this  vefae. 

Now  we  learn  from  the  second  book  of  Irenaeus  against  die  heretics,  that  accordhig  to  the 
Valentinians,  all  created  diings  are  the  images  of  the  aones,  resident  in  the  pleroma,  or  fulness  of 
deity.  And  does  it  not  clearly  follow  from  the  above  version,  that  according  to  Paul  too,  the 
asones  are  the  exemplars  of  visible  or  created  things  i  To  vrfiich  we  may  add,  that  this  sense  of 
the  passage  clearly  accords  with  the  assertion  that  ''  faidi  is  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  For 
here  the  thmgs  which  do  not  appear  are  the  €Bones;  these,  according  to  the  Valentinians,  subsisting 
in  'city.  So  that  from  our  version,  Paul  m^ht  say  with  great  propriety,  that  '*  we  understand  by 
faith,  that  the  itones  were  fiamed  by  the  word  of  God,  in  order  diat  things  which  are  seen,  might  be 
generated  from  such  as  do  not  appear,"  for  this  naturally  follows  from  his  definition  of  faith. 

I  farther  add,  that  among  these  aones  of  the  Valentinians  were  vov^p  /Sutfo;,  0-17^,  aki/itna,  o^fM, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIU 

<%  e.  inielUei,  u  profundity,  9ile$u>e,  tnah,  and  wisdom,  whidi  as  Gale  well  observes  io  his  noteti  oo 
lamblicbus  de  Mysterib^  &€•  prove  dieir  dogmas  to  be  of  Chaldaic  or^D.  For  these  words  per- 
petoally  occur  in  the  fragments  of  die  Chaldaic  oracles.  And  the  middle  of  the  Chaldean  btelU- 
giUe  triad  is  denominated  eum  aon,^  i.  e.  etemUy,  and  is  also  perfecdy  conformable  to  the 
theology  of  Plato,  as  is  very  satisfactorily  shown  by  Proclus  in  the  third  book  of  the  foUowii^ 
woik.  According  to  die  Chaldeans  therefore,  the  seones  are  Gods ;  and  considered  as  &e  exem- 
plars of  die  visible  universe,  diey  are  analogous  to  die  ideas  of  Plato,  which  also  are  Gods,  as  is 
evident  from  the  Parmenides  of  dwt  philosopher.*  Accordmg  to  Paul  too,  as  the  itones  are  die 
fabricators  of  the  visible  world,  they  must  be  beuigs  of  a  much  higher  order  dum  angels,  and  con- 
sequendy  must  be  Gods ;  productive  power  bein|^  one  of  the  great  characteristics  of  a  divine 
nature. 

Again,  in  the  Episde  to  die  £phesians,  chap.  i.  v.  21.  Paul  sajrs  diat  God  has  exalted  Cbrisit 
^'  far  above  every  principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion,"  vmgavm  «W0^  ^SXV  ^^^ 
^vcuif,  KM  iupctiiMOf  Km  xogiovifrog.  And  in  the  6di  chapter  and  It2di  verse  he  conjoins  with  princi- 
palities and  powers,  the  ruUn  cf  the  world,  L  e.  die  seven  planets,  v^  ras  cifxp^g,  rgog  rotg  t^oo- 
o-MCf,  wfo$  ro/s  Mo-piMtfctrogeif.  Aiq^tin'  confesses  diat  he  is  ignorant  what  the  difference  is 
between  those  four  words,  (principality,  power,  might,  and  dominion,)  in  which  die  Aposde  Paul 
seems  to  comprehend  all  the  celestial  society.  *'  Quid  inter  se  distent  quatuor  iOa  vocabula, 
quibus  nniversam  ipsam  coelestem  societatem  videtur  Apostolus  esse  complexus,  dicant  qui  possunt, 
si  tamen  possnnt  probare  quod  dicunt ;  ego  me  ista  ignorare  fateor."  Ignatius  also  (in  Epist  ad 
TraUianos)  speaks  of  die  angelic  orders^  the  diversities  of  archangels  and  armies,  the  diff^ences  of 
the  orders  characterised  by  might  and  dominion^  of  thrones  and  powers,  the  magnificence  of  the 
atones f  and  tb^  transcendency  of  Cherubim  and  Seraphim,"  km  yaq  tym  w  Koff  o,  n  MtfiM,  km 
twnimi  f99i¥  r«  twovfemoL,  km  t»$  it/yt>aKets  tm^ tif,  km  ras  rw  aj%Myyf Acov  km  argetrtw  sf 0(AA«y«^, 

*  Prochw  begiBt  te  lixtii  book  of  the  foUowing  woric  with  observng  that  he  has  celebrated  in  the  preceding  book  the 
liebdomadic  mtm  of  the  int^ectaal  Gods.  The  mMm  therefore,  though  the  cause  of  tiiem  exists  in  the  intelligible,  pro- 
periy  UtoDf  to  the  fnteUectual  order;  and  the  Demhu-gns  or  artificer  of  Uie  nnivene  subsists  at  the  extremity  of  that 
order.  But  the  demiurgus  according  to  Orpheus,  prior  to  the  fobrication  of  the  world  absorbed  in  himself  Phanes  the 
exemplar  of  the  universe.  Hence  he  became  fuH  of  ideas  of  which  Uie  forms  in  the  sensible  uniTerse  are  the  images.  And 
as  all  intettectual  natures  are  in  each,  it  is  evident  that  ihing$wkkhan  $em  were  geur^ied  fiom  the  invmbk  it<me$, 
conformably  to  the  assertion  of  Paul. 

»  I  refer  the  reader  who  is  desirous  of  bdng  fullj  convinced  of  Uiis  to  the  notes  accompanying  my  tianslation  of  that 
'dialogue,  in  vol.  S  of  my  Plato. 
^  Ad  Lanrentium,  c  58. 

♦  Here  we  see  the  tfwifs  arc  acknowledged  by  Ircnwus  to  be  beings  of  an  order  superior  to  angels. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^jiy  iMTBODtfCTIOK. 

The  opiaioa  of  Grotius'  therefore,  is  highly  probable,  that  Ae  Jews  obtamed  the  names  of 
Powers,  Dominations,  and  PrincipfcUties,  from  their  Babjflonic  captivity;  and  Gale  in  his  notes  on 
lambUchus'  says,  that  cfertain  passages  of  Zoroaster  and  Ortanes  cited  by  the  author  of  Arithm. 
Theolog.  tonfirm  this  opinion  of  Grotius.  Indeed,  the  appeBation  of  «5X«  principUt,  which  are 
the  first  of  the  four  powfers  mentioned  by  Paul,  was  given  by  the  Chaldeans  to  fhat  order  of  Gods 
called  by  the  Grecian  theologists  tupermundane  and  ««/mifcitrw,  Ae  natore  of  which  is  unfolded 
by  Proclus  b  the  sixth  book  of  the  following  woA ;  and  Proclus  in  the  fourth  book  of  Ws  MS. 
Commentary  On  ihe  Parmenides  of  Plato  shows  that  the  order  of  Gods  denominated  »«r«J  «« 
inteUigibU  and  at  the  same  time  intelleetual,  is  according  to  the  Chaldean  oracles^  princi- 
pdly  characterized  by  dominatum.^  In  proof  of  thb,  the  two  following  orades  are  cited  by  him. 
the  first,  concerning  the  empyrean,  and  the  second  tconcenang  the  mterial  Synoches.* 

TMf  h  m^i  wtgow  Mf^if  ♦Jl«vng«"rt'  «*«»*« 

i.  e.  "  AU  things  yield  minutrant  to  the  JnteDectoal  prerters  of  ioteUectuKl  fire,  through  the  per- 
suasive witt  of  the  fiiAer."    And 

«XX«  MU  t»X«uoif  o<r«  JwXwM  Xwoxiwi. 

i.  e.  «  But  likewise  such  as  are  b  subjection  to  the  material  Synoches." 

Farther  stiD,  Paul  in  the  EpisUe  to  the  Romans,  chap.  vui.  v.  S8,  .^ys,  -  For  1  «n  persu^^ed 
that  neither  death  nor  life,  nor  angeb,  nor  prindpalitie,,  nor  pawen.  nor  tUng.  p«««t,  «ar  *«gs 
to  come,  nor  luigK  nor  deptk,  nor  any  other  creature,  shaU  be  able  to  separate  us  fiom  the  love 
of  God,  &c.»  From  this  arr-Hjement  therefore,  it  i-  evid«.t  that  pri.cipd.t«  ««1  pow«  .« 
not  the  same  with  angel. ;  ^  as  according  to  Paul  they  are  betogs  so  exalted,  that  m  b.  l^-uUe 

>  Ad  Cap.  18.  liatthsei. 

*  DeMytt.p.«M? 

♦  ThcSynocllttifomtlwtecoBdtrMof  aicmleUlgible,WMlatuiei^^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTEODOCTIOlf.  \r¥ 

to  die  Epkeikmi,  he  could  not  find  aoy  thing  more  magnificent  to  say  of  Cbrist,  than  that  he 
is  raised  even  above  tbem^  it  follows  that  they  must  be  Gods^  since  they  are  superior  to  the  angelic 
order.    It  is  remarkable  too^  that  he  coarranges  height  and  depth  (y^aofiM  xai  |3a$o$)  widl  prindpali-' 
ties  and  powers ;  and  jSudo^  is  one  of  the  aones  according  to  the  Valentinians. 

•In  the  6r3t  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  likewise,  chap.  viii.  v.  5.  Paul  expressly  asserts  tfiat  there 
is  a  divine  multitude.  For  he  says^  ^'  Though  there  be  that  are  called  Gods,  whether  in  heaven  or 
in  eartbi  (as  there  he  Gods  many  and  Lords  many  ;)"  in  the  parenthesis  of  which  verse^  it  isincon- 
trovertibly  evident  that  he  admits  the  existence  of  a  plurality  of  Gods,  though  as  well  as  the 
he^ens  he  believed  that  one  God  only  was  supreme  and  the  fether  of  all  things.  Nor  am  I  singu- 
lar in  asserting  that  this  was  admitted  by  Paul.  For  the  Pseudo-Dionysius  the  Areopagite  in  the 
second  chapter  of  hb  treatise  On  the  Divine  Names  observes  concerning  what  is  here  said  by  Paul 
as  follows  :  "  Again,  from*  the  deific  energy  of  God,  by  which  every  tljing  according  to  its  ability 
becomes  deiform,  muiy  Gods  are  generated ;  in  consequence  of  which  there  appears  and  is  said  to 
be  a  separation  and  multiplication  of  the  one  [supreme]  God.  Nevertheless,  God  hiqgtself,  who  is 
the  chief  deity,  and  is  superessentially  the  supreme,  is  still,  one  God,  remaining  impartible  in  the 
Gods  distributed  from  him,  united  to  himself,  immingled  with  the  many,  and  void  of  multitude.'^ 
And  he  afterwards  adds,  '^  that  this  was  in  a  transcendent  manner  understood  by  Paul,  who  was 
the  leader  both  of  him  and  his  preceptoj,  to  divine  illumination,^  in  the  above  cited  verse.  And, 
^'  that  in  divine  natures,  unions  vanquish  and  precede  separations,  and  yet  nevertheless  they  are 
urated,  after  the  separation  which  doesnot  in  proceeding  depart  fixim  the  one,  and  is  unical.'^'  Paul 
therefore,  according  to  this  Dionynus,  considered  the  Gods^  conformably  to  Plato  and  the  best  of 
his  disciples,  as  deiform  processions  from  the  one,  and  which  at  the  same  time  that  they  have  a  dis- 
tinct subsistence  firom,  are  profoundly  united  to  their  great  producing  cause.  Dionysius  also 
employs  the  very  same  expression  which  Proclus  continually  nses  when  speaking  of  the  separation 
of  the  Gods  firom  their  source ;  for  he  says  that  the  divine  multitude  avixpomtrog  rov  svoi,  i.  e.  does 
not  depart  firom,  but  abides  in  ihe  one.  Hence  Proclus  in  the  fifth  book  of  his  MS.  Commentary 
On'  the  Parmenides  of  Plato,  speaking  of  the  divine  unities  says,  ''  Whichever  among  these  yoa 
assume,  it  is  the  same  with  the  others,  because  all  of  them  are  in  each  other,  and  are  rooted  in  the 

*  IbXff  nf  i(  miffv  9tiMru,  tw  mt»  ivfttfxiy  hum-tm;  ^tutht  ^mi  ir»XXi»y  yiyyo/buyimr,  ^i  ^uuv  ihmm  mm  Xtyrrm  rev  iver  #fM/  ^imfi^ir 

••XX«(«fAiyii(  MAI  •<K\yi$im^i.  Km  twt#  vm^vmt  <miK«f  •  %»mt  nfun  mm  tw  um^nfifjmf  mti  r^  $tmf  f«»velbrMBy  %^<f«ywy^9 
•  «aXv(  T»  9ti»,  n  ^(  T«w  nav^fjAVf  ra  it  fti^'n  tf9mc^rnwf  n  rotf  ufuf  avww  y^fi^««#t.     Km  yaf  iivi^  iiri  Xty^unt  ••«,  ••«  •» 

wf**^,  ««  •»*  ynff,  «.X« Km  ytif  hti  tw»  9mwv  ai  •vwrtif  tw»  Imicfirianr  nrixv^rot/ri  nm   ^ftttmrmfx^v^^  nmt  wUf  nrw^f  irTi? 

tifwfxtm,  nat  fMT«  tip  rsv  tff  tntHftrnrw  n^i  iti«i»v  ^iMif  i#iv« 

Proc.  Vol.  L  d 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Qn0,    For  at  lre«i  by  4beif  summiu  (i.  c*  their  roots)  are  €xtd  m  the  «irtli>  and  di#Ottgh  diese  arc 
earthijiy  afttr  lbs  garnet  mattner  also  dWnie  natnrea  are  rooted  by  their  sammits  in  theone^  «Bd«acb 
of -thenvft  t  unity 'and  ^ne/  through  unconfiised  uni^n  mik^he  one  itsei/^*    Hfyof  «v  irotncov  Xa^ 

yetf  ra  lnHpot  Tm§  tctfrroov  Mgt/^oit§  evilgvvrai  rp  yv^,  xeu  arri  yijtva  xar*  txuva^,  rov  axjtov  rpoiroy  xeu  ra  tvx 


TTiia  'Diouyiiits,  who  certamly  lived  posterior  to  Produs^  because  he  continually  borrows  from 
his^  works,*  barbarously  confounding  that  scientific  arrangement  of  these  deifofm  piocession» 
frony  ihe'0ne^  which  is  so  admirably  unfolded  by  Proclus  in  the  following  work,  classes 
diem  as  fdttows.  The  first  order,  according  to  him,  consists  of  Seraphim,  Cherubim,  and 
Thi^onet.  The  second  of  the  cMvine  essences  characterized  by  dominion,  might,  and  power. 
Abi  the  third  of  Principalities,  Archangels,  and  Angels.  Hence  he  has  tramftnred  the  character- 
istics of  the  intelKgible  triad  of  Gods  to  Seraphim,  Cherubim,  and  Thrones*.  For  symmetry, 
tmth^  and  beauty,  which  characterize  this  trim),  are  said  by  Plato  in  ihe  Philebus  to  subsist 
in  the  vestibule  of  the  good;  («ri  |mv  to*^  rov  myotim  wv  ijSij  irgotvpo^s  9fwru9ai)  and  Dionysius  says* 
of  his  first  order  that  *^it  is  as  it  were  arranged  in  the  vestibules  of  deity  J'  Goodness,  wisdom,- 
and  beauty  also,  are  shown  by  Produs  in  the  third  book  of  the  ibllowing^  work  to  belong  to  tbe^ 
kitelligible  triad ;  gooduesi  to  ita  summit,  wisdom  to  the  middle  of  it,  and  beauty  to  its  eitremityw 
And  Dionyskis  says,  that  according  to  the  Hebrcfwsr,  the  word  Cherobim  ^gnifies  a  multitude  ^ 
knowledge f  or  an  efasion  of  wisdom,  ti)v  *i  x^S^^fi^t^  tfk^amw,  ^XijJoj  yvaaiws,  n  x^"^  <^o<pltt^'  Th^ 
characteristics  of  the  Gods  called  wn^rofxeu  votpot  intelligible  and  at  the  same  timeinteUtctualy 
and  of  the  Gods  that  are  votpat  intellectual  vStont,  he  appears  to  have  transferred  to  his  nuddJe  triad 
which  is  characterized  by  dominion,  might,  and  power.  And  he  haq  adapted  his  third  triad  consist-^ 
ing  of  Principalities,  Archangels,  and  Angeis,  to  the  supermundane,  liberated,  and  mundane 
orders  of  Gods.  For  the  supermundane  Gods  are  called  by  Proclus  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  fol- 
lowing work  apxM  Principalities,  or  rulers,  which  is  the  word  employed  by  Dionysius  and  Paul. 
And  the  mundane  Gods  are  said  by  Proclus  (in  Parmenid.)  to  be  the  sources  of  a  winged  life>  and 
angels  are  celebrated  by  Dionysius  as  haviug.^wngs.  Hence  it  is  evident  tliat  Dionysius  has  accom- 
modated the  peculiarities  of  the  different  orders  of  Gods  to  the  nine  orders  which  he  denominates^  . 
celestial  powers  ;  and  hi^  arrangement  has  been  adopted  by  all  succeeding  Christian  tfaeologists. 

xftt  f(trne  wif^i^nKuttu  yty^rJiai  ivfufitw;,  w;  tixiisy  o<»itw  w^i,  %m.wn  Uttl  o^ttin  7nf  »ifopx*«».     De  C«le8t.  Hiewrch.. 
cap.  7. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


-l  NTlUMLirCTi  O  N.  IXTW 

V^siigd^ak^eiot^QSthtA^fiphgf  oiPlUommj  b«!M«4K>tbiatI)e  J^itkaadCiuisUaQieligion; 
and  iaa  timaar  maimer,  a  f^seodblatKie  m  lk«  relig^  natioi)fl4att  might  be  easily 

pointed  out,  and  its  universality  be  clearly  demonstrated.     Omitting  however,  a  <liscussion  of  this 
kiiH}  far  ibe.pcesent,  I  shall  &rther  observe  respecting  Ak  tfieology,  ^  the  deification  of  dead 
men,  anditbe  womhipptiq;  mea  a»  Gods  form  noipart  of  it  whenitis  considefed  acoordioglorits 
•  '^eouina  purity.    NmDoroaa  instances  ol  tbe  troth  of  ihistmight  be  adduced, Jmt  lAalltmentiooiar 
.tfaisiiwrposa^  as  uiMReptionable  vrknesses,  tfae^wrilrogs  of  Phto,  the  Golden  Pytfaagoric  vmes/ 
«and.  tha  treatise  of  Pluterck  On  Isis  and  Osiris.   ^AU .the* wfiorks  of  Plato  indeed,  evinoe  the  tsuth 
'  of  Ifaisiposition,  .but  thiaia  particularly  manifest  fro9»i««  Laws.    The  GoIde»  verses  orderi  tbat^e 
mmortal  Gods  be  faonoived  first,  as  they  are  o^^sed  by  law ;  aflerwardr  the  illaatrionst  UerQe«i 
under  which  appellation,  the  author  ofihe  verses  eonspnhends' also. angelsi end  deemons, properly 
.  so  eaUed :  and  in  tbe  last  place  the  terrestrialfdeaaMis,ia«^suiclk  good  men  as  Uraoseend  iuiiriftM  the 
.  isest  of  mankind.    But  to  honour  the  Gods  as  they  afeahspoaedby.  law,  isy  aa  H  leroclea  obseif«e9x  to 
revereoce  them  as  they  are  arranged  by.  their  fabricator  and  fathei-;  and  thia  is.to  honour  ibeMraa 
beings  superior  to  man.     Hence,  to.  benourmeny  howevea  excellent  they  may  b^^as  Giod^  iatnol'  to 
honour  die  Gods  according  to  the  rank  in  which  th^y  are  placed  by  their  Creat9r,  for  it  is  con- 
founding the  divine  with  the  human  nature,  and  is  thus  -  acting  tlirectiy  contrai^^  loathe  ^Vtytbagoric 

*  '^Diogenes  Laertiussays  of  Pythagoras,  That  he  charged  hU  ditcipUt  not  to  give  equal  degrees  ^h&mmr  U  tka 
G9di  and  heroes.  Herodotus  (in  Euterpe)  says  of  the  Greeks,  That  they  worshipped  Hercules  two  maye^  one  as  em 
immortal  deity  and  so  they  ssterifieed  to  him:  and  another  as  s  Hero^andso  they  cdebraiedf  Mo  memory.  »lsaefates 
(Encom.  Helen.)  distinguishes  between  the  honours  pf  heroes  and  Gods,  when  he  speaks  of  Menelaus 
and  Helena.  But  the  distinction  is  no  -where  more  fiilly  expressed  than  in  the  Greek  inscription  ufKMS 
the  statue  of  EegiUa,  wife  to  Herodes  Atticus^  as  ISahnasms  thinks,  which  was  set  up  in  his  teazle 
at  Triopium,  and  taken  from  the  statue  itself  by  Sirmondus;  where  it  is  said^  That  she  had  nsitkew  Jk0 
honour  of  a  mortal,  nor  yet  that  which  was  proper  to  the  Gods  :  ^vlf  ttfa  ^vnroi;,  araf  cvit  9totJiy  •^xomi.  It  seems  by 
tke  inscription  of  Heroder,  and  by  the  testament  of  Epicteta  extant  in  Greek  in  ihe  Coilection  of  Inscriptions, 
that  it  was  in  the  power  of  particular  families  to  keep  festival  day^  in  honour  of  some  of  their  own  iamily^  and  to 
give  heroical  honours  to  them*  In  that  noble  inscription  at  Venice,  we  find  three  days  appointed  every  year  to 
be  kept,  and  a  confraternity  established  for  that  purpose  with  the  laws  of  it  The  first  day  to  be  observed  in 
honour  of  the  Muses/and  sacrifices  to  be  sfiered  to  them  as  deities.  The  second  and  tliird  days  in  honour  of  »the 
heroes  of  the  family ;  between  which  honour  and  that  of  deitic%  they  shewed  the  difference  by  the  distance  of 
time  between  them,  and  the  preference  given  to  the  other.  But  wherein  soever  the  difference  lay,  that  there  was 
a  dutinction  acknowledged  among  t^iem  appears  by  this-  passage'  of  Valerius  in  his  excellent  oration- txtatst  in 
pionysius  Halicamass.Antiq.  Rom.  lib.  11.  p.  £96.  J  call,  &ays  he,the.Gods  to  wiiness^whose  temples  and  aliartour 
family  has  worshipped  with  common  sacrifices;  and  nest  after  them,  I  call  the  Genii  cf  our  anctstors,  to  wkom 
we  give  ht^'ffH  «'<pKy  the  second  honours  next  to  the  Gods,^%  «Celsus  caJIs  those  ws  vfo^nMoy^kt^  rt^AAf  the  dua 
honours  that  belong  to  the  lower  demons.  From  which  we  take  notice,  that  the  Heathens  did  not  confound  all 
degrees  of  divine  worship,  giving  toihe  lowest  object  the  tame  which  they  supposed  to.be  due  to  the  celestial 
deities,  oc.th^  supreme  God.  So  that  if  the  distinction  of  divine  worship  will  excuse  from  idolatr}^  tha^Heatkens 
were  not  to  blame  for  it.*'    See  Sti!lingfieet*s  answer  to  a  book  entitled  Catholics  no  Idolatcia»  pi  510, 51S,^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXVai  INTKODUCTIOM. 

precept.   Plotarch  too  io  his  above-mentioned  trefldte  moit  forciUj  and  clear];  ahowt  the  impiety 
of  worshipping  men  as  Gods^  as  is  evident  from  the  following  exttact : 

'^  Those  therefore^  who  think  diat  dimgs  of  this  kind  [i.  e.  fabulous  stories  of  the  GocU  as  if  thej 
were  men]  are  but  so  many  commemorations  of  the  actions  and  disasters  of  kinp  and  tyrants,  who 
through  transcendency  in  virtue  or  power,  inscribed  the  title  of  divinity  on  their  renown,  and  after- 
wards fell  into  great  calamities  and  misfortunes,  these  employ  the  most  easy  method  indeed  of 
eluding  the  story,  and  not  badly  transfer  things  of  evil  report,  from  the  Gods  to  men;  and  iktj 
are  assisted  in  so  doing  by  the  narrations  themselves.  For  the  Egyptians  relate,  that  Hermes  was 
as  to  his  body,  widi  one  arm  longer  than  the  other;  that  Typhon  was  in  his  complexion  red;  but 
Orus  white,  and  Osiris  blacky  as  if  they  had  been  by  nature  men.  Farther  s^l,  they  also  call 
Osiris  a  commander,  and  Canopus  a  pilot,  firom  whom  they  say  the  star  of  that.name  was  denottii<- 
niited.  The  ship  likewise,  which  the  Greeks  call  Argo^  being  the  image  of  the  ark  of  Osiris,  and 
which  therefore  in  honour  of  it  is  become  a  constellation,  they  make  to  ride  not  for  from  Orion  and 
the  Dog ;  of  which  they  consider  the  one  as  saered  to  Orus,  but  the  other  to  Isis« 

''  I  fear,  however,  that  this  [accordmg  to  the  proverb]  would  be  to  move  things  immoveable,  and 
to  declare  war,  not  only,  as  Simonides  says,  against  a  great  length  of  time,  but  also  against  many 
nations  and  families  of  mankind  who  are  under  the  influence  of  divine  inspiration  through  piety  to 
these  Gods;  and  would  not  in  any  respect  fall  short  of  transferring  from  heaven  to  earth,  such  great 
and  venerable  names,  a:^d  of  thereby  shaking  and  dissolving  that  worship  and  belief,  which  has  been 
implanted  in  almost  all  men  from  their  very  birth,  would  be  opening  great  doors  to  the  tribe  of 
atheists,  who  convert  divine  into  human  concerns ;  and  would  likewise  afford  a  large  license  to  the 
impostures  of  Euemerus  of  Messina,  who  devised  certain  memoirs  of  an  incredible  and  fictitious 
mythology,'  and  thereby  spread  every  kind  of  atheism  through  the  globe,  by  inscribing  all  the 
received  Gods,  without  any  discrimination,  by  the  names  of  generals,  naval-captains,  and  kings, 
t»ho  lived  in  remote  periods  of  time.  He  further  adds,  that  they  are  recorded  in  golden  characters^ 
in  a  certain  country  called  Panchoa,  at  which  neither  any  Barbarian  or  Grecian  ever  arrived, 
except  Euemerus  alone,  who,  as  it  seems,  sailed  to  the  Panchoans  and  Tripbyllians,  that  neither 
have,*  nor  ever  had  a  being.  And  though  the  great  actions  of  Semiramis  are  celebrated  by  the 
Assyrians,  and  those  of  Sesostris  in  Egypt ;  and  though  the  Phrygians  even  to  the  present  time,  call 

'  Both  Amobius  therefore  and  Minucius  Felix  were  Tery  unfortunate  in  quoting  this  impostor  to  prove  that 
the  Gods  of  the  ancients  had  formerly  been  men.  Vid.  Arnob.  lib.  4.  Ad  versus  Gentcs,  ct  Minucii  Fehcia 
Octavo,  p.  350.  8vo.  Parisiis,  1605. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


iNtma]>vc'tio]i.  xux 

»U  gplendid  and  admirabla  actioiis  Maiic,  because  a  certain  person  named  Mains  mho  Mras  one  of 
their  ancient  kings,  whom  some  caH  Masdes,  was  a  brave  and  powerful  man ;  and  fardier  stMl, 
though  Cyrus  among  the  Persians,  and  Alexander  among  die  Macedonians,  proceeded  in  their  irio* 
lories,  almost  as  far  as  to  the  boundaries  of  the  earth,  yet  they  only  retain  the  name  of  good  kiafs, 
Mid  are  remembered  as  such,  [and  not  as  Gods.] 

<^  But  if  certain  persons,  inflated  by  ostentation,  as  Plato  says,  having  their  soul  at  one  and  llie 
same  time  inflamed  with  youth  and  ignorance,  have  insolently  assumed  the  appellation  of  Gods,  aiid 
had  temples  erected  in  their  honour,  yet  this  opinion  of  them  flourished  but  for  a  diort  time,  and 
afterwards  they  were  charged  with  vanity  and  arrogance,  in  conjunction  with  impiety  and  lawless 
conduct ;  and  thus. 

Like  smoke  they  flew  away  with  swifl»pac'd  fate. 

And  being  dragged  from  temples  and  altars  like  fugitive  slaves,  they  have  now  nothing  left 
them,  but  their  monuments  and  tombs.  Hence  Antigonus  the  elder  said  to  one  Hermodotus,  who 
had  celebrated  him  in  his  poems  as  the  oflfspring  of  the  sun  and  a  God,  *  he  who  empties  my 
close-stOoI-pan  knows  no  such  thing  of  me.'  Very  properly  also,  did  Lysippus  the  sculptor  blame 
Apelles  the  painter,  for  drawing  the  picture  of  Alexander  with  a  thunder*bolt  in  his  hand,  whereas 
be  had  represented  him  with  a  spear,  the  glory  of  which,  as  bemg  true  and  proper,  no  time  would 
lake  away.*' 

In  another  part  of  the  same  work  also,  he  admirably  reprobates  the  impiety  of  making  the  Gods 
to  be  things  inanimate,  which  was  very  common  with  Latin  writers  of  the  Augustan  age,  and  of  the 
ages  that  accompanied  the  decline  and  fidl  of  the  Roman  empire.  But  what  he  says  on  this  sub- 
ject is  as  follows : 

**  In  the  second  place,  which  is  of  still  greater  consequence,  men  should  be  careful,  and  very 
much  afraid,  lest  before  they  are  aware,  they  tear  in  pieces  and  dissolve  divine  natures,  into  blasts 
of  wind,  streams  of  water,  seminations,  earings  of  land,  accidents  of  the  earth,  aud  mutations  of 
the  seasons,  as  those  do  who  make  Bacchus  to  be  wine,  and  Vulcan  flame.  Cleanthes  also  some- 
where says,  that  Persephone  or  Proserpine  is  the  spirit  or  air  that  pasie$  through  (^tpo/btryoy)  the 
fruits  of  the  earth,  and  is  then  ilain,  (^ovtuofityoy.)    And  a  certain  poet  say^  of  reapers, 

Then  when  the  youth  the  limbs  of  Ceres  cut. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXX  INTRODUCTION. 

For  these  men'do  not  in  tny  lespect  differ  from  those  who  conceive  At  uak,  thectUes,  and  the 
nnchor  of  a  ship,  to  bo  the  pilot,  the  yam  and  the  web  to  be  the  weaver,  and  the  bowl,'  or  the 
mead,  or  die  ptisan,  to.  be  the^  physician.  But  they  aIso  produce  dire  and  athebtical  opinions,  bj 
.  giYbg  die  names  of  Gods  to  natures  and  things  deprived'  of  senso  and  soul,  and  that  are  necessarily 
destroyed  by  men,  who  are  in  want  of  and  use  them.  For  it  is  not  possible  to  conceive  that  these 
things  are  Gods ;  since,  neither  can  any  thing  be  a  God  to  men,  which  is  deprived  of  soul,  or  is 
aul^ect  to  human  power.  From  these  things  however,  we  are  led  to  conceive  those  beings  (o  be 
Gods,  Who  both  use  them  and  impart  them  to  us,  and  supply  them  perpetually  and  without  ceasing. 
Nor  do  we  conceive  that  the  Gods  viho  bestow  these^  are  different  in  different  countries,  nor  that 
some  of  them  are  peculiar  to  the  Barbarians,  but -others  to  the  Grecians,  nor  that  some  are 
southern,  and  others  northern ;  but  as  the  sun  and  moon,  the  heavens,  the  land,  and  the  sea,  are 
common  to  all  men,  yet  are  differently  denominated  by  different  nations ;  ao  the  one  reason  that 
adorns  these  things,  and  the  one  providence  that  administers  them,  and  the  ministrant  powers  that 
preside  over  all  nations^  have  different  appellations  and  honours  assigned  them  according  to  law  by 
different  countries.  Of  those  also  that  have  been  consecrated  to  their  service,  some  employ 
obscure,  but  others  clearer  symbols,  not  without  danger  thus  conducting  our  intellectual  concep- 
tions to  the  apprehension  of  divuie  natures.  For  some,  deviating  from  the  true  meaning  of  these 
symbols,  have  entirely  slipt  into  superstition ;  and  others  again  flying  from  superstition  as  a  quag* 
mire,  have  unaware  faUen  upon  atheism  as  on  a  precipice.  Hence,  in  order  to  avoid  these  dangers, 
it  is  especially  necessary  that  resuming  the  reasoning  of  Philosophy  as  our  guide  to  mystic  knowr 
ledge,  we  should  conceive  piously  of  every  thing  that  is  said  or  done  in  religion ;  lest  that,  as 
Theodorus  said,  while  he  extended  his  arguments  with  his  right  hand,  some  of  his  auditors  received 
them  with  their  left,  so  we  should  fall  into  dangerous  errors,  by  receiving  what  the  laws  have  well 
instituted  about  sacrifices  and  festivals  in  a  manner  different  from  their  original  intention.*' 

The  Emperor  Julian,  as  well  as  Plutarch  appears  to  have  been  perfectly  aware  of  this  confusion 
in  the  religion  of  the  Heathens  arising  from  the  deification  of  men,  and  in  the  fragments  of  his 
treatise  against  the  Christians,  preserved  by  Cyril,  he  speaks  of  it  as  follows  :  '*  If  any  one  wishes 
to  consider  the  truth  respecting  you  [Christians.]  he  will  find  that  your  impiety  is  composed  of  the 
Judaic  audacity,  and  tfte  indolence  and  confution  of  the  Heathens,  For  deriving  from  both,  not 
that  which  is  most  beautiful,  but  the  worst,  you  have  fabricated  a  web  of  evils.  With  die 
Hebrewb  ndeed,  there  are  accurate  and  venerable  laws  pertaining  to  religion,  and  innumerable 
precepts  which  requires  most  holy  life  and  deliberate  choice.  But  when  the  Jewish  legislator 
forbids  the  serving  all  the  Gods,  and  enjoins  the  worship  of  one  alone,  whose  portion  is  Jacob,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Inrael  thcline  of  bis  iiilidpitaii€€/^ind^«K>toi)lj  says  Xhk,  but  i^o  omits  to  add;  I  tbthk,  jon  thall 
not  revile  die  Gods^  the  detestable  wickedness  and  audacity  of  those  in  afiter  times/ wishing  tb  take'* 
away  all  religious  reverence  ffom  the  multitude^  thought  that  not  to  worship  should  be  followed  by  ' 
blaspheming  the  Gods*.-  This  you  have  alone  thence  derived ;  but  there  is  no  siniilttudb^  in  any  ^ 
Chiug  else  between  you  and  them.  Htfdce^  from  the  innovation  of  the  Hebrews,  you  have  seized- ^ 
blasphemy  towards  the  venerable  Gods;  but  from  our  religion  you  have  tasl  ande  reverence  io 
every  nature  more  excellent  than  fnan,  and  the  love  of  paternal  tnstitutei*' 

*^  So  great  an  apprehension  indeed^  says  Dr.  St\1Hngfleet/  had  the  Heathens  of  ihc  necessity  of 
appropriate  acts  of  divine  worship,  that  some  of  them  have  chosen  to  die,  rather  than  to  give  them 
to  what  they  did  not  believe  to  be  God.     We  have  a  remarkable  story  to  this  purpose  in  Arrian 
and  Curtius*  concerning  Callisthenes.    Alexander  arriving  at  that  degree  of  vanity,  as  to  desire 
to  have  divine  worship  given  him,  and  the  matter  being  started  out  of  design  among  the  courtiers, 
either  by  Anaxarchus,  as  Arrian,  or  Cleo  the  Sicilian,  as  Curtius  says ;  and  the  way  of  doing  it 
proposed,  viz.  by  incense  and  prostration ;  Callisdienes  vehemently  opposed  it,  as  that  which 
would  confound  the  difference  of  human  and  divine  worship,  which  had  been  preserved  inviolable  ' 
among  them.    The  worship  of  the  Gods  had  been  kept  up  in  temples,  with  altars,  and  images,  and 
sacrifices,  and  hymns,  and  prostrations,  and  such  like ;  but  it  is  by  no  means  fitting,  says  he,ybi* 
ia  to  confound  these  things,  either  by  lifting  up  men  to  the  honours  of  the  Gods,  or  depressing  the 
Gods  to  the  honours  of  men.    For  neither  would  Alexander  suffer  any  man  to  usurp  his  royal  dig- 
nity by  the  votes  of  men  ;  how  much  more  justly  may  the  Gods  disdain  for  any  man  to  take  their 
honours  to  himself.     And  it  appears  by  Plutarch,'  that  the  Greeks  thought  it  a  mean  and  base  * 
thing  for  any  of  them,  when  sent  on  an  embassy  to   the  kings  of  Persia,  to  prostrate  themselves  ' 
before  them,  because  this  was  only  allowed  among  them  in  divine  adoration.     Therefore,  says  he,  ' 
when  Pelopidas  and  Ismenias  were  sent  to  Attaxerxes,  Pelopidas  did  nothing  unworthy,  but 
•Ismenias  let  fall  his  ring  to  the  ground,  and  stooping  for  that  was  thought  to  make  his  adoration ; 
which  was  altogether  as  good  a  shift  as  tlie  Jesuits  advising  the  crucifix  to  be  held  b  the  Mandarins' 
hands  while  they  made  their  adorations  in  the  Heathen  temples  in  China. 

*'  Conon*  also  refused  to  make  his  adoration,  as  a  disgrace  to  his  city;  and  Isocratcs'  accuses 

■  Answer  to  Catholics  no  Idolaters  Lond.  1676.  p.  211. 
^  Arrian.  de  Exped.  Alex.  1.  4.  et  Curt.  lib.  8. 
3  Vit.  Artaxerx.  iElian.  Var.  hist.  lib.  1.  c.  «1. 

*  Jiistin.  lib.  6. 

*  Panegyr. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXWl  INTRODUCTION. 

the  Persians  for  doing  it,  becauu  herein  they  shewed,  that  they  detpised  the  Gods  rather  than  meny 
hy  prostituting  their  honours  to  their  princes.  Herodotus^  mentions  Sperchius  and  BiilU,  who 
could  not  with  the  greatest  violence  be  brought  to  give  adoration  to  Xerxes,  because  it  was  against 
the  lam  of  their  country  to  give  divine  honour  to  men.^  And  Valerius  Maximus*  says,  the  Athe^ 
nians  put  Timagoras  to  death  for  doing  it ;  so  strong  an  apprehension  had  possessed  tfiem,  that 
the  manner  of  worship  which  they  used  to  their  Gods,  should  be  preserved  sacred  and  inviolable/' 
The  philosopher  Sallust  also  in  his  treatise  On  the  Gods  and  the  World  says,  *'  It  is  not  unreasona- 
ble to  suppose  that  impiety  is  a  species  of  punishment,  and  that  those  who  have  had  a  knowledge 
of  the  Gods,  and  yet  despised  them,  will  in  another  life  be  deprived  of  this  knowledge.  And  it  is 
requisite  to  make  the  punishment  of  those  who  have  honoured  their  kings  as  Gods  to  consist  in 
being  expelled  from  the  Gods."' 

When  the  ineffable  transcendency  of  the  first  God^  which  was  considered  as  the  grand  principle 
in  the  Heathen  theology j^  by  its  most  ancient  promulgators  Orpheus,  Pythagoras,  and  Plato,  was 
forgotten,  this  oblivion  was  doubtless  the  principal  cause  of  dead  men  being  deified  by  the  Pagans. 
Had  they  properly  directed  their  attention  to  this  tranrcendency  they  would  have  perceived  it  to  be 
so  immense  as  to  surpass  eternity,  infinity,  self-subsistence,  and  even  essence  itself,  and  that  these 
in  reality  belong  to  those  venerable  natures  which  are  as  it  were  first  unfolded  into  light  from  the 
unfathomable  depths  of  that  truly  mystic  unknown,  about  which  all  knowledge  is  refunded  into 
ignorance.  JFor  as  Simplicius  justly  observes,  ''  It  is  requisite  that  he  who  ascends  to  the  princi- 
ple of  things  should  investigate  whether  it  is  possible  diere  can  be  any  thing  better  than  the  sup- 
posed principle ;  and  if  something  more  excellent  is  found,  the  same  enquiry  should  again  be 
made  respecting  that,  till  we  arrive  at  the  highest  conceptions,  than  which  we  have  no  longer  any 
more  venerable.  Nor  should  we  stop  in  our  ascent  till  we  find  this  to  be  the  case.  For  there  is 
no  occasion  to  fear  that  our  progression  will  be  through  an  unsubstantial  void,  by  conceiving  some- 
thing about  the  first  principles  which  is  greater  and  more  transcendent  than  their  nature.  For  it  is 
not  possible  for  our  conceptions  to  take  such  a  mighty  leap  as  to  equal,  and  much  less  to  pass 
beyond  the  dignity  of  the  first  principles  of  things."  He  adds,  ''  This  therefore  is  one  and  the  best 
extension  [of  the  soul]  to  [the  highest]  God,  and  is  as  much  as  possible  irreprehensible ;  viz.  to 
kpow  firmly,  that  by  ascnbing  to  hiui  the  most  venerable  excellencies  we  can  conceive,  and  the 
most  holy  and  primary  names  and  things,  we  ascribe  nothing  to  him  which  is  suitable  to  his  dignity. 

'  Lib.  r. 
*  Lib.  6.  Cap.  3. 

S  KoM  %9>M9to»(  h  ul^i  iivai  flidf isv  tt/x  oiviixoc.  Tot/(  ytt^  ytorra;  0f oi/f ,  xm  xavaf  pfm^'At m;,  tvXoytv  n  tri^  ^tm  xai  th^  yvwrnv; 
rTi/i9^lA»,  MM*  T«v(  utvwun  fiariXiaf  wg  Stwg  ri^fi^ayraf,  i^  rnv  iiitfif  avrwy  mtno^a*  rwt  Bun  ixfrcnm     Cap.  18* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


I  NT  ROD  UCT ION.  XXXUl 

It  is  sufficient  howeveo  to  procure  our  pardon  [for  die  attemptj  that  we  can  attribute  to  him 
QOthing  superior.'"  If  it  is  not  possible  therefore  to  form  any  ideas  equal  to  the  dignity  of  the 
immediate  progeny  of  the  ineffable,  t.  e.  of  the  first  principles  of  things,  how  much  less  can  our 
conceptions  reach  that  thrice  unknown  darkness,  in  the  reverential  language  of  the  Egyptians,* 
which  is  even  beyond  these  i  Had  the  Heathens  dierefore  considered  as  they  ought  this  trans- 
cendency of  the  supreme  God,  they  would  never  have  presumed  to  equalize  the  human  with  the 
divine  nature,  and  consequently  would  never  have  worshipped  men  as  Gods.  Their  theology, 
however,  is  not  to  be  accused  as  the  cause  of  this  impiety,  but  their  forgetfulness  of  the  sub- 
limest  of  its  dogmas,  and  the  confusion  with  which  this  oblivion  was  necessarily  attended. 

In  the  last  place,  I  wish  to  adduce  a  few  respectable  testimonies  to  prove  that  statues  were  not 
considered  nor  worshipped  by  any  of  the  intelligent  Heathens  as  Gods,  but  as  the  resemblances  of 
the  Gods,  as  auxiliaries  to  the  recollection  of  a  divine  nature,  and  the  means  of  procuring  its  assist- 
ance and  favour.  For  this  purpose,  I  shall  first  present  the  reader  with  what  the  philosopher 
Sallust  says  concerning  sacrifices  and  the  honours  which  were  paid  to  the  divinities,  in  his  golden 
treatise  On  the  Gods  and  the  World.  '<  The  honours,  says  he,  which  we  pay  to  the  Gods  are  per- 
formed for  the  sake  of  our  advantage ;  and  since  the  providence  of  the  Gods  is  every  where 
extended,  a  certain  habitude  or  fitness'is  all  that  is  requisite  in  order  to  receive  their  beneficent 
communications.  But  all  habitude  b  produced  through  imitation  and  similitude.  Hence  temples 
imitate  the  heaveils,  but  altars  the  earth  ;  statues  resemble  life,  and  on  this  account  they  are  similar 
to  animals;  prayers  imitate  that  which  is  intellectual;  but  characters  superior  ineffable  powers; 
herbs  and  stones  resemble  matter ;  and  animals  which  are  sacrificed  the  irrational  life  of  our  souls. 
But  from  all  these  nothing  happens  to  the  Gods  beyond  what  they  already  posKess ;  for  what  acces- 
sion can  be  made  to  a  divine  nature  ?  But  a  conjunction  with  our  souls  and  the  Gods  is  by  these 
means  produced. 

^^  I  think  however,  it  will  be  proper  to  add  a  few  things  concerning  sacrifices.     And  in  the  first 

«  Ktu  xf^  rot  tri  ra(  fx^  wfafimnnm  {nrM,  u  lt/v«rtr  iiww  ti  xfurrw,  mc  v%97t9u€nc  «px*»f  "f'  '^9*^  »*»^»  ***  mmv 
{nritff  tmi  ar  *tf  r^(  mM^ruraf  tmMf  tX^w^iy,  nn  wxiri  atfM9nf«tf  tx*l^^'  *'*'  h^  ffma-mt  rwv  ajmfiaeif,  Ov^t  yaf  n/Xaf^rtot  fxn 
uttifAfiarmfjuTtf  fjnt^ofa  tiw  imi  vwt^^fovra  rag  Wfmraf  f^^t  "f <  •t/rwv  iwoowrf^.  Ov  yof  ^vmrev  niXiJcet/rey  vi|li|fAa  m^nc^mi  rmt 
q/uuTf^  mouts,  vf  wm^mSntm  rif  «{mi  rm  nfmrwf  o^anr,  w  Kryt  tuu  wircfrniMM*  ^i«  yaf  avrn  nff  9»0t  mpeivactf  fiarnf  wu  »t 
hnafv  axrmsrt,  K«i  wy  tnooufjkif  aymBwf  ra  «t|uivfram,Na»  aywrtira^  tun  ir^aiTtt/fya,  km  •ir«/uum,  nm  %f»yfjtara  »vrift  atmrt^raf 
iiiifut  fi9^u»{f  eri  f^nia  taari$t$nmfArf  mfm^  o^i  it  nixif  Uf  avyyn/fAnfp  to  f«i|#iv  fx><v  nutnn  vmtfrtf^t,  SimpHc.  in  £piet» 
Enchir.  p.  807.  Lond.  1070. 8vo. 

*  Of  the  first  priDciple,  says  Damascius  (in  M.  S.  *if  i  fXT')  the  Egyptians  said  noUiing,  but  celebrated  it  as 
a  darkness  beyond  all  intellectual  conception,  a  thrice  unknown  darkness,  vfmmofx*'  •fVf*;fnKm^f,  #»•»•;  wtf  «»#•? 

Proc*  Vol.  L  e 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XUIV  INTRODUCTION. 

place,  since  we  possess  every  thing  from  the  Gods,  and  it  is  but  just  to  offer  the  first  fruits  of  gifts 
to  die  giveni ;  hence^  of  our  possessions  we  offer  the  first  fruits  dirough  consecrated  gifts  ;  of  our 
bodies  through  ornaments  ;  and  of  our  life  through  sacrifices.  Besides^  without  sacriBces,  prayers 
are  words  only  ;  but  accompanied  with  sacrifices  they  become  animated  words ;  the  words  indeed 
<;orroborating  life,  but  life  animating  the  words.  Add  too,  that  the  felicity  of  ever)  thing  is  its 
proper  perfection ;  but  the  proper  perfection  of  every  thing  consists  in  a  conjunction  with  its  cause. 
And  on  this  account  we  pray  that  we  may  be  conjoined  with  the  Gods.  Since  therefore  life  pri- 
marily subsists  in  the  Gods,  and  there  is  also  a  certain  human  life,  but  the  latter  desires  to  be 
united  to  the  former,  a  medium  is  required  ;  for  natures  much  distant  from  each  other  cannot  be 
conjoined  without  a  medium.  And  it  is  necessary  that  the  medium  should  be  similar  to  the  con- 
nected natures.  Life  therefore  must  necessarily  be  the  medium  of  life ;~  and  hence  men  of  the 
present  day  that  are  happy,  and  all  the  ancients^  have  sacrificed  animals.  And  this  indeed  not  rashly, 
but  in  a  manner  accommodated  to  every  God,  with  many  other  ceremonies  respecting  the  cultiva- 
tion of  divinity.'" 

In  the  next  place,  the  elegant  Maximus  Tyrius  admirably  observes  concerning  the  wor^ip  of 
statues*  as  follows :  ''  It  appears  to  me  that  as  external  discourse  has  no  need,  in  order  to  its  com- 
position, of  certain  Phoenician,  or  Ionian,  or  Attic,  or  Assyrian,  or  Egyptian  characters,  but  human 
imbecility  devised  these  marks,  in  which  inserting  its  dulness,  it  recovers  from  them  its  memory ; 
in  like  manner  a  divine  nature  has  no  need  of  statues  or  altars ;  but  human  nature  being  very  imbe- 
cile, and  as  nnuch  distant  from  divinity  as  earth  from  heaven,  devised  these  symbols,  in  which  it 
inserted  the  names  and  the  renown  of  the  Gods.  Those,  therefore,  whose  memory  is  robust,  and 
who  are  able,  by  directly  extending  their  soul  to  heaven^  to  meet  with  divinity,  have,  perhaps,^  no 
need  of  statues.  Tliis  race  is,  however,  rare  among  men,  and  in  a  whole  nation  you  will  not  find 
one  who  recollects  divinity,  and  who  is  not  in  want  of  this  kind  of  assistance,  which  resembles  that 
devised  by  writing  masters  for  boys,  who  give  them  obscure  marks  as  copies ;  by  writing  over 

■  See  chap.  15  and  16,  of  my  translatioD  of  this  excellent  work. 

^  See  Vol.  9  of  my  translation  of  his  Dissertations,  Dissertat.  38,  the  title  of  which  is,  ''  Whether  statues 
should  be  dedicated  to  the  Gods.'' 

3  The  philosopher  Isidorus  was  a  man  of  this  description,  as  we  are  informed  by  Damascius  in  the  extracts 
from  his  life  preserved  b>  Photius.  For  he  says  of  him :  own  ra  •y»xuaT»  'Kfovxxnm  t9$xwfy  «xx»  i|^*i  «:'  aw^vt  tws 
9wu(  «*fAiTOf,  mw  nfvur^fAtfovs  owx  n  o^t/roif,  aXX*  a  auvw  r^  amoffnrw^  o,  t»  won  i«ti  mg  ««wiXowf  ayywa-iai*  9u>s  out  •**  avnvg 
iiro  TOtourwf  otto;  j  ifwri  inin/)  ttmoffnvf  x«i  vovr^*  nen  rig  h  aXKoc  n  myywavcg  luu  o  tft^t ;  xot  riiw  npn  fa/miy,  itf-o^iv  m  ir»p«* 
tfiync*  (i****  ^»  aivnam,  nat  nntren  yt  ovin  |uaXXov  poJiey.  L  e.  *'  He  was  not  willing  to  adore  statues,  but  approached  to 
the  Oods  themselves,  who  are  inwardly  concealed  not  in  adyta,  but  in  the  occult  itself,  whatever  it  may  be  of  ail- 
perfect  ignorance.  How  therefore  to  them  being  such  did  he  approach  ?  Through  vehement  love,  this  also 
being  occult  And  what  else  indeed,  could  conduct  him  to  them  than  a  love  which  is  also  unknown?  What 
my  meaning  is  those  who  have  experienced  this  love  know ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  reveal  it  by  words,  and  it  is 
no  less  difficult  to  understand  what  it  is*'' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION.  XXZ¥ 

which^  their  hand  being  guided  by  that  of  the  master,  they  become^  through  memory,  accustomed 
(o  the  art.  It  appears  to  me  dierefore,  that  legislators  devised  these  statues  for  men,  as  if  for  a 
certain  kind  of  boys,  as  tokens  of  the  honour  which  should  be  paid  to  divinity,  and  a  certain  manu- 
duction  as  it  were  and  path  to  reminiscence. 

*^  Of  statues  however,  there  is  neither  one  law,  nor  one  mode,  nor  one  art,  nor  one  matter.  For 
the  Greeks  think  it  fit  to  honour  the  Gods  from  things  the  most  beautiful  in  the  earth,  from  a  pure 
matter,  the  human  form,  and  accurate  art :  and  their  opinion  is  not  irrational  who  fashion  statues  in 
'die  human  resemblance.  For  if  the  human  soul  is  most  near  and  most  similar  to  divinity,  it  is  not 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  divinity  would  invest  that  which  is  most  similar  to  himself  with  a  most 
deformed  body,  but  rather  with  one  which  would  be  an  easy  vehicle  to  immortal  souls,  light,  and 
adapted  to  motion.  For  tiiis  «lone,  of  all  the  bodies  on  the  earth,  raises  its  summit  on  high,  is 
magnificent,  superb,  and  full  of  symmetry,  neither  astonishing  through  its  magnitude,  nor  terrible 
through  its  strength,  nor  moved  with  difficulty  through  its  weight,  nor  slippery  through  its  smooth- 
ness, nor  repercussive  through  its  hardness,  nor  groveling  through  its  coldness,  nor  precipitate 
through  its  heat,  nor  inclined  to  swim  through  its  laxity,  nor  feeding  on  raw  flesh  through  its  fero- 
city, nor  on  grass  through  its  imbecility ;  but  is  harmonically  composed  for  its  proper  works,  and 
is  dreadful  to  timid  animals,  but  mild  to  such  as  are  brave.  It  is  also  adapted  to  walk  by  nature, 
but  winged  by  reason,  capable  of  swimming  by  art,  feeds  on  com  and  fruits,  and  cultivates  tha 
earth,  is  of  a  good  colour,  stands  firm,  has  a  pleasing  countenance,  and  a  graceful  beard.  In  the 
resemblance  of  such  a  body,  the  Greeks  think  fit  to  honour  the  Gods.'' 

He  then  observes,  '^  that  with  respect  to  die  Barbarians^  all  of  them  in  like  manner  admit  the 
subsistence  of  divinity,  but  diflferent  nations  among  these  adopt  di£ferent  symbols."  After  which  he 
adds,  '^  O  many  and  all-various  statues !  of  which  some  are  feishioiied  by  art,  and  others  are 
embraced  through  indigence :  some  are  honoured  through  utility,  and  others  are  venerated  through 
the  astonishment  which  they  excite ;  some  are  conndered  as  divine  through  their  magnitude,  and 
others  are  celebrated  for  their  beauty  |  There  is  not  indeed  any  race  of  men,  neither  Barbarian  nor 
Grecian,  neither  maritime  nor  continental,  neither  livmg  a  pastoral  life,  nor  dwelling  in  cities,  which 
can  endure  to  be  without  some  symbols  of  the  honour  of  the  Gods.  How,  therefore,  shall  any  one 
discuss  the  question  whether  it  is  proper  that  statues  of  die  Gods  should  be  fabricated  or  not  i  For 
if  we  were  to  give  laws  to  other  men  recently  sprung  from  the  earth,  and  dwelling  beyond  our 
boundaries  and  our  air,  or  who  were  fashioned  by  a  certain  Prometheus,  ignorant  of  life,  and  law, 
puad  reason,  it  might  perhaps  demand  consideration,  whether  this  race  should  be  permitted  to  adore 
these  spontaneous  statues  alone,  which  are  not  fashioned  from  ivory  or  gold,  and  which  are  neither 


Digitized  by 


Google 


IXXVl  INTRODUCTION. 

oaks  nor  cedars^  nor  rivers,  nor  birds,  but  the  rising  sun^  the  splendid  moon,  the  variegated  heav^, 
the  earth  itself  and  the  air,  all  fire  and  all  water ;  or  shall  we  constrain  these  men  also  to  the  neces- 
sity of  honouring  wood,  or  stones  or  images  ?  If,  however,  this  is  the  common  law  of  all  men,  let 
us  make  no  innovations,  let  us  admit  the  conceptions  concerning  the  Gods,  and  preserve  their  sym- 
bols as  well  as  their  names. 

"  For  divinity  indeed,  the  father  and  fabricator  of  all  things,  is  more  ancioit  than  the  sun  and  the 
heavens,  more  excellent  than  time  and  eternity,  and  every  flowing  nature,  and  is  a  legislator  with- 
out law,  ineffable  by  voice,  and  invisible  by  the  eyes.  Not  being  able,  however,  to  comprehend  his 
essence,  we  apply  for  assistance  to  words  and  names,  to  animals,  and  figures  of  gold  and  ivory  and 
silver,  to  plants  and  rivers,  to  the  summits  of  mountains,  and  to  streams  of  water ;  desiring  indeed 
to  understand  his  nature,  but  through  imbecility  calling  him  by  thenanies  of  such  things  as  appear 
to  us  to  be  beautiful.  And  in  thus  acting,  we  are  affected  in  the  same  manner  as  lovers,  who  are 
delighted  with  surveying  the  images  of  the  objects  of  their  love,  and  with  recollecting  the  lyre,  the 
dart,  and  the  seat  of  these,  the  circus  in  which  they  ran,  and  every  thing  in  short,  which  excites  the 
memory  of  the  beloved  object.  What  then  remains  for  me  to  investigate  and  determine  respecting 
statues  ?  only  to  admit  the  subsistence  of  deity.  But  if  the  art  of  Phidias  excites  the  Greeks  to  the 
recollection  of  divinity,  honour  to  animals  the  Egyptians,  a  river  others,  and  fire  others,  I  do  not 
condemn  the  dissonance :  let  them  only  know,  let  them  only  love,  let  them  only  be  mindful  of  the 
object  they  adore/' 

With  respect  to  the  worship  of  animals,  Plutarch  apologizes  for  it  in  the  following  eiccellent  man- 
ner in  his  treatise  On  Isis  and  Osiris. 

*^  It  now  remains  that  we  should  speak  of  the  utility  of  these  animals  to  man,  and  of  their  sy]»- 
bolical  meaning  ;  some  of  them  partaking  of  one  of  these  only,  hut  many  of  diem  of  both.  It  is 
evident  therefore  that  the  Egyptians  worshipped  the  ox,  the  sheep,  and  the  ichneumon,  on  account 
of  their  use  and  benefit,  as  the  Lemnians  did  larks,  for  discovering  the  eggs  of  caterpillars  and 
breaking  them ;  and  the  Thessalians  storks,  because,  as  dieir  land  produced  abundance  of  ser- 
pent9,  the  storks  destroyed  all  of  them  as  soon  as  they  appeared.  Hence  also  they  enacted  a  law, 
that  whoever  killed  a  stork  should  be  banished.  Bat  the  Egyptians  honoured  die  asp,  the  weezle, 
and  the  beetle,  in  consequence  of  observing  in  them  certain  dark  resemblances  of  the  power  of  die 
Gods,  like  that  of  the  sun  in  drops  of  water.  For  at  present,  many  believe  and  assert  that  the 
weezle  engenders  by  the  ear,  and  brings  forth  by  the  mouth,  being  thus  an  image  of  the  generation 
of  reason,  [or  the  productive  principle  of  things.]    But  the  genus  of  beetles  has  no  female;  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTKODUCTION.  XXXTll 

«}l  die  males  emit  their  sperm  into  a  spherical  piece  of  earth,  which  they  roll  about  thrusting  it 
backwards  with  their  hbd  feet,  while  they  themselves  move  forwaid ;  just  as  the  sun  appears  to 
revolve  iu  a  direction  contrary  to  that  of  the  heavens,  in  consequence  of  moving  from  west  to  east 
They  also  assimilated  the  asp  to  a  star,  as  bek^  exempt  from  old  age,  and  performing  its  motions 
unassisted  by  organs  with  agility  and  ease.  Nor  was  the  crocodile  honoured  by  them  without  a 
probable  cause ;  but  is  said  to  have  been  considered  by  them  as  a  resemblance  of  divinity,  as  being 
tlie  only  animal  that  is  without  a  tongue.  For  the  divine  reason  is  unindigent  of  voice,  and  proceed- 
ing through  a  silent  path,  and  accompanied  with '  justice,  conducts  mortal  affiurs  according  to  it. 
They  also  say  it  is  the  only  animal  living  in  water  that  has  the  sight  of  its  eyes  covered  with  a  thin 
and  transparent  film,  which  descends  from  his  forehead,  so  that  he. sees  without  being  seen,  which 
is  likewise  die  case  with  the  first  God.  But  in  whatever  place  the  female  crocodile  may  lay  her 
eggs,  this  may  with  certainty  be  concluded  to  be  the  boundary  of  the  increase  of  the  Nile,  For 
not  being  able  to  lay  their  eggs  in  the  water,  and  fearing  to  lay  them  far  from  it,  they  have  such  an 
accurate  pre-sensation  of  futurity,  that  though  they  enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  river  in  its  access,  during 
the  time  of  their  laymg  and  hatching,  yet  they  preserve  their  eggs  dry  and  untouched  by  the  water. 
They  also  lay  sixty  eggs,  are  the  same  number  of  days  in  hatching  them,  and  those  4hat  are  the 
longest  lived  among  them,  live  just  so  many  years ;  which  number  is  tbe  first  of  the  measures 
employed  by  diose  who  are  conversant  with  the  heavenly  bodies. 

^^  Moreover,  of  those  animals  that  were  honoured  for  both  reasons,  we  have  before  spoken  of  the 
dog.  But  the  ibis,  killing  indeed  all  deadly  reptiles,  was  the  first  that  taught  men  the  use  of  medi- 
cal evacuation,  in  consequence  of  observii^  that  she  is  after  this  manner  washed  and  purified  by 
herself.  Those  priests  also,  that  are  most  attentive  to  the  laws  of  sacred  rites,  when  they  conse- 
crate water  for  lustration,  fetch  it  from  that  place  where  the  ibis  had  been  drinking ;  for  she  will 
neither  drink  nor  come  near  unwholesome  or  infected  water ;  but  with  tbe  distance  of  her  feet  from 
each  other,  and  her  bill  she  makes  an  equilateral  triangle.  Farther  still,  the  variety  and  mixture  of 
her  black  wings  about  tbe  white  represents  the  moon  when  she  is  gibbous. 

^'  We  ott|^t  not,  however,  to  wonder* if  the  E^ptians  love  such  slender  similitudes,  since  the 
Greeks  also,  both  in  their  pictures  and  statues,  employ  many  such  like  resemblances  of  the'  Gods. 
Thus  in  Crete,  there  was  a  statue  of  Jupiter  without  ears.  For  it  is  fit  that  he  who  is  the  ruler 
and  lord  of  all  things,  should  bear  no  one.*    Phidias  also  placed  a  dragon  by  the  statue  of 

»  Instead  of  «M*«j««ip,  I  read  MM /*«»»^»K. 
»  i.  e.  Should  be  perfectly  impartiaL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXZfiu  INTROBUCTION. 

Minerva^  and  a  soail  by  tbat  of  Veniifl  at  fllis,  to  show  that  Tirgins  require  a  guard,  and  that  keep- 
iog  at  home  and  silence  become  married  women.  But  the  trident  of  Neptune  is  a  symbol  of  the 
diird  region  of  the  worlds  which  the  sea  possesses,  having  an  arrangement  after  the  heavens  and  the 
air.  Hence  also,  they  thus  denominated  Ampbitrite  and  the  Tritons.  The  Pythagoreans  likewise 
adorned  numbers  and  figures  with  the  appeUations  of  the  Gods.  For  they  called  the  equilateral 
triai^le  Minerva  Coryphagenes,  or  begotten  from  the  summit,  and  Tritogeneia^  because  it  b  divided 
by  three  perpendiculars  drawn  from  the  three  angles.  But  they  called  die  one  Apollo^  being  per- 
suaded to  this  by  the  obvious  meaning  of  the  word  Apollo  [which  signifies  a  privation  of  multi- 
tude] and  by  the  simplicity  of  the  monad.'  The  duad  they  denominated  strife  and  audacity ;  and 
the  triad  justice.  For  since  injuring  and  being  injured  are  two  extremes  subsisting  according  to 
excess  and  defect,  justice  through  equality  has  a  situation  in  the  middle.  But  what  is  called  the 
tetractys,  being  the  number  36,  was,  as  is  reported,  their  greatest  oath,  and  was  denominated  the 
world.  For  this  number  is  formed  from  the  composition  of  the  four  first  even,  and  the  four  first 
odd  numbers,  collected  into  one  sum.^  If  therefore  the  most  approved  of  the  philosophers  did  not 
think  it  proper  to  n^ect  or  despise  any  occult  signification  of  a  divine  nature  when  they  perceived 
it  even  in  things  which  are  inanimate  and  incorporeal,  it  appears  to  me,  that  they  in  a  still  greater 
degree  venerated  those  peculiarities  depending  on  manners  which  they  saw  in  such  natures  as  had 
.  sense,  and  were  endued  with  soul,  with  passion,  and  ethical  habits.  We  must  embrace  therefore,  not 
those  who  honor  these  kings,  but  those  who  reverence  divinity  through  these,  as  through  most  clear 
mirrors,  and  which  are  produced  by  nature,  in  a  becoming  manner,  conceiving  them  to  be  tlie  instru* 
ments  or  the  art  of  the  God  by  whom  all  things  are  perpetually  adorned.  But  we  ought  to  think  that  no 
inanimate  being  can  be  more  excellent  than  one  that  is  animated,  nor  an  insensible  than  a  sensitive 
being,  not  even  though  some  one  should  collect  together  all  the  gold  and  emeralds  in  the  universe.  For 
die  divinity  is  not  ingenerated  either  in  colours,  or  figures,  or  smoothness;  but  such  things  as  neither 
ever  did,  nor  are  naturally  adapted  to  participate  of  life,  have  an  allotment  more  ignoble  than  that  of 
dead  bodies.  But  the  nature  which  lives  and^sees,  and  has  the  principle  of  motion  from  itself,  and  a 
knowledge  of  things  appropriate  and  foreign  to  its  being,  has  certainly  derived  an  efflux  and  portion 
of  that  wisdom,  which,  as  Heraclitus  says,  considers  how  both  itself,  and  the  universe  is  governed, 
Hence  the  divinity  is  not  worse  represented  in  these  animals,  than  in  the  workmanships  of  copper 
and  stone,  which  in  a  similar  manner  suffer  corruption  and  decay,  but  are  naturally  deprived  of  all 
sense  and  consciousness.  This  then  I  consider  ^  the  best  defence  that  can  be  given  of  the  adora- 
tion of  animals  by  the  Egyptians. 

■  Instead  of  itvxtmroif  fjuifai»s  as  in  the  original,  which  is  nonsense,  it  is  necessary  tp  read,  as  in  tl^e  above 
translation  wxy»rnri  ms  i*«m^»ff. 

*  For  3+4+6+8=t0;  and  1+3+5+7=16;  and  30+16=30, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION.  1XX1& 

With  respect  however  to  die  sacred  vestmeDts^  those  of  Isis  are  of  varioas  hues ;  for  her  power 
b  about  matter^  which  becomes  «id  receives  all  things^  as  light  and  darkness^  day  atid  nighty  fire 
and  water,  life  and  death,  beginning  and  end ;  but  those  of  Osiris  are  without  a  shade  and  have  no 
variety  of  colours,  but  have  one  only  which  is  simple  and  luctform.  Hence  when  the  latter  hate 
been  once  used,  they  are  laid  aside  and  preserved;  for  the  intelligible  is  invisible  and  intangible. 
But  the  vestments  of  Isis  are  used  frequently.  For  sensible  things  being  in  daily  use  and  at  hand, 
present  us  with  many  developements  and  views  of  their  different  mutations :  but  the  intellectual 
perception  of  that  which  is  intelligible,  genuine,  and  holy,  luminously  darting  through  the  soul  Hke 
a  coruscatioiv  is  attended  with  a  simultaneous  contact  and  vision  of  its  object.  Hence  Plato  and 
Aristotle  call  this  part  of  philosophy  epoptic  or  intuitive,  indicating  that  those  who  have  through 
the  exercise  of  the  reasoning  power  soared  beyond  these  doxastic,  mingled  and  all-various  natures, 
raise  themselves  to  that  first,  simple,  and  immaterial  principle,  and  passing  into  contact  with  the 
pure  truth  which  subsists  about  it,  they  consider  themselves  as  having  at  length  obtained  the  end 
of  philosophy.'  And  that  which  the  present  devoted  and  veiled  priests  obscurely  manifest  with 
great  reverence  and  caution  is  that  this  God  is  the  ruler  and  prince  of  the  dead,  and  is  not  differeflt 
firom  that  divinity  who  is  called  by  the  Greeks  Hades  and  Pluto,  the  truth  of  which  assertion  not 
being  understood,  disturbs  the  multitude,  who  suspect  that  the  truly  sacred  and  holy  Osiris  dwelli 
in  and  undemhe  earth,  where  the  bodies  of  those  are  concealed  who  appear  to  have  obtained  all 
end  of  their  being.  But  he  indeed  himself  is  at  the  remotest  distance  from  the  earth,  unstained, 
unpolluted,  and  pure  from  every  essence  that  receives  corruption  and  death.  The  souls  of  men 
however,  being  here  encompassed  with  bodies  and  passions,  cannot  participate  of  divitiity  except 
as  of  an  obscure  dream  by  intellectual  contact  through  philosophy.  But  when  they  are  liberated 
from  the  body,  and  pass  into  the  invisible,  impassive,  and  pure  region,  this  God  is  then  their  leader 
and  king,  from  whom  they  depend,  insatiably  beholding  him,  and  desiring  to  survey  that  beauty 
which  cannot  be  expressed  or  uttered  by  men ;  and  which  Isis,  as  the  ancient  discourse  evincea, 
always  loving,  pursuing,  and  enjoying  fills  such  things  in  these  lower  regions  as  participate  of  geoe^ 
ration  with  every  thing  beautiful  and  good." 

And  lastly,  the  Emperor  Julian,  in  a  fragment  of  an  Oration  or  Epistle  on  the  duties  of  a  priest^ 
has  the  following  remarks  on  religiously  venerating  statues :  '^  Statues  and  altars,  and  the  preset^ 
vation  of  unextinguished  fire,  and  in  short,  all  such  particulars,  have  been  established  by  our  fathers 
as  symbols  of  the  presence  of  the  Gods;  not  that  tpe  should  believe  thai  these  symbols  are 
Gods,  but  that  through  these  we  should  worship  the  Gods.    For  since  we  arc  connected  with  body, 

/  For  TiXtj  ix«v  5MXM-«f  Miy,  it  is  necessary  to  read  as  in  the  transladon,  nxtf  ix«»  f*x»^MK, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^  1NTRO0UCTIOK. 

U  is  abo  necessary'that  our  worship  of  the  Gods  should  be  performed  in  a  corporeal  manner;  but 
they  are  incorporeal.  And  thej  indeed  have  exhibited  to  us  as  the  first  of  statues^  that  which 
ranks  as  the  second  genus  of  Gods  from  the  first,  and  which  circularly  revolves  round  the  whole  of 
heaven.'  Since,  however,  a  corporeal  worship  cannot  even  be  paid  to  these,  because  they  are 
naturally  unindigent,  a  third  kind  of  statues  was  devised  on  the  earth,  by  the  worship  of  which  we 
rencfer  the  Gods  propitious  to  us.  For  as  those  who  reverence  the  images  of  kings,  who  are  not 
in  want  of  any  such  reverence,  at  the  same  time  attract  to  themselves  their  benevolence ;  thus  also 
those  who  venerate  the  statues  of  the  Gods,  who  are  not  in  want  of  any  thing,  persuade  the  Gods 
by  this  veneration  to  assist  and  be  favourable  to  them.  For  alacrity  in  the  performance  of  things 
in  our  power  is  a  document  of  true  sanctity ;  and  it  is  very  evident  that  he  %vho  accomplishes  the 
former,  will  in  a  greater  degree  possess  the  latter.  But  he  who  despises  things  in  his  power,  and 
afterwards  pretends  to  desire  impossibilities,  evidently  does  not  pursue  the  latter,  and  overlooks  the 
former.  For  though  divinity  is  not  in  want  of  any  thing,  it  does  not  follow  that  on  this  account 
nothing  is  to  be  offered  to  him.  For  neither  is  he  in  want  of  celebration  through  the  minbtry  of 
wards.  What  then?  [Is  it  therefore  reasonable  that  he  should  be  deprived  of  this  f  By  no  means. 
Neither  therefore  is  he  to  be  deprived  of  the  honour  which  is  paid  him  through  works ;  which 
honour  has  been  legally  established,  not  for  three,  or  for  three  thousand  years,  but  in  all  preceding 
ages,  among  all  nations  of  the  earth. 

**  But  [the  Galilaeans  will  say,]  O !  you  who  have  admitted  into  your  soul  every  multitude  of  daemons, 
whom,  though  according  to  you  they  are  formless  and  unfigured,  you  have  fashioned  in  a  corporeal 
resemblance,  it  is  not  fit  that  honour  should  be  paid  to  divinity  dirough  such  works.  How,  then, 
do  not  we  \heathens'\  consider  as  wood  and  stones  those  statues  which  are  fashioned  by  the  hands 
of  nun  f  O  more  stupid  than  even  stones  themselves !  Do  you  fancy  that  all  men  are  to  be 
drawn  by  the  nose  as  you  are  drawn  by  execrable  d<tmonSy  so  as  to  think  that  the  artificial  resent 
blances  of  the  Gods  are  the  Gods  themselves  f  Looking  therefore  to  the  resemblances  of  the 
Gods,  we  do  not  think  diem  to  be  either  stones  or  wood ;  for  neither  do  we  think  that  the  Gods 
are  these  resemblances;  since  neither  do  we  say  that  royal  images  are  wood,  or  stone,  or  brass,  nor 
that  diey  are  the  kings  themselves,  but  die  images  of  kings.  Whoever,  therefore,  loves  his  king, 
beholds  with  pleasure  the  image  of  his  kmg ;  whoever  loves  his  child  is  delighted  with  his  image ; 
and  whoever  loves  his  father  siurveys  his  image  with  delight.*    Hence  also,  he  who  is  a  lover  of 

■  Meaning  those  divine  bodies  the  celestial  orbs,  which  io  consequence  of  participating  a  divine  life  from  the 
incorporeal  powers  from  which  they  are  suspended,  may  be  very  properly  called  iecondary  Gods. 

*  Dr.  Stillingfleet  quotes  this  part  of  the  extract,  in  his  answer  to  a  book  entitled  Catholics  no  Idolaters,  and 
calls  Julian  the  devout  emperor. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


IKTBODUCTION.  Ik 

divinity  gkdl;  surreys  the  statues  ami  images  of  the  Gods;  at  the  same  time  venerating  and  fcariog 
with  a  holj  dread  the  Gods  who  invisibly  bdudd  him.< 

The  Catholics  have  employed  arguments  similar  to  these,  in  defence  of  the  reverence  which  thqr 
pay  to  the  images  of  their  saints*    Indeed,  it  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England,*  that  the 

'  ^*  Dio  Chrysostome  (says  Dr.  Stillingflect  in  the  before-cited  work,  p.  414)  at  large  debates  the  case  about 
images,  in  bis  Olympic  Oration ;  wherein  he  first  shows,  that  all  men  have  a  natural  apprehension  of  one 
supreme  God  the  father  of  all  things ;  and  that  this  God  was  represented  by  the  statue  made  by  Phidias  of 
Jupiter  Olympius,  for  so  he  said  «ap* «» jw  ta-fxn,  before  whom  we  now  are;  and  then  describes  him  to  be  the  king, 
ruler,  and  father  of  all,  both  Gods  and  men.  This  image  he  calls  the  most  blessed,  the  most  excellent,  the  most 
beautiful,  the  most  beloved  image  of  God.  He  says  there  are  four  ways  of  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  bjf 
nature,  by  the  instructions  of  the  poets,  by  the  laws,  and  by  images;  but  neither  poets,  nor  lawgivers,  nor  arti- 
ficers were  the  best  interpreters  of  the  deity,  but  only  the  philosophers  who  both  understood  and  explained  the 
divine  nature  most  truly  and  perfectly.  After  this,  he  supposes  Phidias  to  be  called  to  account  for  making  suck 
an  image  of  God,  as  unworthy  of  him;  when  Iphims,  Lycurgus,  and  the  old  Eleans,  made  none  at  all  of  him,  as 
being  out  of  the  power  of  man  to  express  his  nature.  To  this  Phidias  replies,  that  no  man  can  express  mind  and 
understanding  by  figures,  or  colours,  and  therefore  they  are  forced  to  fly  to  that  in  which  the  soul  inhabits,  and 
from  thence  they  attribute  the  seat  of  wisdom  and  reason  to  God,  having  nothing  better  to  represent  him  by. 
And  by  that  means  joining  power  and  art  together,  they  endeavour  by  something  which  may  be  seen  and  painted, 
to  represent  that  whidi  is  invbible  and  inexpressible.  But  it  may  be  said,  we  had  better  then  have  no  image  or 
representation  of  him  at  all.  No,  says  he ;  for  mankind  doth  not  love  to  worship  God  at  a  distance,  but  to  comf 
near  and  feel  him,  and  with  assurance  to  sacrifice  to  him  and  crown  him.  like  children  newly  weaned  from 
their  parents,  who  put  out  their  hands  towards  them  in  their  dreams  as  if  they  were  still  present;  so  do  men  out 
of  the  sense  of  God's  goodness  and  their  relation  to  him,  love  to  have  him  represented  as  present  with  them,  and 
80  to  converse  with  him.  Thence  have  come  all  the  [representations  of  God  among  the  barbarous  nations,  in 
mountains,  and  trees,  and  stones.*^ 

The  same  conceptions  abo  about  statues  are  entertained  by  the  Braehmans  in  Benares  on  the  Ganges.  Far 
Monsieur  Bernier  when  he  was  at  their  university,  and  was  discoursing  with  one  of  the  most  learned  men  among 
Ihem,  proposed  to  him  the  question  about  the  adoration  of  their  idols,  and  reproaching  him  with  it  as  a  thing 
very  unreasonable,  received  firom  him  this  remarkable  answer :  ''  We  have  indeed  in  our  temples  many  different 
statues,  as  those  of  Brahma,  Mabaden,  Genick,  and  Gavani,  who  are  some  of  the  chief  and  most  perfect  Deutas 
(or  Deities) ;  and  we  have  also  many  others  of  less  perfection,  to  whom  we  pay  great  honour,  prostmting  our- 
selves before  them,  and  presenting  them  flowers,  rice,  oyles,  saffian,  and  the  like,  with  much  ceremony.  But 
we  do  not  believe  these  statues  to  be  Brahma  or  Bechen,  &c.  themselves,  but  only  their  images  and  representar 
tions,  and  we  only  give  them  that  honour  on  account  of  the  beii^  they  represent  They  are  in  our  temples, 
because  it  is  necessary  in  order  to  pray  well,  to  have  something  before  our  eyes  that  may  fix  the  mind.  And 
when  we  pray,  it  is  not  the  statue  we  pray  to,  but  he  that  is  represented  by  it."  The  Brahmans  have  also  ano« 
ther  way  of  defending  their  worship  of  statues,  of  which  the  same  author  gxvss  the  followung  account:  *'  That 
God,  or  that  sovereign  being  whom  they  call  Achar  (immutable)  has  produced  or  drawn  out  of  his  own  substance, 
not  only  souls,  but  also  whatever  is  material  and  corporeal  in  the  universe,  so  that  all  things  in  the  world  are 
hut  one  and  the  same  thing  with  God  himself,  as  all  numbers  are  but  one  and  the  same  unity  repeated."  Ber- 
nier Memoires,  tome  9.  p.  171*  178. 

From  this  latter  extract  it  appears  that  the  Braehmans  as  well  as  the  ancient  Egyptians,  believe  that  the 
supreme  principle  is  all  things.  According  to  the  best  of  the  Platonists  likewise,  this  principle  is  all  things  prior 
to  all*    For  by  being  the  one,  it  is  all  thingt  after  the  most  nmpk  manner,  i.  e.  so  as  to  transcend  all  multitude. 

*  See  its  Homilies,  tome  3.  p.  46. 
froc.  Vol.  I,  / 


Digitized  by 


Google 


xlK  IKTRODVCTION. 

Cathofics  form  the  same  opiiuoos  of  the  saints  whose  images  ihey  warship  as  dM  HeadieQS  did  of 
their  Gods  ;  and  employ  the  same  outward  rites  in  honouring  their  images^  as  the  Headiens  did 
in  the  religious  veneration  of  their  statues.  Thus  as  the  Heathens  had  their  tutelar  GodSf  such  as 
were  Bdus  to  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians,  Osiris  and  Isis  to  the  E^ptians,  and  Vulcan  to 
4he  Lemnians,  thus  also  the  Catholics  attribute  die  defence  of  certain  countries  to  certain  saints. 
Have  not  the  saints  also  to  whom  the  safeguard  of  particular  cities  is  committed,  die  same  office 
as  the  Dii  Frasides  of  the  Heathens?  Such  as  were  at  Delphi,  Apollo;  at  Athens,  Minerva; 
at  Carthage,  Juno  ;  and  at  Rome,  Quirinus.  And  do  not  the  saints  to  whom  churches  'are  built 
and  altars  erected  correspond  to  the  Dii  Patroni  of  the  Heathens?  Such  as  were  in  the  Capitol, 
Jupiter,  in  the  temple  at  Paphos,  Venus,  in  the  temple  of  Ephesus,  Diana.  Are  not  likewise,  our 
Lady  of  Walsingham,  our  Lady  of  Ipswich,  our  Lady  of  Wilsdon,  and  the  like,  imitations  of  Diana 
Agrotera,  Diana  Coriphea,  Diana  Ephesia,  Venus  Cypria,  Venus  Paphia,  Venus  Gnidia,  and  the 
like  ?  The  Catholics  too,  have  substituted  for  the  iharine  deities  Neptune,  Triton,  Nereus,  Castor 
and  Pollux,  Venus,  8cc.  Saint  Christopher,  Saint  Clement,  and  others,  and  especially  our  Lady, 
as  she  is  called  by  them,  to  whom  seamen  sing  Ave  Maris  Stella,  Neither  has  the  fire  escaped 
their  imitation  of  the  Pagans.  For  instead  of  Vulcan  and  Vesta,  the  inspective  guardians  of  fire 
according  to  the  Heathens,  the  Catholics  have  substituted  Saint  Agatha,  on  the  day  of  whose  nati- 
vity they  make  letters  for  the  purpose  of  extinguishing  fire.  Every  artificer  likewise  and  profession 
lias  a  special  saint  in  the  place  of  a  presiding  God.  Thus  scholars  have  Saint  Nicholas  and  Saint 
Gregory;  painters  Saint  Luke;  nor  are  soldiers  in  want  of  a  saint  corresponding  to  Mars,  nor  lovers 
of  one  who  is  a  substitute  for  Venus. 

All  diseases  too  have  their  special  saints  instead  of  Gods,  who  are  invoked  as  possessing  a  healii^ 
power.  Thus  the  venereal  disease  has  Saint  Roche ;  the  falling  Sickness  Saint  Cornelius,  the  tooth- 
ach  Saint  Apollin,  &c.  Beasts  and  cattle  also  have  their  presiding  saints :  for  Saint  Loy  (says  the 
HcHuily)  is  the  horse-leach,  and  Saint  Antony  the  swineherd,  8cc.  The  Homily  adds,'  ^'  that  in 
many  points  the  Papists  exceed  the  Gentiles  in  idolatry,  and  particularly  in  honouring  and  wor- 
shipping the  relics  and  bones  of  saints,  which  prove  that  they  be  mortal  men  and  dead,  and  there- 
fore no  Gods  to  be  worshipped,  which  the  Gentiles  would  never  confess  of  their  Gods  for  very 
shame."  And  after  enumerating  many  ridiculous  practices  of  the  Catholics  in  reference  to  these 
relics,  the  Homily  concludes  vdth  observing,  ^^  that  they  are  not  only  more  wicked  than  the  Gen- 
tile idolaters,  but  also  no  wiser  than  asses,  horses,  and  mules,  which  have  no  understanding." 

In  the  second  place  the  Homilies  shew^  that  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Papists  in  honour 

'  Tome  3.  p.  54.  *  p.  49. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTIOK.  d&i 

ing  tiul  wordiippiiv  Ibek  isMigefl  or  MtaaU,  are  tbe  same  widt  the  rites  of  the  Pagena^  ^  Tbia, 
say  tfaej,  is  erident  in  their  pilgrimageB  to  visit  images  which  had  more  hddoess  and  virtoe  in  them 
than  others.  In  their  candle-religion,  burning  incense^  offering  up  gold  to  images,  hanging  up 
crutches,  chairs,  and  ships,  legs,  arms,  and  whole  men  and  women  of  war,  before  ionges,  as  though 
by  them,  or  saints  (as  they  say)  they  were  delivered  from  kmeneas,  sickness,  captivity,  or  shipwrack/' 
In  spreading  abroad  after  the  manner  of  the  Heathens,  the  miracles  that  have  accompamed  inures; 
f^  Sudi  an  image  was  s^it  from  heaven,  like  the  Palladium,  or  Diana  of  the  Ephesians.  Such  an 
image  was  brought  by  angels.  Such  a  one  came  itself  far  from  the  east  to  the  west,  as  Dame 
Fortune  fled  to  Rome.  Some  images  though  they  were  hard  and  stony,  yet  for  tender-heart  and 
pity  wept.  Some  spake  more  monstrously  than  ever  did  Balaam's  ass,  who  had  life  and  braalh 
in  him.  Such  a  cripple  came  and  saluted  this  saint  of  oak,  and  by  and  by  he  was  made  wbok^ 
and  here  hangeth  his  crutch.  Such  a  one  in  a  tempest  vowed  to  Saint  Christopher,  and  scaped,  and 
behold  here  is  his  ship  of  war.  Such  a  one,  by  Saint  Leonard's  help,  brake  out  of  prison,  and  aee 
where  his  fetters  hang.  And  infinite  thousands  more  miracles  by  like,  or  more  shameless  lies  were 
reported." 

After  all  this,  I  appeal  to  every  intelligent  reader,  whether  the  religion  of  the  Heathens,  accord^ 
ing  to  its  genuine  purity  as  delineated  in  this  Introduction,  and  as  professed  and  promulgated  by 
Ae  best  and  wisest  men  of  antiquity,  is  not  infinitely  preferable  to  that  of  the  Catholics  i  And 
vrhetfaer  it  is  not  more  holy  to  reverence  beings  the  immediate  prt^eny  of  the  ineffible  principle  of 
all  things,  and  which  are  etemaUy  centered  and  rooted  in  him ;  and  to  beUeve  that  in  reverencing 
these,  we  at  the  same  time  reverence  the  ineffable,  because  they  partake  of  his  nature,  and  thai 
through  these  as  media  we  become  united  vnth  him,'  than  to  reverence  men,  and  the  images  (^ 
men,  many  of  whom  when  living,  were  the  disgrace  of  human  nature  i  The  Church  of  England  as 
we  see  prefers  the  Pagans  to  the  Papists;  and  I  trust  that  every  other  sect  of  Protestant  Christians 
will  unanimously  subscribe  to  her  decision.  And  &us  much  in  defence  of  the  theology  of  Plato^ 
and  the  religious  worship  of  the  Heathens, 

it  now  remains  that  I  should  speak  of  the  following  work,  of  its  author,  and  the  translation.  The 
work  itself  then  is  a  scientific  developement  of  the  deiform  processions  firom  the  ineffable  princifde 

>  Tbe  ineffable  principle  of  things,  as  is  demonstrated  in  the  Elements  of  Theology  in  this  work,  is  beyond 
self-subsistence.  Hence  the  first  ineffable  evolution  from  him  consists  of  self^^ubsistent  natures.  As  we 
therefore  are  only  the  dregs  of  the  rational  nature,  many  media  are  necessary  to  conjoin  us  with  a  principle  so 
immensely  exalted  above  us.  And  these  media  are  the  golden  chain  of  powers  that  have  deified  summits,  or 
^hat  have  the  ineffable  united  with  the  efiable. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


xllT  INTHODUCTION. 

#f  ttungs,  and  dut,  m  it  appears  to  me  in  the  greatest  perfection  poitible  to  man.  For  tbe  reason- 
ing is  etery  where  consummately  accurate^  and  deduced  from  sdf^vident  principles;  and  the 
conclusions  are  tbe  result  of  what  Plato  powerfully  calls  geometrical  necessities.  To  the  reader 
of  this  work  indeed,  who  has  not  been  properly  disciplined  in  Eleatic  and  Academic  stttdies,  and 
who  has  not  a  genius  naturally  adapted  to  such  abstruse  speculations,  it  will  doubtless  appear  to 
be  perfectly  unintelligible,  and  in  the  language  of  critical  cant,  nothing  but  jargon  and  revery. 
This,  however,  is  what  Plato  die  great  hierophant  of  this  theology  predicted  would  be  the  case,  if 
eftt*  it  was  unfolded  to  the  multitude  at  large.  ''  For  as  it  appears  to  me,  sojfs  he,  there  are 
searuly  any  particulars  which  will  be  considered  by  the  multitude  more  ridiculous  than  these;  nor 
again,  any  which  will  appear  more  wonderful  and  enthusiastic  to  those  who  are  naturally  adapted 
to  perceive  themJ' ' 

In  his  seventh  epistle  also  he  observes  as  follows :  ''  Thus  much,  however,  I  shall  say  respecting 
all  diose  who  either  have  written  or  shall  write,  affirming  that  they  know  those  things  which  are 
the  objects  of  my  study  (whether  they  have  heard  them  from  me  or  from  others,  or  whether  they 
have  discovered  them  themselves)  that  they  have  not  heard  any  thing  about  these  things  conform- 
able to  my  opinion :  for  I  never  have  written  nor  ever  shall  write  about  them.*  For  a  thing  of  thb 
kind  cannot  be  expressed  by  words  like  other  disciplines,  but  by  long  familiarity,  and  living  in 
conjunction  with  the  thing  itself,  a  light'  as  it  were  leaping  from  a  fire  will  on  a  sudden  be  enkindkd 
in  the  soul,  and  there  itself  nourish  itself.''  And  shordy  after  he  adds ;  ^'  But  if  it  appeared  to  me 
that  the  particulars  of  which  I  am  speakiog  could  be  sufficiendy  communicated  to  the  multitude 
by  writmg  or  speech,  what  could  we  accomplish  more  beautiful  in  life  than  to  impart  a  mighty 
benefit  to  mankind,  and  lead  an  intelligible  nature  into  light,  so  as  to  be  obvious  to  all  men  i  I 
diink,  however,  that  an  attempt  of  this  kind  would  only  be  beneficial  to  a  few,  who  from  some 
small  vesdges  previously  demonstrated  are  themselves  able  to  discover  these  abstruse  particulars. 
But  with  respect  to  the  rest  of  mankind,  some  it  will  fill  with  a  contempt  by  no  means  elegant,  and 
others  widi  a  lofty  and  arrogant  hope  that  they  sludl  now  learn  certam  venerable  things."^ 

MCM  ifffovrMM-rixMrrvpa,     Epist.  9. 

^  Plato  means  by  this,  that  he  has  never  written  perspicuously  about  intellig^lei  or  true  beings,  the  proper 
objects  of  intellect. 

^  This  light  is  a  thing  of  a  very  different  kind  from  that  which  is  produced  by  the  evidence  arising  from 
truths  perceptible  by  the  multitude,  as  those  who  have  experienced  it  well  know. 

^  Totfvrli  y»  f^it  irif t  irwrfwv  fxa>  f ^f«iv  f*n  ytypafomt  wbu  yfa^^airm,  otf-et  fo^-iv  ii^nwi  iri^i  ivy  tyw  ovou^/w,  cit*  i/t«ov 
•iPfiiMrcc,  iir*  fl»XXiw,  110*  »c  tv^rtf  avrup  vwroi/(  oux  t^ri  unra  yi  mv  tfxnf  io(en  irfpi  rtu  WfayfMVoc  miui  et/^iv,  evx  ei/r  tjuoy 
yi  irif i  avrwf  ten  avyyft^fjtm,  wii  f4.n  irtri  ymrtu*  fnrtif  yaf  wietfJims  c0tiv,  w;  aXhM  fJM9nf*nr»,  oXX"  m  ireXXii;  ffvnvfftaf  yiyvopw 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION.  xIt 

The  prediction  of  Plato  tlierefore^  has  been  but  too  truly  fulfilled  in  the  fate  which  has  attended 
the  writings  of  tfie  best  of  his  disciples^  amoi^  whom  Proclus  certainly  maintains  the  most  distin- 
guished rank.  This  indeed,  these  disciples  well  knew  would  be  the  case ;  but  perceiving  that  the 
hand  of  Barbaric  and  despotic  power  was  about  to  destroy  the  scho<^  of  the  philosophers,  and 
foreseeing  that  dreadful  night  of  ignorance  and  folly  which  succeeded  so  nefarious  an  undertaking, 
diey  benevolently  disclosed  in  as  luminous  a  manner  as  the  subject  would  permit,  the  arcana  of 
tfieir  master's  doctrmes,  thereby,  as  Plato  expresses  it,  giving  assistance  to  I^ilosophy,  and  also 
preserving  it  as  a  paternal  and  immortal  inheritance,  to  the  latest  posterity.  Proclus  in  the  first 
book  of  this  work  has  enumerated  the  requisites  which  a  student  of  it  ought  to  possess  ;  and  it  is 
most  certain  that  he  vdio  does  not  possess  them,  will  never  fathom  the  depths  of  tins  theology,  or 
perceive  his  mind  irradiated  with  that  admirable  light,  mentioned  by  Plato  in  the  foregoii^ 
extact,  and  which  is  only  to  be  seen  by  that  eye  of  the  soul  which  is  better  worth  saving  than  ten 
diousand  corporeal  eyes. 

With  respect  to  ^  diction  of  Proclus  in  this  work,  its  general  character  is  that  of  purity, 
clearness,  copiousness,  and  magnificence ;  so  that  even  the  fastidious  critic,  who  considers  every 
Greek  writer  as  partially  barbarous  who  lived  after  the  fall  of  the  Macedonian  empire,  must,  how* 
ever  unwillingly,  be  forced  to  acknowledge  that  Proclus  is  a  splendid  exception.  The  sagacious 
Kepler,  whose  decision  on  this  subject,  outweighs  in  my  opinion,  that  of  a  swarm  o(  modem 
critics,  after  having  made  a  long  extract  from  the  commentaries  of  Proclus  on  Euclid,  gives  the 
following  animated  encomium  of  his  diction.  ^^  Oratio  fluit  ipsi  torrentis  instar,  ripas  inundans,  et 
cosca  dubitationum  vada  gurgitesque  -occultans,  dum  mens  plena  majestatis  tantarum  rerum, 
luctatnr  in  angustiis  linguas,  et  conclusio  nunquam  sibi  ipsi  verborum  copi&  satisfaciens,  proposi- 
tionmn  simplicitatem  excedit''  i.  e.  **  His  language  flows  like  a  torrent,  inundating  its  banks,  and 
hiding  the  dark  fords  and  wUrlpoob  of  doubts,  while  his  mind  full  of  the  majesty  of  things  of  such 
a  magnitude,  struggles  in  the  straits  of  language,  and  the  conclusion  never  satisfying  him,  exceeds 
by  the  copia  of  words,  the  simplicity  of  the  propositions."  If  we  omit  what  Kepler  here  says 
about  the  struggle  of  the  mind  of  Proclus,  atad  his  never  being  satisfied  with  the  conclusion,  the 
rest  of  his  eulogy  is  equally  applicable  to  the  style  of  the  present  work,  so  far  as  it  is  possible  for 
the  beauties  of  diction  to  be  combined  with  the  rigid  accuracy  of  geometrical  reasoning. 

«if I  TO  Wfayfjta  »uto,  mi  tou  tfvf nv,  iS**^pn{  otcv  ain  wvfoe  «i?lii^arroff  (lege  mi^nmv)  ifa^n  ^mf,  «r  rif  +wx?  y«w/LUio»  at/rt  lai/rt 

^In  Tpiftt. Ei  it  (uifli  i^MTo  ypcMTTM  9*  tKarmf  fiNM  Vfof  rwg  iroXXov;  >uu  fnra,  n  rovrw  xaXXtov  twtr paxr  at  nfjur  nr^fiift^  ^ 

rwc  Ti  aiOfwtwa-i  fxtya  o^iXo;  ypa4^i,  xeu  vnf  ^vffiy  fi(  fcvf  tm;  irno-i  it^raytvym ;  aXX*  ot/n  wBpwmtf  ny^vfAOi  rnf  (ViX"^*'  «tf« 
^tvwf  Uyofjopif  ayaOvff  u  p-n  riciy  oXiyot; ,  oiroo'M  It/WTM  tnwftti  mvrot  tta  fAinfOf  wiiifiw;*  tw  «  in  oXXivr,  fwg  fxtf  naraff9fn^m( 
w%»^»i  tfAWhuautr  ov^v^u^  afAfAiXivs,  vwg  ^  v-^n^f  neu  xavrif  tXiriiof,  vg  o-ip*  arva  fAifM^ntott^e. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


xlvi  INTRODUCTION. 

With  respect  to  the  life  of  Proclus,  it  has  been  written  with  great  elegance  by  his  disciple  Man- 
nus ;  and  a  transla^on  of  it  by  me  prefixed  to  my  version  of  the  commentaries  of  Proclus  was  pub- 
lished in  1788.  From  the  edition  of  that  life  therefore,  by  Fabricius,  die  following  particulars 
relative  to  this  very  extraordinary  man  are  extracted,  for  the  information  of  the  reader  who  may  not 
have  the  translation  of  it  in  his  possession.  According  to  the  accurate  chronology  then  of 
Fabridus,  Proclus  was  bom  at  Byzantium  in  the  year  of  Christ  412,  on  the  6th  of  the  Ides 
of  February,  and  died  in  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-fourth  year  after  the  reign  of  the  empe- 
ror Julian,  on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  Attic  Munichion,  or  the  April  of  the  Romans, 
Nicagoras  the  junior,  being  at  that  time  the  Athenian  archon.  His  father  Patricius,  and  his 
mother  Marcella,  were  both  of  them  of  the  Lycian  nation,  and  were  no  less  illustrious  for  their 
virtue  than  their  birth.  As  soon  as  he  was  bom,  his  parents  brought  him  to  their  native  country 
Xanthus,  which  was  sacred  to  Apollo.  And  this,  says  Marinus,  happened  to  him  by  a  certain  divine 
aUotment.  ^'  For,  he  adds,  I  think  it  was  necessary  that  he  who  was  to  be  the  leader  of  all 
sciences,  should  be  nourished  and  educated  under  the  presiding  deity  of  the  Muses.**  The  person 
of  Proclus  was  uncommonly  beautiful ;  and  he  not  only  possessed  all  the  moral  and  intellectual 
virtues  in  the  highest  perfection,  but  the  vestigies  of  them  also,  which  are  den9minated  the  physical 
virtues,  were  clearly  seen,  says  Marinus,  in  his  last  and  shelly  vestment  the  body.  Hence  he 
possessed  a  remarkable  acuteness  of  sensation,  and  particularly  in  the  most  honourable  of  the 
senses,  sight  and  hearing,  which,  as  Plato  says,  were  imparted  by  the  Gods  to  men  for  the  purpose 
of  philosophiz'mg,  and  for  the  well  being  of  the  animal  life.  In  the  second  place,  he  possessed  so 
great  a  strength  of  body,  that  it  was  neidier  injured  by  cold,  nor  any  endurance  of  labours,  though 
these  were  extreme,  both  by  night  and  day.  In  the  third  place,  he  was,  as  we  have  before  observed, 
very  beautiful.  '^  For  not  only,  says  Marinus,  did  his  body  possess  great  symmetry,  but  a  living 
light  as  it  were  beaming  from  his  soul  was  efBorescent  in  his  body,  and  shone  forth  with  au  admira^ 
ble  splendor,  which  it  is  impossible  to  describe.'*  Marinus  adds,  ^'  Indeed  he  was  so  beautiful, 
^t  no  painter  could  accurately  exhibit  his  resemblance ;  and  all  the  pictures  of  him  which  were 
circulated,  though  very  beautiful,  were  very  inferior  to  the  beauty  of  the  original'^  And  in  the 
fourth  place,  he  possessed  health  in  such  perfection,  diat  he  was  not  ill  above  twice  or  thrice  in 
the  course  of  so  long  a  life  as  seventy-five  years. 

Such  then  were  the  corporeal  prerogatives  which  Proclus  possessed,  and  which  may  be  called 
the  forerunners  of  the  forms  of  perfect  virtue.  But  he  possessed  in  a  wonderful  manner  what 
Plato  calls  the  elements  of  a  philosophic  genius.'  For  he  had  an  excellent  memory,  learned  with 
focility,  viras  magoificent  and  graceful,  and  the  friend  and  ally  of  tmth,  justice,  fortitude,  and  tem^ 

*  See  the  sixth  book  of  the  Republic  of  Plato, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION.  xlvii 

perance.  Haying  for  a  short  space  of  time  applied  himself  in  Lycia  to  grammar,  he  went  to  Alex- 
UDdria  in  Egypt^  and  was  there  instructed  in  rhetoric  by  Leonas  who  derived  his  lineage  from 
Isaurus,  and  in  grammar  by  Orion,  whose  ancestors  discharged  the  sacerdotaPofEce  aflioog  the 
Egyptians,  and  who  composed  elaborate  treatises  on  that  art.  A  certain  good  fortwie  however, 
says  Marinus,  brought  him  back  to  the  place  of  his  nativity.  For  on  bis  return  his  tutelar  Goddess 
exhorted  him  to  philosophy,  and  to  visit  the  Athenian  schools.  Having  therefore,  first  returned  to 
Alexandria  and  bade  farewell  to  rhetoric,  and  the  other  arts  which  he  had  formerly  studied,  he  gave 
himself  up'  to  the  discourses  of  the  philosophers  then  resident  at  Alexandria.  Here,  he  became  an 
auditor  of  Olympiodorus,'  the  most  illustrious  of  philosophers,  for  the  sake  of  imbibing  the  doc- 
trine of  Aristotle ;  and  was  instructed  in  the  mathematical  disciplines  by  Hero,  a  religious  man, 
and  eminently  skilful  in  teaching  .those  sciences.  Proclus  however,  not  bemg  satisfied  widi  the 
Alexandrian  schools,  went  to  Athens,  ^'  with  a  certain  splendid  procession,  says  Marinus,  of  all  elo- 
quence and  elegance,  and  attended  by  the  Gods  that  preside  over  philosophy,  and  by  beneficent 
daemons.  For  that  the  succession  of  philosophy,  might  be  preserved  legitimate  and  genuine,  the 
Gods  led  him  to  the  city  over  M'hich  its  inspective  guardian  presides.''  Hence  Proclus  was  called 
'"«''  »f  oX'Jv  by  way  of  eminence y  the  Platonic  Successor.  At  Athens  therefore,  Proclus  fortunately 
met  with  the  first  of  philosophers,  Syrianus,^  the  son  of  Philoxenus,  who  not  only  much  assisted 
him  in  his  studies,  but  made  him  his  domestic  as  to  other  concerns,  and  the  companion  of  his  philo- 
sophic life,  having  found  him  such  an  auditor  and  successor  as  he  had  a  long  time  sought  for,  and  one 
who  was  capable  of  receiving  a  multitude  of  disciplines  and  divine  d<9gmas. 

In  less  duin  two  whole  years  therefore,  Proclus  read  with  Syrianus  all  the  works  of  Aristotle,  viz. 
his  logic,  ethics,  politics,  physics,  and  theological  science.  And  being  sufficiently  instructed  in  these 
as  in  certain  proteleia,  or  thmgs  preparatory  to  initiation,  and  lesser  mysteries,  Syrianus  led  hiil| 
to  the  mystic  discipline  of  Plato,  in  an  orderly  progression,  and  not  according  to  the  Chaldean 
oracle  with  a  transcendent  foot.  He  likewise  enabled  Proclus  to  survey  in  conjunction  with  him, 
says  Marinus,  truly  divine  mysteries,  with  the  eyes  of  his  soul  free  from  material  darkness,  and 
with  undefiled  intellectual  vision.      But  Proclus  employing  sleepless  exercise  and  attention,  both 

'  This  Olympiodorus  is  not  the  same  with  the  philosopher  of  that  name  whose  learned  commentaries  on  cer- 
tain dialogues  of  Plato  are  extant  m  manuscript ;  as  in  these,  not  only  Proclus,  but  Damascius  who  flourished 
after  Proclus  is  celebrated.  ^ 

*  This  truly  great  man  appears  to  have  been  the  first  who  thoroughly  penetrated  the  profundity  contained  in 
the  writings  of  the  more  ancient  philosophers,  contemporary  with  and  prior  to  Plato,  and  to  have  demon- 
strated the  admirable  agreement  of  their  doetrines  with  each  other.  Unfortunately  but  few  of  his  works  are 
extant. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Xl^  INTRODUCTION. 

by  night  and  by  day,  and  synoptically  and  judiciously  committing  to  writing  what  he  heard  from 
Syrianus,  made  so  great  a  progress  in  a  little  time,  that  by  then  he  was  twenty-eight  years  of  age^ 
be  had  composed  a  multitude  of  works  and  among  the  rest  his  commentaries  on  the  Tim«us  which 
are  truly  elegant  and  full  of  science.  But  from  such  a  discipline  as  this,  his  manners  became  more 
adorned ;  and  as  he  advanced  in  science  he  increased  in  virtue. 

Marinus  after  this,  shows  how  Produs  possessed  all  the  virtues  in  the  greatest  possible  perfec« 
tion;  and  how  he  proceeded  from  the  exercise  of  the  political  virtues,  which  are  produced  by 
reason  adorning  the  irrational  part  as  its  instrument,  to  the  cathartic  virtues  which  pertain  to  reason 
alone,  withdrawing  from  other  things  to  itself,  throwing  aside  the  instruments  of  sense  as  vain, 
repressmg  also  the  ener^es  through  Ihese  instruments,  and  liberating  the  soul  from  die  bonds  of 
generation.  He  then  adds,  **  Proclus  having  made  a  proiSciency,  through  these  virtues,  as  it  were 
by  certain  mystic  steps,  recurred  from  these  to  such  as  are  greater  and  more  telestic,  being  con* 
ducted  to  them  by  a  prosperous  nature  and  scientific  discipline.  For  being  now  purified,  rising 
above  generation,  and  despising  its  thyrsus-bearers,'  he  was  agitated  with  a  divinely  inspired  fury, 
about  the  first  essences,  and  became  an  inspector  of  the  truly  blessed  spectacles  which  they  contain. 
No  longer  collecting  discursively  and  demonstratively  the  science  of  them,  but  surveying  them  as 
it  were  by  simple  intuition,  and  beholding  through  intellectual  energies  the  paradigms  in  a  divine 
intellect,  assuming  a  virtue  which  can  no  longer  be  denominated  prudence,  but  which  ought  rather 
to  be  called  wisdom,  or  somediing  still  more  venerable  than  this.  The  philosopher  therefore  ener* 
gizing  according  to  this  virtue,  easily  comprehended  all  the  theology  of  the  Greeks  and  Barbarians, 
Mid  that  which  is  adumbrated  in  mythological  fictions,  and  brought  it  into  light,  to  those  who  are 
willing  and  able  to  understand  it.  He  explained  likewise  every  thing  in  a  more  enthusiastic  man* 
ner,  and  brought  die  difierent  theologies  to  an  harmonious  agreement.  At  the  same  time  also, 
investigating  the  writings  of  the  ancients,  whatever  he  found  in  them  genuine,  he  judiciously 
adopted ;  but  if  he  found  any  diing  of  a  spurious  nature,  this,  he  entirely  rejected  as  erroneous. 
He  also  strenuously  subverted  by  a  diligent  examination  such  doctrines  as  were  contrary  to  truth. 
In  his  associations  too  with  others,  he  employed  no  less  force  and  perspicuity.  For  he  was  a  man 
laborious  beyond  measure ;  as,  in  one  day,  he  gave  five,  and  sometimes  more  lectures,  and  wrote 

>  Socrates  in  the  Phado  of  Plato,  Orphically  calls  the  multitude  thyrsus-bearers  as  living  Tltannically.  For 
the  thyrsus,  says  Olympiodoras,  (in  MS.  comment  in  Phsed.)  is  a  symbol  of  material  and  partible  fobrication,  on 
account  of  its  divulsed  continuity,  whence  also  it  is  a  Tltannic  plant.  **  For  it  is  extended,  says  he,  before  Bac- 
chus, instead  of  his  paternal  sceptre,  and  through  this  they  call  him  into  a  partial  nature.  He  adds,  ^  Besides 
the  Titans  are  thyrsus-bearers;  and  Prometheus  concealed  fire  in  a  reed,  whether  by  this  we  are  to  understand 
that  he  draws  down  celestial  light  into  generation,  or  impels  soul  into  body,  or  calls  forth  divine  illumination,  the 
whole  of  which  is  ungenerated,  into  generation,** 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION.  xUx 

as  many  as  seven  hundred  verses.  Besides  this,  he  went  to  other  philosophy rs^  and  spent  the 
evening  in  conversation  with  them.  And  all  these  employments  h^  executed  in  such  a  manner  as 
not  to  neglect  his  nocturnal  and  vigilant  piety  to  the  Gocjs^  and  assiduously  supplicating  the  sun 
when  rising,  when  at  his  meridian  altitude^  and  when  he  sets.'' 

Marinus  farther  observes  of  this  most  extraordinary  man^  '^  that  he  did  not  seem  to  be  without 
divine  inspiration.  For  words  «milar  to  the  most  white  and  thick-falling  snow '  proceeded  from  his 
wise  mouthy  his  eyes  appeared  to  be  filled  with  a  fulgid  splendor^  and  the  rest  of  his  face  to  partici- 
pate of  divine  illumination.  Hence  Rufinus,  a  man  illustrious  in  the  Republic,  and  who  was  also 
a  man  of  veracity,  and  in  other  respects  venerable,  happening  to  be  present  with  him  when  he  was 
lecturing,  perceived  tliat  his  head  was  surrounded  with  a  light.  And  when  Proclus  had  finished 
his  lecture,  Rufinus  rising,  adored  him>  and  testified  by  an  oath  the  truth  of  the  divine  vision  which 
he  bad  seen.'' 

Marinus  also  informs  us,  ^'that  Proclus  being  purified  in  an  orderly  manner  by  the  Chaldean  puri- 
fications, was  an  inspector  of  the  lucid  Hecatic  visions,  as  he  himself  somewhere  mentions  in  one 
of  his  writings.  By  opportunely  moving  likewise  a  certain  Hecatic  sphaerula,*  he  procured  showers 
of  rain,  and  freed  Athens  from  an  unseasonable  heat.  Besides  this,  by  certain  phylacteria  or 
charms,  he  stopt  an  earthquake,  and  had  made  trial  of  the  divining  energy  of  the  tripod,  having 
been  instructed  by  certain  verses  respecting  its  failure.  For  when  he  was  in  his  fortieth  year,  he 
appeared  in  a  dream  to  utter  the  following  verses  ; 

High  above  sther  there  with  radiance  bright, 
A  pure  immortal  splendor  wings  its  flight ;  ^ 
Whose  beams  divine  with  vivid  force  aspire, 
And  leap  resounding  from  a  fount  of  hre. 

*  Alluding  to  the  beautiful  description  given  of  Ulysses  in  the  third  book  of  the  Iliad,  v.  8S.  which  is  thus 
elegantly  paraphrased  by  Pope. 

But  when  he  speaks  what  elocution  flows! 
Soft  as  the  fleeces  of  descending  snows 
The  copious  accents  fall  with  easy  art ; 
Melting  they  fall  and  sink  into  the  heart* 

*  Nicephorus  in  his  commentary  on  Synesius  de  Insomniis,  p.  368.  informs  us  that  the  Hecatic  orb  is  a  golden  v 
sphere,  which  has  a  sapphire'stone  inclosed  in  its  middle  part,  and  through  its  whole  extremity  characters,  and 
various  figures.  He  adds,  that  turning  this  sphere  round,  the  Chaldeans  perform  invocations  which  they  call 
lyngae.  Thus  too,  according  to  Suidas,  the  magician  Julian  of  Chaldaea,  and  Amuphis  the  Egyptian  brought 
down  showers  of  rain,  by  a  magical  power.  And  by  an  artifice  of  this  kind,  Empedocles  was  accustomed  to 
restrain  the  fury  of  the  winds ;  on  which  account  he  was  called  a>^S»ufMf,  an  espeller  of  mind. 

^  This  signifies  that  the  divine  splendor  which  is  the  cause  of  the  prophetic  energy,  would  leave  the  earth, 
in  consequence  of  the  then  existing  inaptitude  of  persons,  places,  and  instruments,  to  receive  it. 

Proc,  YoL.L  g 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  INTRODUCTION. 

And  in  the  beginning  of  his  forty-second  yeai[  he  appeared  to  himself  to  pronounce  with  a  loud 
voice  these  verses  : 

Lo  !  on  my  soul  a  sacred  fire  descends. 
Whose  vivid  power  the  intellect  extends ; 
From  whence  far  beaming  thro'  dull  body's  night. 
It  soars  to  sther  deck'd  with  starry  light ; 
And  with  soft  murmurs  thro'  the  azure  round, 
The  lucid  regions  of  the  Gods  resound. 

Besides,  he  clearly  perceived  that  he  belonged  to  the  Mercurial  series ;  and  was  persuaded  from  a 
dream,  that  he  possessed  the  soul  of  Nicomachus  the  Pythagorean." ' 

In  the  last  place,  Marinus  adds,  '*  that  the  lovers  of  more  elegant  studies  may  be  able  to  conjec- 
ture from  the  position  of  the  stars  under  which  he  was  bom,  that  the  condition  of  his  life,  was  by 
no  means  among  the  last  or  middle,  but  among  the  first  orders,  we  have  thought  fit  to  expose  in 
this  place  tiie  following  scheme  of  his  nativity." 

>  17  29      n 

■  No  opinion  is  more  celebrated,  than  that  of  the  metempsychosis  of  Pythagoras ;  but  perhaps  no  doctrine  is 
more  generally  mistaken.  By  most  of  the  present  day  it  is  exploded  as  ridiculous ;  and  the  few  who  retain  some 
veneration  for  its  founder,  endeavour  to  destroy  the  literal,  and  to  confine  it  to  an  allegorical  meaning.  By  some 
of  the  ancients  this  mutation  was  limited  to  similar  bodies;  so  that  they  conceived  the  human  soul  might  trans- 
migrate into  various  human  bodies,  but  not  into  those  of  brutes.  And  this  was  the  opinion  of  Hierocles,  as  may 
be  seen  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Golden  Verses.  But  why  may  not  the  human  soul  become  connected  with 
subordinate,  as  well  as  with  superior  lives,  by  a  tendency  of  incfination?  Do  not  similars  love  to  be  united;  and 
is  there  not  in  all  kinds  of  life  something  similar  and  common  ?  Hence  when  the  affections  of  the  soul  verge  to 
a  baser  nature,  while  connected  with  a  human  body,  these  affections,  on  the  dissolution  of  such  a  body,  become 
enveloped  as  it  were,  in  a  brutal  nature,  and  the  rational  eye,  in  this  case,  clouded  with  perturbations,  is  oppressed 
by  the  irrational  energies  of  the  brute,  and  surveys  nothing  but  the  dark  phantasms  of  a  degraded  imagination. 
But  this  doctrine  is  vindicated  by  Proclus  with  his  usual  acuteness,  in  his  admirable  Commentaries  on  the  TimsBus 
lib.  5.  p.  8t9,  as  follows:  "  It  is  usual,  says  he,  to  enquire  how  human  souls  can  descend  into  brute  animals. 
And  some  indeed,  think  that  there  are  certain  similitudes  of  men  to  brutes,  which  they  call  savage  lives :  for  they 
by  no  means  think  it  possible  that  the  rational  essence  can  become  the  soul  of  a  savage  animal.  On  the  contrary 
others  allow  it  may  be  sent  into  brute?,  because  all  souls  are  of  one  abd  the  same  kind;  so  that  they  may  become 
wolves  and  panthers,  and  ichneumons.  But  true  reason  indeed,  asserts  that  the  human  soul  may  be  lodged  in 
brutes,  yet  in  such  a  manner,  as  that  it  may  obtain  its  own  proper  life,  and  that  the  degraded  soul  may,  as  it 
were,  be  earned  above  it,  and  be  bound  to  the  baser  nature  by  a  propensity  and  similitude  of  affection.  And  that 
this  is  the  only  mode  of  insinuation,  we  have  proved  by  a  multitude  of  arguments,  in  our  Commentaries  on  the 
Phaedrus.  If  however,  it  be  requisite  to  take  notice,  that  this  is  the  opinion  of  Plato,  we  add  that  in  his  Republic 
he  says,  that  the  soul  of  Thersites  assumed  an  ape,  but  not  the  body  of  an  ape:  and  in  the  Phsedrus,  that  the 
soul  descends  into  a  savage  life,  but  not  into  a  savage  body.  For  life  is  conjoined  with  its  proper  soul.  And  in 
this  place  he  says  it  is  changed  into  a  biutal  nature.   For  a  brutal  nature  is  not  a  brutal  body,  but  a  brutal  life." 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION. 

h 

24 

23 

8 

X 

24 

41 

8 

i 

29 

50 

* 

? 

— 

23 

X 

9 

4 

42 

ta 

Horos. 

8 

19 

T 

Mid. 
Heaven. 

] 

4 

42 

Vf 

8 

or  die  head  of  die  dragon 

24 

33 

m 

The  new  moon 

preceding 

his  birdi 

8 

51 

tt: 

And  thus  much  for  the  life  of  Proclus. 

With  respect  to  the  translation  of  the  following  work.  On  the  Theology  of  Plato,  I  can  only  say 
that  I  have  endeavoured  to  render  it  as  faithful  as  possible,  and  to  pifeserve  the  manner  as  well  as 
the  matter  of  the  author ;  this  being  indispensably  necessary,  both  from  the  importance  of  the  sub- 
ject, and  the  scientific  accuracy  of  the  reasoning  with  which  it  is  discussed.    I  have  added  a  seventh 
book  in  order  to  render  the  work  complete ;  for  vnthout  die  developement  of  the  mundane  Gods, 
and  the  more  excellent  genera  their  perpetual  attendants,  it  would  obviously  be  incomplete.    From 
the  catalogue  of  the  manuscripts  in  the  late  French  king's  library,  it  is  evident  that  Proclus  had 
written  a  seventh  book,'  as  some  chapters  of  it  are  there  said  to  be  extant  in  that  library.    These 
I  have  endeavoured,  but  without  success,  to  obtain.     The  want  of  this  seventh  book  by  Proclus, 
will  doubtless  be  considered  by  all  the  friends  of  Greek  literature,  and  particularly  by  all  who  are 
lovers  of  the  doctrines  of  Plato,  as  a  loss  of  no  common  magnitude.     It  is,  however,  a  fortunate 
circumstance,  that  in  the  composition  of  the  seventh  book  I  have  been  able  to  supply  the  deficiency 
arising  from  the  want  of  that  which  was  written  by  Proclus,  in  a  great  measure  from  other  work* 
©f  Proclus  himself,  and  particularly  firom  his  very  elegant  and  scientific  commentaries  on  the 
Timaeus  of  Plato.     So  that  I  trust  the  loss  is  in  some  measure  supplied ;  though  1  am  sensible, 
very  inadequately,  could  it  be  compared  with  the  book  which  was  written  by  a  man  of  such  gigantic 

'  Proclus  at  the  end  of  the  first  book  of  this  work  says,  "  that  divine  names  will  be  accurately  discussed  by 
him,  when  he  comes  to  speak  of  partial  powers."  This,  however,  is  not  done  by  him  in  any  one  of  the  six  books 
that  are  extant;  which  shows  that  another  book  is  wanting. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Ill  INTRODUCTION. 

powers  of  mind  aa  Proclus,  and  who  had  ako  sources  of  information  on  die  subject,  which  at  the 
present  period^  it  is  impossible  to  obtain. 

A  translation  of  the  Elements  of  Theology  is  added  in  order  to  render  the  treatise  On  the 
Theology  of  Plato,  more  complete^  and  to  assist  the  reader  who  wishes  to  penetrate  the  depths  of 
tliat  most  abstruse  and  sublime  M'ork ;  for  the  former  elucidates^  and  is  elucidated  by  the  htter. 

In  translating  the  treatise  of  Proclus  On  Providence  and  Fate,  I  had  great  difficulties  to  encoun- 
ter, as  the  original  Greek  is  lost,  and  nothing  but  a  Latin  translation^  which  Fabricius  observes,  is 
all  but  barbarous,  remains.  If  the  reader  compares  that  translation  with  mme,  he  will  at  once 
acknowledge  the  truth  of  my  remark.  Indeed,  that  translation  is  m  some  parts  so  barbarous,  that 
nothing  but  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  writings  of  Proclus,  and  the  philosophy  of  Plato 
could  enable  any  one  to  render  them  intelligible  in  another  language.  The  same  observation  b 
partially  applicable  to  the  translation  of  the  Extracts  from  two  other  treatises  of  Proclus. 

The  Greek  text  of  Proclus  abounds  with  errors,  so  that  the  emendations  which  I  have  made, 
and  the  deficiencies  which  I  have  supplied  in  this  volume,  amount  to  more  than  four  hundred. 
And  the  Latin  translation  of  Portus  is  so  very  faulty,  as  to  be  almost  beyond  example  bad. 
Having  discovered  this  to  be  the  case,  and  having  in  so  many  places  corrected  the  original,  I 
scarcely  think  that  any  of  my  critical  enemies  will  be  hardy  enough  to  say,  that  any  part  of  this 
volume  was  translated  from  the  Latin,  where  the  Greek  could  be  obtained.  As  I  am  conscious 
however,  that  in  what  is  now  offered  to  the  public,  I  had  no  other  view  than  to  benefit  those  who 
are  capable  of  being  benefited  by  such  sublime  speculations;  that  wishing  well  to  all  mankind,  and 
particularly  to  my  country,  I  have  laboured  to  disseminate  the  philosophy  and  theology  of  Plato,  as 
highly  favourable  to  the  interests  of  piety  and  good  government,  and  most  hostile  to  lawless  conduct 
and  revolutionary  principles ;  and  that  I  have  done  my  best  to  deserve  the  esteem  of  the  wise  and 
worthy  part  of  mankind,  1  am  wholly  unconcerned  as  to  the  reception  it  may  meet  with  fi*om  the 
malevolent,  though  I  wish  for  the  approbation  of  the  candid  critics  of  the  day.  For  in  all  my  labours 
I  have  invariably  observed  the  following  Py thagoric  precept :  *^  Do  those  things  which  you  judge 
to  be  beautifiil,  though  in  doing  them  you  should  be  without  renown ;  for  the  rabble  is  a  bad  judge 
of  a  good  thing."* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CONTENTS 


OF 


THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  I. 


CHAPTER  I. 

The  Preface,  m  which  the  scope  of  the  treatise  is  unfolded,  together  with  the  praise  of  Plato  him* 
self,  and  of  those  that  received  the  philosophy  from  him. 

CHAPTER  n. 

What  the  mode  of  the  discussion  b  in  the  present  treatise,  and  what  preparation  of  the  auditors  of 
il  is  previously  necessary. 

CHAPTER  in. 

What  a  dieologist  b  according  to  Plato,  whence  he  begins,  as  far  as  to  what  hypostases  he  ascends^ 
and  according  to  what  power  of  the  soul  he  particularly  energizes. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

The  theological  ^pes  or  forms  according  to  all  which  Plato  dbposes  tfie  doctrine  concerning  the 
Gods. 

CHAPTER  V. 

What^  Aalogues  are  from  which  die  theology  of  Plato  may  eiipecially  be  assumed;  and  to  what 
orders  of  Gods  each  of  these  dfal<^ues  refers  us. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


liv  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


An  objection  against  collecting  the  Platonic  theology  from  many  dialogues,  in  consequence  of  its 
being  partial,  and  distributed  into  minute  parts. 

CHAPTER  Vn. 

A  solution  of  the  before  mentioned  objection,  referring  to  one  dialogue,  the  Parmenides,  the 
whole  truth  concerning  the  Gods  according  to  Plato. 

CHAPTER  Vlll. 

An  enumeration  of  the  different  opinions  concerning  the  Parmenides,  and  a  division  of  the  objec- 
tions to  them. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

A  confutation  of  those  who  assert  that  the  Parmenides  is  a  logical  dialogue,  and  who  admit  that  the 
discussion  in  it  is  argumentative,  proceeding  through  subjects  of  opinion. 

CHAPTER  X. 

How  for  they  are  right  who  assert  that  the  hypotheses  of  the  Parmenides  are  concerning  the  princi- 
ples of  things,  and  what  is  to  be  added  to  what  they  say  from  the  doctrine  of  our  preceptor 
[Syrianus.] 

CHAPTER  XL 

Many  demonstrations  concerning  the  conclusions  of  the  second  hypothesis,  and  of  the  division  of 
it  according  to  the  divine  orders. 

CHAPTER  XIL 

The  intention  of  the  hypotheses,  demonstrating  their  connexion  with  each  other,  and  their  consent 
with  the  things  themselves.' 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

What  the  common  rules  concerning  the  Gods  are,  which  Plato  delivers  in  the  Laws.  And  also 
concerning  the  hyparxis  of  the  Gods,  their  providence,  and  their  immutable  perfection. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

How  the  hyparxis  of  the  Gods  is  delivered  in  the  Laws,  and  through  what  media  die  discourse 

recurs  to  the  truly  existing  Gods. How  the  providence  of  the  Gods  is  demonstrated  in 

the  Laws,  and  what  the  mode  of  their  providence  is  according  to  Plato.* 

'  The  12th  chapter  is  not  marked  in  the  original ;  but  it  begins  conformably  to  my  translation. 
*  The  15tb  chapter  also  is  not  marked  in  the  original ;  and  is  comprehended  in  my  translation  in  the  14th  chap- 
ter.   Perhaps  it  should  begin  at  the  words,  "  If  therefore  the  Gods  produce  all  things,"  in  p.  49. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CONTENTS.  W 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Through  what  arguments  in  the  same  treatise  [the  Laws]  it  is  demonstrated  that  tfae  Gods  provide 
[for  all  thingsj  immutably. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

What  the  axioms  are  concerning  the  Gods  which  are  delivered  in  the  Republic,  and  what  order 
thej  have  with  respect  to  each  other. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

What  the  goodness  of  the  Gods  is,  and  how  they  are  said  to  be  the  causes  of  all  good ;  and  that 
evil  according  to  every  hypostasis  is  itself  adorned  and  arranged  by  the  Gods. 

CHAPTER  XVin. 

What  the  immutability  is  of  the  Gods ;  where  also  it  b  shown  what  their  self-sufficiency,  and  firm 
impassivity  are ;  and  how  we  are  to  understand  their  possessing  an  invariable  sameness  of 
subsistence. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

.  What  the  simplicity  is  of  the  Gods ;  and  how  that  which  is  simple  in  them  appears  to  be  various 
in  secondary  natures. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

What  the  truth  is  in  the  Gods  j  and  whence  falsehood  is  introduced  in  the  participations  of  the 
Gods  by  secondary  natures. 

CHAPTER  XXr. 

From  the  axioms  in  the  Phaedrus  concerning  every  thing  divine  [it  follows]  that  every  thing  divine 
is  beautiful,  wise,  and  good. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

A  discussion  of  the  dogmas  concerning  the  goodness  [of  the  Gods,]  and  an  investigation  of  the 
elements  of  the  good  in  the  Philebus. 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 
What  the  wisdom  of  the  Gods  is,  and  what  elements  of  it  may  be  assumed  from  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 
Concerning  divine  beauty,  and  the  elements  of  it,  as  delivered  by  Plato. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


W  CPNTSNT8. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

What  the  triad  is  which  is  conjoined  with  the  good,  the  wise,  and  the  beautiful,  and  what  auxili* 
aries  to  the  theory  of  it,  Plato  affords  us/ 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Concerning  the  axioms  delivered  in  the  Phaedo/  respecting  an  invisible  nature.  What  the  divine 
nature  is.  What  the  immortal,  and  the  intelligible  3  are ;  and  what  order  these  possess  with 
reference  to  each  other. 

CHAPTER  XXVIl. 

What  the  uniform  and  indissoluble  are,  and  how  sameness  of  subsistence  [and  the  unbegotten  are] 
to  be  assumed  in  divine  natures. 

CHAPTER  XXVni. 

How  paternal,  and  how  maternal  causes  are  to  be  assumed  in  the  Gods. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Concerning  divine  names,  and  the  rectitude  of  them  as  delivered  in  the  Cratylus. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OP  BOOK  II. 

CHAPTER  I. 

A  method  leading  to  the  superessential  principle  of  all  things,  according  to  the  intellectual  concep* 
tion  of  the  one  and  multitude. 

CHAPTER  II. 

A  second  method  unfolding  the  hypostasis  of  the  one,  and  demonstrating  it  to  be  exempt  from  all 
corporeal  and  incorporeal  essences. 

'  Such  is  the  title  of  this  chapter  in  the  Greek,  which  is  obviously  erroneous.  For  the  proper  title  is,  **  What 
that  is  which  unites  us  to  the  good;  and  that  it  is  divine  faith.''  What  is  said  indeed  in  the  Greek  to  be  the  con*, 
tenU  of  this,  belong  to  the  preceding  chapter. 

*  For  f  9»t^rf>  it  is  necessary  to  read  w  f •«i«*y<. 

^  In  the  Greek  to  (jwou^s  the'uniformf  but  it  should  evidently  be  f  unrf,  the  intelligikle* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CONTENTS.  Irii 


CHAPTER  HI. 

Many  argum^ts  in  confirmation  of  the  same  thing,  and  evincing  the  irreprebensible  hypothesb  of 
the  one. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

A  confutation  of  those  who  saj  that  the  first  principle  is  not  according  to  Plato  above  intellect^  and 
den^onstrations  from  the  Republic,  the  Sophbta,  the  Philebus,  and  the  Pannenides^  of  the 
superessential  hypostasb^  of  the  one. 

CHAPTER  V. 

What  the  modes  are  of  ascent  to  the  one  according  to  Plato ;  and  that  the  modes  are  two,  through 
analogy,  and  tlirough  negations.  Likewise,  where  Hato  treats  of  each  of  these,  and  through 
what  cause, 

CHAPTER  VI. 

By  what,  and  by  how  many  names  Plato  unfolds  the  ineffable  principle,  and  why  he  unfolds  it  by 
such' and  by  so  many  names.    And  how  these  names  accord  with  the  modes  of  ascent  to  it. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

What  the  assertions  are  in  the  Republic  concerning  the  first  principle,  through  its  analogy  to  the 
sun ;  where  also  it  is  shown,  how  it  is  celebrated  as  the  good,  and  as  the  most  splendid  of 
being.  How  the  sun  is  the  offsprmg  of  the  good;  and  that  according  to  each  order  of 
divine  natures,  there  is  a  monad  analogous  to  the  first  principle.  And  how  the  first  principle 
is  the  cause  of  all  beings,  and  is  itself  prior  to  power  and  energy. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

What  Plato  m  his  Epistle  to  Di<Miysius  says  the  first  king  is.  And  admonitioiis,  that  the  first  God 
is  discussed  in  that  Epistle. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

What  the  three  conceptions  are  which  are  delivered  [in  that  Epistle]  concerning  the  first  king.  How 
all  things  are  about  him.  How  all  things  are  for  his  sake.  How  he  is  the  cause  of  all 
beautiful  things,  What  the  order  is  of  diese  cc^iceptiops.  And  from  what  hypotheses  they 
are  assupied. 

CHAPTER  X. 

How  in  the  first  hypothesis  of  the  Parmenides,  Plato  delivers  the  doctrine  concerning  the  one, 
employing  for  this  purpose  negations.  And  <m  what  account  the  negations  are  such  and  so 
inuiy. 

^  For  v%99wniffl  read  ut99r9€tm(» 
Proc.  Vot.  I.  h 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Iviii  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XI. 


How  it  is  necessary  to  enter  on  the  theory  concerning  tfie  one,  through  nations.    And  what  dis^ 
position  of  the  soul  is  most  adapted  to  discussions  of  this  kind. 

CHAPTER  Xn. 

A  celebration  of  the  oite/demonstrating  through  negative  conclusions  that  it  is  exempt  from  all  the 
orders  of  beings^  according  to  the  order  delivered  in  the  Parmenides. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  III. 


CHAPTER  I. 

That  after  the  discussion  in  common  of  the  one  principle  of  things,  it  is  requisite  to  treat  of  the 
divine  orders,  and  to  show  how  many  they  are,  and  how  they  are  divided  from  each  other. 

CHAPTER  U. 

That  the  multitude  of  unities  according  to  which  the  Gods  have  their  hypostasis,  subsists  after 
the  one. 

CHAPTER  in. 

How  many  the  particulars  are  which  ought  to  be  demonstrated  previous  to  the  discovery  of  the 
multitude  of  the  divine  orders,  and  an  uninterrupted  narration  of  the  doctrine  of  these. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

That  all  the  unities  are  participate.  And  that  there  is  only  one  truly  superessential  one  ;  but  that 
all  the  other  unities  are  participated  by  essences.* 

CHAPTER  V. 

That  the  participations  of  the  unities  which  are  nearer  to  the  one,  proceed  into  more  simple  hypos- 
tases ;  but  the  participations  of  those  that  are  remote  from  the  one,  proceed  into  more  com- 
posite hypostases. 

'  These  four  chapters  are  comprehended  in  one  in  my  translation,  as  they  are  not  paarked  in  the  Gr^k;  and 
I  had  not  divided  them,  when  this  work  was  sent  to  the  press,  as  I  have  done  the  chapters  of  the  other  books, 
in  which  there  is  a  similar  defect  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CONTENTS.  Ux 


CHAPTER  VI. 


What  the  natures  are  which  participate  of  the  divine  unities^  and  what  the  order  of  them  is  with  res- 
pect to  each  other.  And  that  being  indeed^  is  the  most  ancient  of  these ;  life^  the  second; 
intellect,  the  third ;  soul,  the  fourth ;  and  body,  the  last.  And  that  there  are  also  as  many 
orders  of  the  divine  unities/ 

CHAPTER  Vn- 

A  resumption  of  the  doctrine  concerning  the  one,  and  a  discussion  of  the  biformed  principles  pos- 
terior to  the  one. 

CHAPTER  VUI. 

What  the  two  principles  are  of  all  things  posterior  to  the  one ;  how  Socrates  the  Philebus  calls 
them  bound  and  infinity ;  and  of  what  things  they  are  the  causes*  to  beings.' 

.      CHAPTER  IX. 

What  the  third  thing  is  which  is  produced  from  the  two  principles.  Why  Socrates  in  the  Philebus 
calls  it  that  which  is  mixed  That  it  is  nothing  else  than  that  which  is  primarily  being.^ 
And  bow  this  proceeds  from  the  two  principles,  and  from  the  one. 

CHAPTER  X. 

How  from  images  also,  it  may  be  inferred,  that  the  first  thing  which  subsists  from  bound  and  infi- 
nity is  being,  s  How  this  may  be  demonstrated.  And  how  bound  and  infinity  are  twofold ; 
one  order  of  these  subsisting  in  being,  but  the  other  existing  prior  to  being.' 

CHAPTER  XL 
What  the  triad  is,  which  Socrates  in  the  Philebus  says  is  inherent  in  every  thing  that  is  mixed,* 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Concerning  the  first  intelligible  triad  in  common ;  and  how  the  second  triad  proceeds  analogous  to 
this.' 

'  The  fifth  and  sixth  chapters  are  comprehended  in  the  second  chapter  in  my  translation. 

*  For  wtf-MM,  it  is  necessary  to  read  (unai. 

3  The  seventh  and  eighth  chapters  form  the  third  in  my  translatioi^ 

♦  For  If,  it  is  necessary  to  read  w. 

'  And  the  ninth  and  tenth  are  the  fourth  and  fifth  chapters  in  my  translation. 

^  This,  is  the  sixth  chapter  in  n^y  translation. 

^  It  appears  from  this  account  of  the  contents  of  the  twelfth  chapter,  that  a  considerable  part  of  it  is  wanting 
in  the  original ;  because  nothing  is  sud  in  it  about  the  manner  in  which  the  second  UM  proseeds  analogous  to 
the  first. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


"  CaNTBNTg. 

CHAPTEBl  XIIL 

What  the  second  intelligible  triad  b.  A  more  accurate  account  of  it,  as  subsisting  from  Aat  vhich 
predominates,  from  that  which  is  participated,  and  from  that  which  characterizes  the  mixture- 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

What  the  third  intelligible  triad  is;  what  that  is  which  predominates,  and  is  participated  in  this. 
And  at  the  end,  a  discourse  in  common  concerning  the  distinction  of  the  three  triads. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

How  the  intelligible  triads  are  delivered  in  the  Timaus.  And  many  admonitions  concemmg  animal 
itself,  [evincing]  that  it  has  the  thiiti  order  in  intelligibles. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
Many  demonstrations  that  eternity  subsists  according  to  the  middle  order  of  intelligibles. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

That  the  one  in  which  etemity^bides  is  the  summit  of  intelligibles. 

CHAPTER  XVm. 

Concerning  all  the  intelligible  orders  in  conmion,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Timseus.  And  a 
more  accurate  account  of  the  peculiarities  in  the  intelligible  triads. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Concerning  intelligible  forms,  and  the  doctrine  unfolding  the  peculiarity  of  them.  How  likewise 
they  are  four,  and  from  what  causes  they  subsist. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

That  also  from  what  is  said  in  the  Sophista,  it  is  possible  to  discover  the  three  intelligible  orders ; 
viz.  in  that  part  of  the  Sophista,  in  which  it  is  shewn  what  the  one  being,  what  whole,  and 
what  all  are. 

CHAPTER  XXL 

A  summary  account  of  ^what  has  been  said  concerning  the  intelligible  triads.  And  admonitions 
from  Plato  that  it  is  possible  to  divide  them  into  ftilfaer,  power,  and  intellect 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

How  in  die  Phaidnu  it  is  said  that  every  thing  divine  is  beautiful,  wise,  and  good.  What  triple 
elements  of  each  of  these  Plato  delivers.  And  how  from  these  it  is  possible  to  accede  to  the 
union  and  separation  of  die  intelligible  triads. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CONTENTS.  hi 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 


How  Parmenides  delivers  the  maltitude  of  Gods  in  the  second  hypothesis.  And  how  we  should 
discourse  about  each  order  of  them,  employing  for  this  purpose  the  conclusions  of  that 
hypothesis. 

CHAPTfiR  XXIV. 

What  the  first  intelligible  triad  is  according  to  Parmenides.  Whence  he  begins,  and  how  far  he 
proceeds,  teaching  concerning  it. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

What  the  second  intelligible  triad  is.  How  it  is  delivered  by  Purmenides  in  continuity  widi  the 
triad  prior  to  it.    And  how  far  he  produces  die  discourse  concerning  it. 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 
What  the  diird  intelligible  triad  is.    And  how  Parmenides  unfolds  it  through  the  third  conclusion. 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Concerning  the  three  conclusions  in  common,  through  which  the  three  orders  of  intelligiblei,  are 
characterized.  And  how  through  these  it  is  possible  to  dissolve  the  most  difiicult  of  theolo- 
gical doubts. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

A  celebration  of  the  intelligible  Gods,  unfolding  at  the  same  time  the  nnion  of  intelligibles  diemselves 
with  the  good,  and  their  exempt  hypahds. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  IV. 

CHAPTER  L 

What  the  peculiarity  is  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods.    How  they  illuminate  imparticipa- 
ble  life,  and  are  in  continuity  with  the  intelligible  Gods. 

CHAPTER  II. 

How  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods  subsist  from  the  intelligible  Gods.    And  how  they  com- 
municate with  the  intelligible  Gods. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Ixii  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  IIL 

What  the  division  is  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods  according  to  triads.  And  what  the  dif- 
ference is  of  these  triads  with  respect  to  the  intelligible  triads. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

How  Socrates  in  the  Phsedrus  leads  us  to  thb  order  of  Gods, 

CHAPTER  V. 

That  it  is  not  proper  to  understand  the  Heaven^  and  celestial  circulation  [celebrated  in  the  Phae- 
drus]  as  pertaining  to  sensibles  ;  and  many  admonitions  from  the  Platonic  words  themselves^ 
that  these  are  to  be  referred  to  the  first  order  of  Heaven. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

That  the  supercelestial  place  is  not  simply  intelligible  ;  but  demonstrations  from  what  is  delivered 
about  it  [in  the  PhaedrusJ  that  it  is  allotted  an  intelligible  order  as  in  inl;ellectuals, 

CHAPTER  VII. 

That  the  subcelestial  arch  is  the  boundary  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Godsj,  evinced  from  the 
peculiarities  of  it. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Why  Plato  characterizes  this  order  of  Gods  from  the  middle  which  it  contains^  and  delivers  the 
names  of  the  extremes  according  to  the  habitude  to  diis  middle. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

That  Plato  delivers  the  same  mode  of  ascent  to  the  intelligible^  as  is  delivered  by  initiators  into  the 
mysteries. 

CHAPTER  X. 

What  the  supercelestial  place  is.  How  it  proceeds  from  the  first  intelligibles.  How  it  is  supreme 
in  intellectualst     And  how  Plato  demonstrates  its  prolific  power. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

How  Plato  has  indicated  the  unknown  peculiarity  of  the  summit  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals^ 
and  why  he  celebrates  it  at  one  and  the  same  time  aflirmatively  and  negatively. 

CHAPTER  XII. 

What  the  negations  are  of  the  supercelestial  place.  That  they  are  produced  from  the  divine  orders, 
What  kind  of  negations  also  designate  the  uncoloured,  what^  the  unfigured^  and  what;  the  prir 
vation  of  contact, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CONTENTS.  l&iii 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


What  die  things  are  which  Plato  affirms  of  the  supercelestial  place,  and  from  what  intelligible  pecu- 
liarities, he  ascribes  to  it  affirmative  signs. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

What  the  three  deities  of  the  virtues,  viz.  science,  temperance,  and  justice,  are  in  the  supercelestial 
place ;  what  order  they  have  with  respect  to  each  other ;  and  what  perfection  each  of  them 
imparts  to  the  Gods. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

W^hat  the  plain  of  Truth,  and  what  the  meadow  are.  What  the  unical  form  of  intelligible  nutri- 
ment is.  What  the  twofold  nutriment  of  the  Gods  b  which  is  distributed  from  this  intelligible 
food. 

CHAPTER  XVL 

Many  admonitions  that  the  supercelestial  place  is  triadic.  And  what  the  signs  are  of  the  three 
hypostases  in  it. 

CHAPTER  XVn. 

Who  Adrastia  b.  What  the  sacred  law  of  Adrastia  b.  That  she  ranks  in  the  supercelestial  place. 
And  on  what  account  she  does  so. 

CHAPTER  XVIIL 
A  summary  account  of  what  is  said  about  the  supercelestial  place,  unfolding  the  peculiarities  of  it. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Demonstrations  that  the  connectedly-containing  order  is  in  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods. 
And  that  it  b  necessary  there  should  be  three  connective  causes  of  wholes. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

That  according  to  Plato  the  celestial  circulation  is  the  same  with  the  connective  order. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

How  we  may  obtain  auxiliaries  from  what  is  said  by  Plato  of  the  triadic  division  in  the  connective 
deity.    And  why  he  especially  venerates  the  union  in  thb  triad. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

What  the  theology  in  the  Cratylus  is  concerning  Heaven.  And  how  it  is  possible  to  collect;  from  it 
by  a  reasoning  process  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


IxW  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

That  the  most  divinely-inspired  of  the  interpreters  have  defined  the  subcelesUal  arch  to  be  a  certain 
peculiar  order.    And  diat  our  preceptor  has  unfolded  it  in  the  most  perfect  manner. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Many  admonitions  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  subcelestial  arch  is  perfective^  from  what  Plato  has 
delivered  concerning  it^  and  from  the  souls  that  are  elevated  to  it. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

What  the  triadic  division  is  of  the  perfective  order,  which  Plato  has  delivered  in  the  subcelestial 
arch. 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

What  the  elevation  is  of  souls  separate  from  bodies  to  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  triads. 
What  the  most  blessed  telete  is.  What  muesis,  and  epopteia  are.  What  the  entirei  simplcj 
and  unmoved  visions  are.    And  what  the  end  is  of  all  this  elevation, 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

How  Plato  unfolds  in  the  Pannenides,  from  intelligibles  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  orders. 
And  what  that  which  is  common;  and  that  which  is  different  are,  in  the  theology  concemiug 
these, 

CHAPTER  XXVIH. 

How  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  number  proceeds  from  intelligiffles.  And  in  what  it  differs 
from  intelligible  multitudes 

'    CHAPTER  XXIX, 

How  divine  number  adorns  aH  beiiq;s.  And  vrint  the  powers  in  it  are  which  are  symbolically  delir 
vered  bom  the  division  of  number, 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

How  Parmenides  has  delivered  the  feminine  and  generative  peculiarity  [of  first  number]  m  what  he 
says  concerning  number, 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 

How  we  may  discover  in  what  is  delivered  concerning  number,  the  triadfc  divisicNi  of  the  summit  of 
intelligibles  and  intellectuals.  ^ 

CHAPTER  XXXH. 

Whether  it  is  proper  to  place  pumber  prior  to  animal  itself^  or  in  animal  itself,  or  posterior  to  it. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


COKTBNT8.  1?T 

CHAPTER  XXXIIl. 

Whence  Parmenides  begins  to  speak  about  number.  How  far  he  proceeds  in  what  he  says  about 
it.    And  how  he  unfolds  the  different  orders  in  it. 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

What  the  unknown  is  in  divine  numbers.  What  the  generative  is  in  them.  And  admonitions  of 
these  diings  from  what  is  elsewhere  said  by  Plato  concerning  numbers. 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

How  Parmenides  delivers  the  middle  order  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals  through  the  one,  whole, 
and  finite.    And  what  the  peculiarities  are  of  these. 

CHAPTER  XXXVL 

Whence  Parmenides  begins  to  speak  about  this  order.  And  how  far  he  proceeds  in  what  he  says 
about  it.  How  he  like\yise  unfolds  the  three  monads  in  it  conformably  to  what  is  said  in  the 
Phaedrus  concerning  them. 

CHAPTER  XXXVU. 

How  Parmenides  delivers  the  third  order  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals.  And  how  he  unfolds 
the  perfective  peculiarity^  and  triadic  division  of  it. 

CHAPTER  XXXVllI. 

An  admonition  what  tlie  union  is  of  the  three  intelligible  and  intellectual  triads^  from  the  conclu- 
sions of  Parmenides. 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

How  many  theological  dogmas  we  may  assume,  through  the  order  of  the  conclusions  delivered  by 
Parmenides  in  his  discourse  concerning  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  V. 

CHAPTER  I. 

How  the  intellectual  orders  proceed  from  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods.    And  according  to 
what  peculiarities  they  subsist. 

CHAPTfeir  II. 

What  the  division  is  of  the  intellectual  Gods.    And  the  progression  according  to  hebdomads  in  diis 
order  of  Gods. 
Proc.  VOL.  II.  « 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Jlti  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  in. 

Wko  the  three  inteDectoa!  ftthers  are  according  to  Plato.  What  the  three  imdefiled  monads  are. 
And  who  the  seventh  deity  is^  diat  is  co*arranged  with  die  two  triads. 

CHAPTER  fV. 

How  from  the  writings  of  Plato,  the  procession  of  the  intellectttal  Gods  into  seven  hebdomads  nay 
be  collected  by  a  reasoning  process. 

CHAPTER  V. 

Who  the  mighty  Saturn  is,  according  to  the  theology  in  tiie  CraCylns.  And  kow  he  is  in  a  certain 
respect  intelligible,  and  in  a  certain  respect  intellectual,  in  which  also,  the  dognms  are  dis- 
cussed concerning  the  union  of  intellect  with  the  btelligible,  and  its  separation  from  it. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

What  die  kingdom  of  Saturn  is.  In  what  manner  it  b  ddivered  by  Plato  in  the  Politicus.  And 
of  what  it  is  die  cause  to  the  world,  to  the  mundane  Gods^  and  to  partiri  souls. 

CHAPTER  VIL 

What  the  Satumian  life  of  souls  is.  And  what  peculiarities  of  this  circnlatioB  the  Elean  Guest 
delivers. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

How  souls  are  said  to  be  nourished  by  mtelligibles.  And  what  the  difference  is  of  the  nutriment 
derived  from  different  mtelligibles. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

What  the  orders  are  which  the  mighty  Saturn  causes  to  preside  over  wholes.  In  which  also^  who 
the  Satumiau  mtellect  is  that  is  delivered  in  the  Gorgias  is  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  X. 

How  diis  God  [Saturn]  is  peculiariy  called  by  theologists  insenescible^  or  fr^ee  from  old  age.  ^And 
how  Plato  has  delivered  Uiis  peculiarity  of  him. 

CHAPTER  XL 

Who  the  vivific  Goddess  is.  How  she  is  the  collector  of  the  Saturnian  and  Jovian  kingdoms.  And 
what  orders  she  possesses  conjoined  with  both  these  kingdoms. 

CHAFFER  Xn. 

Who  the  third  father  in  intellectuals  is.  How  he  proceeds  from  the  causes  prior  to  him.  And 
that  he  is  the  deminrgus  of  the  universe. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


eOHTlNTS*  IvWI 


CHAPTER  xnr. 

Pemoostratioiia  that  die  whole  demiurges  of  the  luiiferse^  is  tfie  third  ftlher  of  the  iotellectual 
Goda. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

An  anftwer  to  thoee  who  say  that  there  are  ftsee  damiuigi.  according^  ta  Plato^  dfunftastralmg 
through  many  arguments  that  the  demiurgio  monad  is  arranged  prior  to  the  [demiui^]  triad, 
in  the  third  order  of  intellectuals* 

CHAPTER  XV- 

That  Timsus  especially  delivers  the  peculiarity  of  the  demiurgus,  by  calling  him  intellect.  And 
that  this  pertains  to  the  third  of  the  intellectual  fathers. 

CHAPTER  XVL 

How  according  to  another  method  it  is  reqimite  to  discofer  the  peculiarity  of  the  demiurgus.  Andf 
how  the  demiurgus  is  called  m  the  Tinueus  effector  and  father.  In  which  also,  it  is  clearly 
shown,  where*  the  paternal,  where  the  paternal  and^at  the  same  time  eflbetiYe,  vidiere  the'  effM> 
ti?e  and  paternal,  and  where  the  effective  only  are,  acconHng  to  FUlOr  And' in  short,  ia 
what  effector  and  &ther  differ, 

CHAPTER  XVIL 

How  following  Timseus,  according  to  a  third  method,  we  may  purify  our  conceptions  concerning 
the  demiurgic  monad. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

A  theological'  explanation  of  Ae  speech  of  the  demiurgus  in  the  Timaeus,  distinctly  evolving  our 
conceptions  about  the  demiurgic  energy. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

What  the  second  speech  of  the  demiurgus  is  to  divisible  souls.  In  what  it  differs  from  the  tomktr. 
And  how  in  thb  all  the  measures  of  the  life  of  souls  are  defined. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

A  summary  of  all  that  is  sMd  about  the  demiurgus,  following  the  doctrine  of  Timaeus. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 
Admonitions  from  what  is  said  in  the  Cratylus^  that  Plato  attributes  fabrication  to  Jupiter. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Ixviii  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XXH. 

Admonitions  from  what  is  said  in  the  Cratylus  of  the  fabrication  of  Jupiter.  In  which  also  thiB 
concord  is  demonstrated  of  the  theology  from  names,  with  the  arrangement  of  the  deminrgus 
in  the  Tima^us. 

CHAPTER  XXni. 

Admonitions  of  the  fabrication  of  Jupiter  from  what  is  demonstrated  in  (he  Philebus.  In  which 
also  it  is  shown,  what  the  royal  sou),  and  the  royal  intellect  are. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Demonstrations  of  the  same  thing,  from  what  is  said  in  the  Protagoras  about  the  political  science. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

An  argument  shewing  that  Jupiter  is  the  demiurgus  and  fadier  of  die  universe'  according  to  PIato> 
from  what  is  said  in  the  Ppliticus  concerning  the  twofold  circulation  [of  the  universej 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Admonitions  of  the  same  things,  from  what  is  said  in  tbe  Laws  concerning  analogy,  Viz.  that  it  is 
the  judgment  of  Jupiter. 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 
How  Jupiter  subsists  according  to  cause  in  animal  itself,  and  how  animal  itself  is  in  Jupiter. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 
How  Timseus  attributes  to  the  demiurgus  the  unknown  and  ineffable. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Why  Tima^us  thinks  fit  to  denominate  animal  itself,  and  is  of  opinion  that  it  may  be  known^  but 
leaves  the  demiurgus  unknown  and  ineffable. 

CHAPTER  XXX, 

Concerning  the  Crater  in  the  Timanis,  a  theology  teaching  what  the  genera  are  that  are  mingled  in 
it^  and  bow  it  is  the  cause  of  the  essence  of  souls. 

CHAPTER  XXXr. 

Tliat  the  Crater  in  the  Timaeus  is  fontal.  And  admonitions  from  the  writings  of  Plato,  concerning 
^e  principle  and  fountain  of  souls. 

For  «X4iTBWf ,  it  b  necessary  to  read  ««mf. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CONTENTS.  '  hlX 

CHAPTER  XXXir. 

That  the  diree  yivific  fountains  co-aimnged  with  the  demiurgus,  ma^f  be  assumed  from  what  is  said 
in  the  Timaeus,  Tiz.  the  fountain  of  souls^  the  fountain  of  the  virtues^  and  the  fountain  of 
natures. 

CHAPTER  XXXni. 

Admonitions  concerning  the  undefiled  Gods ;  that  there  are  such  Gods  according  to  Plato ;  and 
{what  the  peculiarity  is  of  their  essence. 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 
More  manifest  demonstrations  of  the  hypostasis  of  the  undefiled  Gods,  according  to  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XXXV; 

Admonitions  dirough  many  arguments  how  it  is  proper  to  denominate  the  undefiled  Gods  accord- 
ing to  Plato.  In  which  also^  the  union  of  th^n,  what  dieir  separation^  and  what  their  pecu*- 
liarity  are,  is  delivered. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

How  from  what  is  mystically  asserted  by  Plato,  auxiliaries  may  be  obtained,  concemii^  die  seventh 
monad  of  intellectuals. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

How  Plato  delivers  in  ihe  Parmenides  the  summit  of  the  intellectual  Gods.' 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

How  Parmenides  unfolds  the  middle  order  of  the  intellectual  breadth^  and  through  what  signs. 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

How  Parmenides  defines  the  third  order  of  intellectuals,  and  thrpi^;h  what  peculiarities. 

CHAPTER  XL. 

A  common  theory  of  Ac  intellectual  hebdomad,  from  the  conclusions  of  Parmenides. 

»  The  contents  of  chapter  thirty-seven  in  the  original  erroneously  form  the  conclusion  of  the  contents  of 
chapter  thirty-six.  And  instead  of  ^s  w  axpomr*,  it  is  therefore  necessary  to  read  »?;?  tnt  «cf«oiT«.  Hence  whtt 
are  marked  as  xifi.  xf,«it.  xt,  and  x«9.  \9,  should  be  mariced  «f .  x»i,  xif .  x«,  and  xi^.  fx'.  It  will  be  found  also  that 
chapter  forty  is  wanting. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


(O^  COHTKNTS. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  VL 


CHAPTER  L 

That  the  ruling  order  of  Gods  is  ia  contiouity  witl^  the  intellectual  Gods.  And  that  the  division 
into  fountains  and  pnnciples  mny  be  assumed  from  die  writings  of  Plato,  through  die  dieory 
about  souls. 

CHAPTER  11. 

How  the  ruling  Gods  pioceed.  And  that  the  supermundane  peculiarity  pertains  to  these  Gods 
alpqe. 

CHAPTER  UL 

What  the  peculiar!^  ia  of  tfie  ruling  Gods.  That  the  assimilative  is  especially  diaracteristic  of 
them.  And  how  the  causes  of  assimilation  aire  antecedently  assumed  in  the  demiurgus ;  and 
hpv|  inthftintalligfble  paradigm*^ 

CHAPTER  IV. 

What  the  powers  are  of  die  assimilative  Gods.  What  their  energies.  And  how  many  goods  are 
imparted  by  them  to  the  worlds  and  ta  all  mundane  natures^ 

CHAPTER  V. 

What  the  divisions  are  of  the  assimilative  Gods.  And  that  the  greatest  part  of  die  discourse  about 
them  is  concerning  the  middle  oiders  in.then^. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Many  demonstrations,  that  bodi  according  to  Hato^and  other  theologbts^  th^e  is  one  demiuigus 
pri<Hr  to  die  three  d^ miui;^. 

CHAI^rER  VII. 

That  Jupiter  irtwofold ;  one  indeed,  being  prior  to  die  three  sons  of  Saturn,,  [but  the  other  being^ 
one  of  them.]    And  bow  the  three  proceed  from  Saturn,  and  the  one  Jupiter. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

That  according  to  Plato  also,  the  demiurgic  monad  subsists  prior  to  the  three  sons*  of  Saturn* 
Demonstrations  of  this  from  what  is  said  in  the  Politicus,  and  in  the  Laws* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CONTSMTS«  Ixxi 


CHAPTER  IX. 


More  mtnifieftt  admomtions  of  the  tame  things  from  what  is  said  in  the  GorgiaSi  and  in  the 
Cratylus. 

CHAPTER  X. 

Who  the  three  demiargi  are^  and  what  order  they  have  with  reference  to  each  other*  likewise 
what  their  progressions  are,  and  their  divisions  aboiit  the  world. 

CkAPTER  kl. 

What  the  vivific  triad  is  among  the  ruling  Gods.  And  whence  we  may  derive  auxiliaries  from  the 
writmgs  of  Plato  concerning  the  union  and  division  of  this  triad. 

CHAPTER  Xll. 

What  the  convertive  tiiad  of  the  ruling  Gods  is;  and  yAidX  the  monad  which  it  contains.  la  which 
also,  the  union  of  Apollo  with  die  sun  is  demonstrated ;  and  it  is  shewn,  how  frbm  ^rfiat  is 
said  about  Apollo  we  may  be  led  to  the  theory  of  the  solar  orders. 

CHAPTER  Xni. 

What  the  undefiled  order  is  of  the  ruling  Gods.  And  how  from  die  writings  of  Plato  conceptioBS 
about  it  may  be  obtained. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

How  Parmenides  forms  his  conclusions  about  the  ruling  Gods,  in  continuity  with  the  demiurgic 
order.  And  that  he  characterizes  the  whole  order  of  them,  through  similitude  and  dis- 
similitude. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

What  the  supermundane  and  atthe  same  time  mundane  genus  of  Gods  is.  And  how  through  their 
own  medium  they  preserve  the  continuity  of  the  Gk>ds  that  proceed  from  Ae  demiurgus. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

How  the  liberated  Gods  are  characterized.  And  how  from  thehr  liberated  peculiarity  they  are 
exempt  from  the  uuiverse,  and  are  co-arranged  with  the  mundane  Gods. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

What  the  common  powers,  and  what  the  common  ^ergies  are  of  die  liberated  Gods,  according 
with  the  essence  that  has  been  delivered  of  them. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


hxg  CONTENT 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Concerning  the  twelve  leaden  or  rulers 'mentioned  in  the  Phasdrus,  and  that  they  have^^  liberated 
order. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Man;  and  clearer  demonstrations  that  the  great  leader  Jupiter^  and  all  the  dodecad  of  leaders, 
are  liberated. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

An  explanation  from  precedaneous  causes  whence  the  number  of  the  dodecad  in  the  liberated 
Gods  is  derived. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

What  die  division  of  the  liberated  leaders  is  into  two  monads  and  one  decad.  And  what  the  one 
division  of  them  is. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

The  theology  concerning  each  of  the  twelve  Gods,  unfolding  the  peculiarities  of  diem  from  the 
subjects  of  their  government. 

CHAPTER  XXni. 

Concem'mg  the  modier  of  the  Fates  mentioned  in  die  Republic.  Likewise  concerning  die  triad  of 
the  Fates.  What  orders  they  have  vrith  reference  to  each  other.  What  powers  of  them  are 
delivered  through  divine  symbols.  What  their  energies  are.  And  how  Plato  characterizes 
the  liberated  peculiarity. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

How  Parmenides  forms  his  conclusions  concerning  the  liberated  Gods  immediately  after  the  assi- 
milative Gods.    And  how  he  characterizes  the  order  of  diem  hy  touching  and  not  touching. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF  BOOK  VII. 

CHAPTER  I. 

On  the  mundane  Gods  in  general,— the  source  of  dieir  progrcssion,*--Uieir  orders,  powers,  and 
•pheres. 

CHAPTER  II. 

On  die  division,  and  allotments  of  the  mundane  Gocb. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


coKTBKTs.  Isxiii 


CHAPTER  III. 

Ti)at  the  mundane  do  not  differ  from  the  supermundane  Gods  in  habitudes  to  bodies,  &c. — lliat 
the  providence  of  the  Gods  is  not  circumscribed  by  place. — ^That  it  pervades  all  things,  and 
like  the  light  of  the  sun^  fills  whatever  is  capable  of  receiving  it. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

After  what  manner  the  visible  celestial  orbs  are  Gods. — ^That  a  celestial  body  is  eminently  allied 
to  the  incorporeal  essence  of  the  Gods. — ^That  the  visible  are  connected  with  the  intelligible 
Gods. — And  that  the  perfectly  incorporeal  are  united  to  the  sensible  Gods,  through  tbe 
essence  of  each  being  characterized  by  the  one. 

CHAPTER  V. 

The  nature  of  the  mundane  Gods  unfolded  from  the  speech  of  the  Demiurgus  to  tfaem,  in  tlia 
Timseus. — And  what  the  whole  conception  of  the  speech  is  according  to  Proclus* 

CHAPTER  VI. 

What  the  demiurgus  effects  in  the  multitude  of  mundane  Gods  by  the  first  words  of  his  speech.— 
That  the  words  of  the  Demiurgus  are  addressed  to  the  composite  from  soul  and  animal^  vit* 
to  the  animal  which  is  divine  and  partakes  of  a  soul. — The  meaning  of  the  words,  **  Of 
whom  I  am  the  demiurgus  and  father,"  &c. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

The  meaning  of  the  words  unfolded  in  the  speech  of  the  Demiurgus,  *^  Every  thing  therefore  which 
is  bound  is  dissoluble,  ^ut  to  be  willing  to  dissolve  that  which  is  beautifully  harmonized  and 
well  composed,  is  the  province  of  an  ill  nature.'' 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  following  part  of  the  speech  of  the  Demiurgus  to  the  mundane  Gods  unfolded. — The  differ* 
ence  between  the  primarily  and  secondarily  immortal,  and  the  primarily  and  secondarily 
indiasoluble. — And  that  the  mundane  Gods  are  neither  primarily  iounortal,  nor  primarily 
indissoluble. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

T)iat  part  of  the  speech  of  the  Demiurgus  unfolded,  in  which  he  says  to  the  mundane  Gods, 
''  Learn  now  therefore  what  I  say  to  you  indicating  my  desire.'' 

CHAPTER  X. 

The  developement  of  the  remaining  part  of  the  speech  of  the  Demiurgus. 
J?roc.  Vol.  I.  k 


Digitized  by 


Google 


]X]Q<r  CONTBMTS. 

CHAPTER  XI. 
Who  the  junior  Gods  are,  and  why  they  are  thus  called. 

CHAPTER  Xn, 

Farther  important  particulars  respecting  the  fabrication  of  the  mundane  Gods,  collected  from  the 
Timaeus,  and  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  Xni. 

Continuation  of  the  developement  of  these  particulars. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

The  peculiarities  of  the  celestial  Gods  separately  discussed.— Why  the  one  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars 
comprehends  a  multitude  of  stars,  but  each  of  the  planetary  spheres  convolves  only  one  star. 
•->And  that  in  each  of  the  planetary  spheres,  tfiere  is  a  number  of  satellites,  analogous  to  the 
choir  of  the  fixed  stars,  subsisting  with  proper  circulations  of  their  own. 

CHAPTER  XV. 
The  nature  of  the  Moon,  Mercury,  Venus,  and  the  Sun  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
Extract  from  the  Oration  of  the  Emperor  Julian  to  the  Sovereign  Sun. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 
Extract  from  the  MS.  Scholia  of  Proclus  on  the  Cratylus  of  Plato  concerning  Apollo,  in  which 
the  principal  powers  of  the  God  are  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  XVm. 
The  nature  of  the  Muses  unfolded  from  the  above  MS.  Scholia. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

The  nature  of  Mars,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn,  unfolded—The  manner  in  which  each  of  the  «sven  plane- 
tary divinities  becomes  an  animal,  and  is  suspended  from  a  more  divme  soul ;  and  what  kmd 
of  perfection  it  affords  to  the  universe. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

That  all  the  celestial  Gods  are  beneficent,  and  after  a  similar  manner  the  causes  of  good.-And  that 
the  participation  of  them,  and  the  mixture  of  material  with  immaterial  influences,  become  the 
causes  of  Ae  abundant  difference  in  secondary  natures. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CONTBKTS.  klf 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

The  nature  of  Minerva  unfolded  from  the  Commentaries. of  Proclus  on  the  Tlmaeus.— The  spear 
and  shield  with  which  this  Goddess,  in  the  statues  of  her,  is  represented  as  armed,  exphuned 
from  lamblichus* — And  observations  respecting  the  mundane  allotment  of  diis  Goddess. 

CHAPTER  XXn. 

The  nature  of  the  great  mundane  divinity,  the  earth,  unfolded  from  Proclus  on  the  Timasus  of 
Plato. 

CHAPTER  XXUI. 

The  manner  in  which  the  earth  is  said  to  be  the  most  ancient,  and  the  first  of  the  Gods  within  the 
heavens,  explained. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 
On  the  essence  of  the  sublunary  deities. — What  Plato  says  of  them  in  the  Timaeus  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Where  the  sublunary  Gods  are  to  be  arranged. — And  the  meauing  of  the  subsequent  words  of  Plato 
developed.  ' 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

The  nature  of  the  sublunary  Gods  more  fully  unfolded. — On  the  dasmoniacal  order. — And  that 
about  each  of  the  fabricators  of  generation,  there  is  a  co-ordinate  angelical,  dsnnooiacal,  and 
heroical  multitude,  which  retains  the  appellation  of  its  producing  monad. 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

What  Pythagoras  says  in  the  Sacred  Discourse. — What  the  Orphic  traditions  are  conoemiog 
Phanes,  Night,  Heaven,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Bacchus.— That  Plato  begins  the  Theogony  of 
the  sublunary  Gods  from  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  not  from  Phanes  and  N^t. — And  whv  he 
does  so. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

On  (he  two  principles  Heaven  and  Earth. — ^What  each  of  them  is ;  and  particularly  eonceming  the 
power  of  Heaven* 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

The  whole  theory  of  Earth  unfolded. — And  also  the  theory  of  Ocean  and  Tethys.-^That  the  causes 
of  these  are  in  the  intellectual  Gods,  and  likewise  in  the  sensible  universe^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAPTER  XXX. 
The  tbeoiy  of  Phorcys,  Satura^  and  Rhea,  unfolded. 

CHAPTER  XXXr. 

Hie  nature  of  tbe  sublunary  Jupiter  and  Juno  unfolded. — And  \9hy  Plato  comprehends  in  this 
ennead^  viz*  Heaven  and  Earth,  Ocean  and  Tethys^  Phorcys,  Saturn^  Rhea,  Jupiter,  and  Juno, 
the  Gods  who  are  the  fabricators  of  generation. 

CHAPTER  XXXir. 

Why  Plato  denominates  die  sublunary  deities,  ^^  such  as  become  apparent  when  they  please.^— 
General  observations  respectii^  the  Gods  that  govern  generation. 

CHAPTER  XXXni. 

On  the  summit,  or  monad  of  all  the  mundane  Gods,  Bacchus. — And  on  the  mundane  soul  which  is 
the  immediate  participant  of  the  Bacchic  intellect 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

How  the  mundane  Gods  are  characterized  in  the  Parmenides  of  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

A  developement  of  what  Plato  says  in  the  Phsdrus,  about  Boreas  and  Orithya,  the  Centaurs, 
ChimaeraSf  Gorgons,  Pegasuses,  Typhons,  Achelous,  and  the  Nymphs. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

The  meaning  of  Plato  unfolded,  in  what  he  says  about  Pan,  Tartarus,  Prometheus,  Cadmus,  and 
the  Syrens. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

A  developement  of  Plato's  theological  conceptions  respecting  Nature,  Fate,  and  Fortune. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII 1. 

What  Time,  Day  and  Night,  Month  and  Year  arc,  so  far  as  they  arc  deities,  according  to  the 
theology  of  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 
A  chscuisioii  of  the  order  of  divine  souls,  who  are  deified  by  always  participating  of  the  Gods. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


eOMTBNTt.  tefO 


CHAPTER  XL. 

A  devdopement  of  (he  nature  of  Love,  from  the  MS.  Commeiitafy  of  Proclus  on  &e  First  AIri* 
blades  of  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XU. 

A  continuation  of  the  same  subject. 

CHAPTER  XLIL 

The  nature  of  dflsmons  more  fully  disclosed.— An  extract  from  the  MS*  Commentary  of  Proclus 
-     on  the  First  Aicibiades,  on  this  subject. 

CHAPTER  XLUI. 

On  the  daemons  who  are  allotted  the  superintendence  of  mankind, 

CHAPTER  XLIV. 

On  the  dsm<Ni  of  Socrates*— The  peculiarity^of  this  daemon ;  and  that  it  bdonged  to  the  Apollo* 
niacal  series. 

CHAPTER  XLV. 

Important  information  concerning  daemons  from  the  MS.  Scholia  of  Proclus  on  die  Cratylus  of 
Plato. — ^And  also  from  the  MS.  Commentary  of  Olympiodorus  on  the  Phaedo  of  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XLVI. 

The  nature  of  those  human  souls  that  are  of  an  heroic  characteristic  unfolded. — What  Plato  says  of 
these  souls  in  the  Cratylus. — His  meaning  elucidated  from  the  MS.  Scholia  of , Proclus  on 
that  dialogue. 

CHAPTER  XLVI  I. 

How  the  triple  genera  that  are  the  perpetual  attendants  of  the  Gods^  are  indicated  in  the  Parme- 
nides  of  Plato. 

CHAPTER  XLVIII. 

An  elucidation  from  Proclus  of  what  Plato  say^  in  the  Timaeus,  in  celebration  of  the  divinity  of  the 
World,  80  far  as  the  whole  of  it  is  a  God. 

CHAPTER  XLIX* 

A  further  elucidation  from  Proclus  of  the  same  subject. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


bifli  CONTXKT8. 


CHAPTER  L. 


The  ry^wg  of  the  words  of  Plato,  ''  And  causbg  circle  to  revolve  in  a  circle,  he  establidied 
heaven  (i*  e.  the  world)  one,  only,  solitary  nature,''  unfolded  fix>m  Produs. 

CHAPTER  LI. 
What  Plato  says  in  the  Unueus  about  the  name  of  the  WorId,^with  the  elucidations  of  Proclus. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Ixxlx 


An  explanation  of  certain  terms  which  are  unusual^  or  have  a  meaning  dif- 
ferent  from  their  common  acceptation^  and  which  there  was  a  necessity  of 
introdticing  in  the  translation  of  this  work. 


Composite,  <ruvArro^  1  have  used  the  word  composite  instead  of  compounded,  because  the 
latter  rather  denotes  the  mingling  than  the  contiguous  union  of  one  thing  with  another,  which  the 
former,  through  its  derivation  from  the  Latin  word  cbmpo$itus,  solely  denotes. 

Dbmiurgus  op  wholes,  hiiMovpyo;  row  oXcpv.  The  artificer  of  die  universe  is  thus  denomi- 
nated, because  he  produces  the  universe  so  far  as  it  is  a  whole,  and  likewise  all  the  wholes  it  con- 
tains, by  his  own  immediate  energy ;  other  subordinate  powers  co-operating  with  him  in  the  pro- 
duction of  parts.    Hence  he  produces  the  universe  totally  and  at  once. 

Desire,  tTiivfua.  Is  an  irrational  appetite  solely  directed  to  external  objects,  and  to  the 
gratification  arising  from  the  possession  of  them. 

DiANOiA,  hawia,  from  whence  dianoetic/iu  the  discursive  energy  of  reason;  ($i<^oSixi}  rou  Xoyov 
ivspyita)  or  according  to  its  most  accurate  signification,  it  is  that  power  of  the  soul  which  reasons 
scientifically,  deriving  die  principles  of  its  reasoning  from  intellect,  or  the  power  which  sees  truth 
intuitively. 

Dox  ASTic,  formed  from  do^oiy  opinion,  is  the  last  of  the  gnostic  powers  of  the  radonal  soul ;  and 
knows  that  a  thing  is,  but  is  ignorant  of  the  cause  of  it,  or  why  it  is.  The  knowledge  of  the  $iot#, 
or  tchy  a  thing  is,  being  the  province  of  dianoia. 

Guest,  ^ew^.  This  word,  in  its  more  ample  signification  in  the  Greek,  denotes  a  stranger,  but 
properly  implies  one  who  receives  another,  or  is  himself  received  at  an  entertainment.  In  the  dia- 
logues of  Plato  therefore,  (and  consequently  in  this  work  of  Pioclus  when  he  cites  the  dialogues  in 
which  this  word  occurs)  wherever  one  of  the  speakers  is  introduced  as  a  ^wo^,  I  have  translated  this 
word  guest,  as  being  more  conformable  to  the  genius  of  Plato's  dialogues,  which  may  be  jusdy 
called  rich  mental  banquets,  and  consequently  the  speakers  in  them  may  be  considered  as  so  many 
guests.  Hence  in  the  Timapus,  the  persons  of  that  dialogue  are  expressly  spoken  of  as  guests  from 
having  been  feasted  with  discourse. 

Hyparxis,  vwap^if.  The  first  principle,  or  foundation  as  it  were,  of  the  essence  of  a  thing. 
Hence,  also,  it  is  the  summit  of  essence. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Ixxx 

Imparticipablc^  oifji,ettKTO$.  One  thing  is  said  to  be  imparticipable  with  respect  to  another^ 
to  which  it  is  superior,  when  it  is  not  consubsistent  with  it. 

Intellectual  projection.  The  immediate  energy  of  intellect  is  thus  denominated, 
because  it  is  an  intuitive  perception,  or  an  immediate  darting  forth,  as  it  were,  to  its  proper  object, 
the  intelligible. 

Monad,  ftova;,  in  divine  natures  is  that  which  contains  distinct,  but  at  the  same  time  pr(h 
foundly-united  multitude,  and  which  produces  a  multitude  exquisitely  allied  to  itself.  But  iu  the 
sensible  universe,  the  first  monad  is  the  world  itself,  which  comprehends  in  itself  all  the  multitude  of 
which  it  is  the  cause  (in  conjunction  with  die  cause  of  all).  The  second  monad  is  the  inerratic 
sphere.  In  the  third  place,  the  spheres  of  the  planets  succeed,  each  of  which  is  also  a  monad,  com- 
prehending an  appropriate  multitude.  And  in  the  fourth  and  last  place  are  the  spheres  of  the 
elements,  which  are  in  a  similar  manner  monads.  All  these  monads  likewise  are  denominated 
o\on}Tff;,  wholenesses,  and  have  a  perpetual  subsistence. 

Permanency,  areuris*  llie  proper  word  for  rest,  in  Greek,  is  ijpsjxia.  Ancl  Simplicius  justly 
observes,  that  not  every  arouns  is  ij^fjxia,  but  that  only  which  is  after  motion,  lliis  word  is 
employed  by  Plato  in  the  Sophista,  to  express  one  of  the  five  genera  of  being,  viz.  essence,  perma' 
nency,  Qrrwris),  motion,  sameness,  and  difference ;  in  which  place  it  evidently  does  not  signify  rest. 

Phantasy,  or  Imagination,  ^avroto-toiy  is,  fto^fcorixii  yoi}^if,  i.  e.  a  figured  intelligence,  because 
all  the  perceptions  of  this  power  are  inward,  and  not  external,  like  those  of  sense,  and  are  accom- 
panied with  ^gtire. 

Psychical,  ^^uxixo;,  i.  e.  pertaining  to  soul,  in  the  same  manner  as  f uo-ixo^,  physical,  is  some* 
thing  pertaining  to  nature. 

Reason,  Xoyo^.  This  word  in  Platonic  writers  signifies  either  that  inward  discursive  energy 
called  reasoning ;  or  a  certain  productive  and  seminal  principle ;  or  that  which  is  indicative  and 
definitive  of  a  thing.     Hence  Xoyo^  or  reasons  in  the  soul,  are,  gnostically  producing  principles. 

Unical,  i¥tcuog,  that  which  is  characterized  by  unity. 

Uniform  §voit&9is.  This  word  when  it  occurs  in  Proclus,  and  other  Platonic  writers,  Mgnifies 
diat  which  has  the  form  of  the  one,  and  not  as  iii  Johnson,  that  which  keeps  its  tenour,  or  is  similar 
to  itself. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PROCLUS, 


THE  PLATONIC  SUCCESSOR, 


ON 


Clie  Clieologp  of  $lato. 


BSBEBBBSSBBBSa 

BOOK  I. 


CHAPTER  L 

O  PERICLES,  to  me  the  dearest  of  friends,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the 
whole  philosophy  of  Plato  was  at  first  unfolded  into  light  through  the 
beneficent  will  of  superior  natures,  exhibiting  the  intellect  concealed  in 
them,  and  the  truth  subsisting  together  with  beings,  to  souls  conversant 
with  generation  (so  far  as  it  is  lawful  for  them  to  participate  of  such 
supernatural  and  mighty  good);  and  again,  that  afterwards  having  received 
its  perfection,  returning  as  it  were  into  itself,  and  becoming  unapparent  to 
many  who  professed  to  philosophize,  and  who  earnestly  desired  to  engage 
in  the  investigation  of  true  being,  it  again  advanced  into  light.  But  I 
particularly  think  that  the  mystic  doctrine  respecting  divine  concerns, 
which  is  purely  established  on  a  sacred  foundation,  and  which  perpetually 
fubsists  with  the  gods  themselves,  became  thence  apparent  to  such  as  are 
Proc.  Vol.  I.    -  A 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

capable  of  enjoying  it  (for  a  timci  through  one  man,'  whom  I  should  not 
err  in  calling  the  primary  leader  and  hierophant  of  those  true  mysteries, 
into  which  souls  separated  from  terrestrial  places  are  initiated,  and  of 
those  entire  and  stable  visions,  which  those  participate  who  genuinely 
embrace  a  happy  and  blessed  life.  But  this  philosophy  shone  forth  at 
first  from  him  so  venerably  and  arcanely,  as  if  established  in  sacred 
temples,  and  within  their  adyta,  and  being  unknown  to  many  who  have 
entered  into  these  holy  places,  in  certain  orderly  periods  of  time,  proceeded 
as  much  as  was  possible  for  it  into  light,  through  certain  true  priests^ 
and  who  embraced  a  life  corresponding  to  the  tradition  of  such  mystic 
concerns.  Jt  appears  likewise  to  me,  that  the  whole  place  became 
splendid,  and  that  illuminations  of  divine  spectacles  every  where 
presented  themselves  to  the  view. 

These  interpreters  of  the  epopteia  (or  mystic  speculations)  of  Plato,  who 
have  unfolded  to  us  all-sacred  narrations  of  divine  concerns,  and  who 
were  allotted  a  nature  similar  to  their  leader,  I  should  determine  to  be 
the  Egyptian  Plotinus,  and  those  who  received  the  theory  from  him,  I 
mean  Amelius  and  Porphyry,  together  with  those  in  the  third  place  who 
were  produced  like  virile  statues  from  th§se,  viz.:  Jamblichus  and 
Theodoras,  and  any  others,  wh6  after  these,  following  this  divine  choir, 
have  energized  about  the  doctrines  of  Plato  with  a  divinely-inspired 
mind.  From  these,  he*  who,  after  the  gods,  has  been  our  leader  to  every 
thing  bettutifiil  and  good,  receiving  in  an  undefiled  manner  the  most 
genuine  and  pure  light  of  truth  in  the  bosom  of  his  soul,  made  us  a 
partaker  of  all  the  rest  of  Plato's  philosophy,  communicated  to  us  that 
fttcane  information  which  he  had  received  from  those  more  ancient  than 
himself,  and  caused  us,  in  conjunction  with  him,  to  be  divinely  agitated 
about  the  mystic  truth  of  divine  concerns. 

To  this  man,  therefore,  should  we  undertake  to  return  thanks  adequate 
to  the  benefits  which  we  have  received  from  him ;  the  whole  of  time 
would  not  be  sufficient.  But  if  it  is  necessary,  not  only^  that  we  shouid 
have   received   from  others    the  transcendant   good   of   the   Platonic 

'  Metoii^  Plato.    *  Meaning  his  preceptor  Syrianut .    '  The  word  i^voy  is  omitted  in  the  originaL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  n.  OF  PLATO.  9 

philosophy,  but  that  we  should  leave  to  posterity  monuments  of  thos^ 
blessed  spectacles  of  which  we  have  been  spectators^  and  emulators  to^ 
the  utmost  of  our  ability,  under  a  leader  the  most  perfect  of  the  present 
time,  and  who  arrived  at  the  summit  of  philosophy ;  perhaps  we  shall 
act  properly  in  invoking  the  gods,  that  they  will  enkindle  the  light  of 
truth  in  our  soul,  and  in  supplicating  the  attendants  and  ministers  of 
better  natures  to  direct  our  intellect  and  lead  it  to  the  all-perfect,  divine, 
and  elevated,  end  of  the  Platonic  theory.  For  I  think  that  every  where 
he  who  participates  in  the  least  degree  of  intelligence,  will  b^n  his 
undertakings  from  the  Gods,  and  especially  in  explications  respecting 
the  Grods  :  for  we  can  no  otherwise  be  able  to  understand  a  divine  nature 
than  by  being  perfected  through  the  light  of  the  Gods ;  nor  divulge  it  to 
others  unless  governed  by  them«  and  exempt  from  multiform  opinions^ 
and  the  variety  which  subsists  in  words,  preserving  at  the  same  time  the 
interpretation  of  divine  names.  Knowing  therefore  this,  and  complying 
with  the  exhortation  of  the  Platonic  Umaeus,  we  in  the  first  place  estaUish 
the  Grods  as  leaders  of  the  doctrine  respecting  themselves.  But  may 
they  in  consequence  of  hearing  our  prayers  be  propitious  to  us,  and 
benignantiy  approaching,  guide  the  intellect  of  our  soul,  and  lead  it  about 
the  Vesta  of  Hato,  and  to  the  arduous  sublimities  of  this  speculation  ; 
where,  when  arrived,  we  shall  receive  all  the  truth  concerning- them,  and 
shall  obtain  the  best  end  of  oar  parturient  conceptions  of  divine  concerns^ 
desiring  to  know  something  respecting  them,  inquiring  about  them  of 
others,  and,  at  the  same  time,  as  far  as  we  are  able^  expiring  th^n 
ourselves. 


CHAPTER  II. 

AKd  thus  much  by  way  of  pre&ce.  But  it  is  necessary  that  I  should 
finibld  the  mode  of  the  proposed  doctrine,  what  it  is  requisite  to  expect 
ft  will  be,  and  define  the  preparatives  which  a  hearer  of  it  ought  to 
possess;  that  being  properly  adapted,  he  may  approach,  not  to  our 
discourses,  but  to  the  intellectually-elevated  and  deific  philosophy  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


4  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  L 

Plato.  For  it  is  proper  that  conveDient  aptitudes  of  auditors  should  be 
proposed  according  to  the  forms  of  discourses,  just  as  in  the  mysteries, 
those  who  are  skilful  in  concerns  of  this  kind,  previously  prepare 
receptacles  for  the  Gods,  and  neither  always  use  the  same  inanin^ate 
particulars,  nor  other  animals,  nor  men,  in  order  to  procure  the  presence 
of  the  divinities ;  but  that  alone  out  of  each  of  these  which  is  naturally 
capable  of  participating  diving  illumination,  is  by  them  introduced  to  the 
proposed  mystic  rites. 

The  present  discourse,  therefore,  will  first  of  all  be  divided  by  me  into 
three  parts.  In  the  beginning,  considering  all  those  common  conceptions 
concerning  the  Gods,  which  Plato  summarily  delivers,  together  with  the 
power  and  dignity  every  where  of  theological  axioms ;  but  in  the  middle 
of  this  work,  speculating  the  total  orders  of  the  Gods,  enumerating  their 
peculiarities,  defining  their  progressions'  after  the  manner  of  Plato,  and 
referring  every  thing  to  the  hypotheses  of  theologists ;  and,  in  the  end, 
speaking  concerning  the  Gods  which  are  in  different  places  celebrated  in 
the  Platonic  writings,  whether  they  are  supermundane  or  mundane,  and 
referring  the  theory  respecting  them  to  Uie  total  genera  of  the  divine 
orders. 

In  every  part  of  this  work,  likewise,  we  shall  prefer  the  clear,  distinct, 
and  simple,  to  the  contraries  of  these.  And  such  things  as  are  delivered 
through  symbols,  we  shall  transfer  to  a  clear  doctrine  concerning  them  ; 
but  such  as  are  delivered  through  images,  we  shall  transmit  to  their 
exemplars^  Such  things  too  as  are  written  in  a^more  afi&rmative  way, 
we  shall  examine  by  causal  reasonings ;  but  such  as  are  composed  through 
demonstrations,  we  shall  investigate ;  and  besides  this,  explain  the  mode 
of  truth  which  they  contain,  and  render  it  known  to  the  hearers.  And 
of  things  enigmatically  proposed,  we  shall  elsewhere  discover  perspicuity, 
not  from  foreign  hypotheses,  but  from  the  most  genuine  writings  of  Plato. 
But  with  respect  to  the  things  which  immediately  occur  to  the  hearers, 
of  these  we  shall  contemplate  the  consent  with  things  themselves.  And 
from  all  these  particulars,  one  perfect  form  of  the  Platonic  theology  will 
present  itself  to  our  view,  together  with  its  truth  which  pervades  through 
tlie  whole  of  divine  intellections,  and  the  one  intellect  which  generated  all 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  11.  OF  PLATO.  5 

the  beauty  of  this  theology,  and  the  mystic  evolution  of  this  theory. 
fSkich,  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  will  be  my  present  treatise. 

But  the  auditor  of  the  proposed  dogmas  is  supposed  to  be  adorned 
with  the  moral  virtues,  and  to  be  one  who  has  bound  by  the  reason  of 
virtue  all  the  illiberal  and  inharmonious  motions  of  the  soul,  and 
harmonized  them  to  the  one  form  of  intellectual  prudence:  for,  a& 
Socrates  says,  it  is  not  lawful  for  the  pure  to  be  touched  by  the  impure. 
But  every  vicious  man  is  perfectly  impure  ;  and  the  contrary  character 
is  pure.  He  must  likewise  have  been  exercised  in  all  the  logical  methods, 
and  have  contemplated  many  irreprehensible  conceptions  about  analyses, 
and  many  about  divisions,  the  contraries  to  these,  agreeably,  as  it  appiears 
to  me,  to  the  exhortation  of  Parmenides  to  Socrates.  For  prior  to  such  a 
contest  in  arguments,  the  knowledge  of  the  divine  genera,  and  of  the  truth 
established  in  them,  is  difficult  and  impervious.  But  in  the  third  place, 
he  must  not  be  unskilled  in  physics.  For  he  who  has  been  conversant 
with  the  multiform  opinions  of  physiologists,  and  has  after  a  manner 
explored  in  images  the  causes  of  beings,  will  more  easily  advance 
to  the  nature  of  separate  and  primary,  essences.  An  auditor  therefore 
of  the  present  work,  as  I  have  said,  must  not  be  ignorant  of  the  truth 
contained  in  the  phenomena,  nor  unacquainted  with  the  paths  of  erudition, 
and  the  disciplines  which  they  contain;  for  through  these  we  obtain  a 
more  immaterial  knowledge  of  a  divine  essence.  But  all  these  must  be 
bound  together  in  the  leader  intellect.  Being  likewise  a  partaker  of  the 
dialectic  of  Plato,  meditating  those  immaterial  energies  which  are  separate 
from  corporeal  powers,  and  desiring  to  contemplate  by  intelligence'  in 
conjunction  with  reason  [true]  beings,  our  auditor  must  genuinely  apply 
himself  to  the  interpretation  of  divine  and  blessed  dogmas,  and  fill  his 
soul,  according  to  the  Oracle,  with  profound  love;  since,  as  Plato 
somewhere  observes,  for  the  apprehension  of  this  theory,  a  better  assistant 
than  love  cannot  be  obtained. 

He  must  likewise  be  exercised  in  the  truth  which  pervades  through  all 
things,  and  must  excite  his  intelligible  eye  to  real  and  perfect  truth.     He 

'  Instead  of  yoi;(ri^  /jura  Aoyou^  it  is  necessary  to  read,  voijo-ti  fttra  Xoyot/. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


g  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  t 

mtist  establish  himself  in  a  firm,  immovable,  and  safe  kind  of  divine 
knowledge,  and  must  be  persuaded  not  to  admire  any  thing  else,  nor  even 
to  direct  his  attention  to  other  things,  but  must  hasten  to  divine  h'ght 
H^rith  an  intrepid  reasoning  energy,  and  with  the  power  of  an  unwearied 
life ;  and  in  short,  must  propose  to  himself  such  a  kind  of  energy  and 
rest  as  it  becomes  him  to  possess  who  intends  to  be  such  a  coryphaeus  as 
Socrates  describes  in  the  Thesetetus.  Such  then  is  the  magnitude  of  our 
hypothesis,  and  sUcK  the  mode  of  the  discourses  about  it.  Before, 
however^  I  enter  on  the  narration  of  the  things  proposed,  I  ^vish  to  speak 
about  theology  itself,  its  different  modes,  and  what  theological  forms 
Plato  approves,  and  what  he  rejects  ;  that  these  being  previously  known, 
we  may  more  easily  learn  in  what  follows,  the  auxiliaries  of  the  demon*> 
strations  themselves. 


CHAPTER  III. 

All,  therefore,  that  have  ever  touched  upon  theology,  have  called 
things  first,  according  to  nature,  Gods  ;  and  have  said  that  the  theological 
science  is  conversant  about  these.  And  some,  indeed,  have  considered  a 
corporeal  essence,  as  that  alone  which  has  any  existence,  and  have  placed 
in  a  secondary  rank  with  respect  to  essence,  all  the  genera  of  incorporeal 
natures,  considering  the  principles  of  things  as  having  a  corporeal  form, 
and  evincing  that  the  habit  in  us  by  which  we  know  these,  is  corporeal, 
teut  others,  suspending  indeed  all  bodies  from  incorporeal  natures,  and 
defining  the  first  hyparxis'  to  be  in  soul,  and  the  powers  of  soul,  call  (as 
it  appears  to  me)  the  best  of  souls,  Gods  ;  and  denominate  the  science 
which  proceeds  as  far  as  to  these,  and  which  knows  these,  theology. 
But  such  as  produce  the  multitude  of  souls  from  another  more  ancient 
principle,  and  estabUsh  intellect  as  the  leader  of  wholes,  these  assert  that 
tiiebest  end  is  a  union  of  the  soul  with  intellect,  and  consider  the 
intellectual  form  of  life  as  the  most  honourable  of  all  things.    They 

'  Hyparxis,  is  the  summit  of  any  nature,  or  blossom,  as  it  were,  of  its  essence. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  m.  OF  PLATO.  7 

doubtless  too  consider  theology,  and  the  discussion  of  intellectual  essence, 
as  one  and  the  same.  All  these,  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  call  the  first 
and  most  self-sufficient  principles  of  things,  Gods,  and  the  science 
respecting  these,  theology. 

The  divine  narration  however,  of  Plato  alone,  despbes  all  corporeal 
natures,  with  reference  to  principles.  Because,  indeed,  every  thing  divisible 
and  endued  with  interval,  is  naturally  unable  either  to  produce  or  preserve 
itself,  but  possesses  its  being,  energy,  and  passivity  through  soul,  and  the 
motions  which  soul  contains.  But  Plato  demonstrates  that  the  psychical 
essence  [i.  e.  the  essence  pertaining  to  soul]  is  more  ancient  than  bodies,  but 
is  suspended  from  anintdlectual  hypostasis.  Forevery  thing  which  is  moved 
according  to  time,  though  it  may  be  self-moved,  is  indeed  of  a  more  ruling 
nature  than  things  moved  by  others,  but  is  posterior  to  an  eternal  motion. 
He  shows,  therefore,  as  we  have  said,  that  intellect  is  the  father  and  cause 
of  bodies  and  souls,  and  that  all  things  both  subsist  and  energize  about 
it,  which  are  allotted  a  life  conversant  with  transitions  and  evolutions. 

Plato,  however,  proceeds  to  another  principle  entirely  exempt  from 
intellect,  more  incorporeal  and  ineffable,  and  from  which  all  things,  even 
though  you  should  speak  of  such  as  are  last,  have  necessarily  a  subsistence. 
For  all  things  are  not  naturally  disposed  to  participate  of  soul,  but  such 
things  only  as  are  allotted  in  themselves  a  more  clear  or  obscure  life. 
Nor  are  all  things  able  to  enjoy  intellect  and  being,  but  such  only  as 
subsist  according  to  form.  But  it  is  necessary  that  the  principle  of  all 
things  should  be  participated  by  all  things,  if  it  does  not  desert  anything, 
since  it  is  the  cause  of  all  things  which  in  any  respect  are  said  to  have  a 
subsistence.  Plato  having  divinely  discovered  this  first  principle  of 
wholes,  which  is  more  excellent  than  intellect,  and  is  concealed  in 
inaccessible  recesses ;  and  having  exhibited  these  three  causes  and  monads, 
and  evinced  them  to  be  above  bodies,  I  mean  soul,  the  first  intellect,  and 
a  union  above  intellect,  produces  from  these  as  monads,  their  proper 
numbers;  one  multitude  indeed  being  uniform,'  but  the  second  intellectwd, 
and  the  third  psychical.    Forevery  monad  is  the  leader  of  a  multitude 

^  Whirever  this  word  occurs  in  this  translation^  it  signifies  that  which  is  cbaractedzeil  by  unity. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


8 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 


coordinate  to  itself.  But  as  Plato  connects  bodies  with  souk,  so  likewise 
he  connects  souls  with  intellectual  forms,  and  these  again  with  the  unities 
of  beings.  But  he  converts  all  things  to  one  imparticipable  unity.  And 
having  run  back  as  far  as  to  this  unity,  he  considers  himself  as  having 
obtained  the  highest  end  of  the  theory  of  wholes ;  and  that  this  is  the 
truth  respecting  the  Gods,  which  is  conversant  with  the  unities  of  beings, 
and  which  delivers  their  progressions  and  peculiarities,  the  contact  of 
beings  with  them,  and  the  orders  of  forms  which  are  suspended  from  these 
unicar  hypostases. 

But  he  teaches  us  that  the  theory  respecting  intellect,  an^  the  forms 
and  the  genera  revolving  about  intellect,  is  posterior  to  the  science  which 
is  conversant  with  the  Gods  themselves.  Likewise  that  the  intellectual 
theory  apprehends  intelligibles,  and  the  forms  which  are  capable  of  being 
known  by  the  soul  through  the  projecting  energy  of  intellect ;  but  that 
the  theological  science  transcending  this,  is  conversant  with  arcane  and 
ineffable  hyparxes,  and  pursues  their  separation  from  each  other,  and 
their  unfolding  into  light  from  one  cause  of  all :  whence,  I  am  of  opinion, 
that  the  intdlectual  peculiarity  of  the  soul  is  capable  of  apprehending 
intellectual  forms,  and  the  difference  which  subsists  in  them,  but  that 
the  summit,  and,  as  they  say,  flower  of  intellect  and  hyparxis,  is  conjoined 
with  the  unities  of  beings,  and  through  these,  with  the  occult  union  of  all 
the  divine  unities.  For  as  we  contain  many  gnostic  powers,  through 
this  alone  we  are  naturally  capable  of  being  conjoined  with  and 
participating  this  occult  union.  For  the  genus  of  the  Gods  cannot  be 
apprehended  by  sense,  because  it  is  exempt  from  all  bodies ;  nor  by 
opinion  and  dianoia,*  for  these  are  divisible  and  come  into  contact  with 
multiform  concerns  ;  nor  by  intelligence  in  conjunction  with  reason,  for 
knowledge  of  this  kind  belongs  to  true  beings ;  but  the  hyparxis  of  the 
Gods  rides  on  beings,  and  is  defined  according  to  the  union  itself  of 
wholes.  It  remains,  therefore,  if  it  be  admitted  that  a  divine  nature  can 
be  in  any  respect  known,  that  it  must  be  apprehended  by  the  hyparxis 
of  the  soul,  and  through  this,  as  far  as  it  is  possible,  be  known.     For  wo 

>  i.  e.  Of  the  nature  of  the  one. 

*  U  e.  The  diKjorsive  energy  of  reason,  or  the  power  of  the  soul  that  reasons  scientifically. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  11.  OF  PLATO.  g 

say  tkat  every  where  things  similar  can  be  known  by  the  similar ;  vi2. 
the  sensible  by  sense^  the  doxastic'  by  opinion,  the  dianoetic  by  dianoia, 
and  the  intelligible  by  intellect  So  that  the  most  unical  nature  must  be 
known  by  the  one,  and  the  ineffable  by  that  which  is  ineffable. 

Indeed,  Socrates  in  the  [First]  Alcibiades  rightly  observes,  that  the  soul 
entering  into  herself  will  behold  all  other  things,  and  deity  itself.  For 
verging  to  her  own  union,  and  to  the  centre  of  all  life,  laying  aside  mill* 
litude,  and  the  variety  of  the  all  manifold  powers  which  she  contains,  she 
ascends  to  the  high<»t  watch-tower  of  beings.  And  as  in  the  most  holy 
of  the  mysteries,  they  say,  that  the  mystics  at  first  meet  with  the  multi^. 
form,  and  many-shaped*  genera,  which  are  hurled  forth  before  the  Gods, 
but  on  entering  the  interior  parts  of  the  temple,  unmoved,  and  guarded 
by  the  mystic  rites,  they  genuinely  receive  in  their  bosom  divine  illumi* 
nation,  and  divested  of  their  garments,  as  they  would  say,  participate  ot 
a  divine  nature ; — ^tlie  same  mode,  as  it  appears  to  me,  takes  place  in  the 
upeculatioo  of  wholes.  For  the  sou)  when  looking  at  things  posterior  to 
herself,  beholds  the  shadows  and  images  of  beings,  but  when  she  converts 
herself  to  herself  she  evolves  her  own  essence,  and  the  reasons  which  she 
contains.  And  a;t  first  indeed,  she  only  as  it  were  beholds  herself;  but, 
when  she  penetrates  more  profoundly  into  the  knowledge  of  herself,  she 
finds  in  herself  both  intellect,  and  the  orders  of  beings.  When  however, 
she  proceeds  into  her  interior  recesses,  and  into  the  adytum  as  it  were  of 
the  soul,  she  perceives  with  her  eye  closed,  the  genus  of  the  Gods,  and 
the  unities  of  beings.  For  all  things  arp  in  us  psychically,  and  through 
this  we  are  naturally  capable  of  knowing  all  things,  by  exciting  tiba 
powers  aqd  thp  images  of  wholes  which  we  contain. 

And  this  is  the  best  employment  of  our  energy,  to  be  extended  to  a 
divine  nature  itself,  having  our  powers  at  rest,  to  revojve  harmoniously 
round  it,  to  excite  9II  the  multitude  of  the  soul  to  this  union,  and  laying 
jaside  all  such  things  as  are  posterior  to  the  one^  to  beconie  seated  and 
conjoined  with  that  which  is  inefikble,  and  beyond  all  things.  For  it  is 
lawful  for  the  squI  to  ascend,  till  she  tern^inates  her  flight  in  the  principle 

/  i.  e.  Tlie  object  of  opimotif  *  i,  e.  EtU  dacmonf , 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  B 


Digitized  by 


Google 


10  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  T. 

of  things ;  but  arriving  thither,  beholding  the  place  which  is  there,  de- 
scending thence,  atid  dfrecting  her  course  through  beings.^  likewise, 
evolving  the  multitude  of  forms,  exploring  their  monads  and  their 
numbers,  and  apprehending  intellectually  how  each  is  suspended  from  its 
proper  unity,  then  we  may  consider  her  as  possessing  the  most  perfect 
science  of  divine  natures,  perceiving  itt  a  uniform  manner  the  progressions 
of  the  Gods  into  beings,  and  the  distinctions  of  beings  about  the  Gods. 
Such  thenr  according  to  Plato's  decision  is  our  theologist  j  and  theology  is 
a  habit  of  this  kind,  which  unfolds  the  hyparxis  itself  of  Ihe  Gods,  se* 
parates  and  speculates  their  unknown  and  unical  light  from  the  peculia-^ 
rity  of  their  participants,  and  announces  it  to  such  as  are  \fortby.of  this 
energy,  which  is  both  blessed  and  comprehends  all  things  at  once. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

After  this  all-perfect  comprehension  of  the  first  theory,  we  mi;st 
deliver  the  modes  according  to  which  Plato  teaches  us  mystic  conceptions 
of  divine  natures.  For  he  appears  not  to  have  pursued  every  where  the 
same  mode  of  doctrine  about  these ;  but  sometimes  according  to  a  deific 
energy,  and  at  other  times  dialecti(ially»  he  evolves  the  truth  concerning 
them.  And  sometimes  he  symbolically  announces  their  inefiable  pecu- 
liarities, but  at  other  times  he  recurs  to  them  from  images,  and  discovers 
in  them  the  primary  causes  of  wholes.  For  in  the  Phaedrus  being  inspired 
by  the  Nymphs,  and  having  exchanged  human  intelligence  for  a  better 
possession,  fury,  he  unfolds  with  a  divine  mouth  many  arcane  dogtpas 
concerning  the  intellectual  Gods,  and  many  concerning  the  liberated 
rulers  of  the  universe,  who  lead  upwards  the  multitude  of  mundane  Gods 
to  the  monads  which  are  intelligible  and  separate  from  [mundane]  wholes. 
But  relating  still  more  about  those  Gods  who  are  allotted  the  world,  he 
celebrates  their  intellections,  and  mundane  fabrications,  their  unpolluted 
providence  and  government  of  souls,  and  whatever  else  Socrates  delivers 
entheastically  [or  according  to  a  divinely-inspired  energy]  in  that  dialogue. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IV.  OF  PLATO.  n 

as  he  clearly  asserts,  ascribing  at  the  same  time  this  fury  to  the  deities  ol 
the  place. 

But  in  the  Sophista,  dialecticaily  contending  about  being,  and  the 
separate  hypostasis  of  the  one  from  beings,  and  doubting  against  those 
more  ancient  than  himself,  he  shows  how  all  beings  are  suspended  from 
their  cause,  and  the  first  being,  but  that  being  itself  participates  of  the 
unity  which  is  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things,  that  it  js  a  passive  one, 
but  not  the  one  itself  being  subject  to  and  united  to  the  one^  but  not 
being  that  which  is  primarily  one.  In  a  similar  manner  too,  in  the  P)^r* 
menides,  he  unfolds  dialectically  the  progressions  of  being  from  the  one^ 
and  the  transoendancy  of  the /me^  through  the  first  hypotheses,  and  this, 
as  he  asserts  in  that  dialogue^  according  to  the  most  perfect  division  of 
this  method.  And  again,  in  the  Gorgias,  he  relates  the  fable  concerning 
the  three  demiurgi  [or  fitbricators]  and  their  demiurgic  allotment,  whidi 
indeed  is  not  only  a  fable,  but  a  true  narration.  But  in  the  Banquet,  he 
speaks  cooceming  the  union  of  Lore.  And  in  the  Protagoras,  about  the 
distributiooi  of  mortal  animals  from  the  Gods;  in  a  symbolical  manner 
concealing  the  truth  respecting  divine  natures,  and  as  fietr  as  to  mere  in* 
dication  unfolding  his  mind  to  the  most  genuine  of  bis  hearers. 

If  likewise,  you  are  willing  that  I  should  mention  the  doctrine  deli-^ 
vered  through  the  mathematical  disciplines,  and  the  discussion  of  divine 
concerns  from  ethical  or  physical  discourses,  of  which  many  may  be  con- 
templated in  the  Timseus,  many  in  the  dialogue  called  the  Politicus,  and 
many  may  be  seen  spattered  in  other  dialogues ;  here  likewise  to  you  who 
are  desirous  of  knowing  divine  concerns  through  images,  the  method  will 
be  apparent.  Foi"  all  these  shadow  forth  the  powers  of  things  divine. 
The  Politicus,  for  instance,  the  fabrication  in  the  heavens.  But  the- 
figures  of  the  five  elements  delivered  in  geometrical  proportions  in  the 
TimsBUS,'  represent  in  images  the  pecuharities  of  the  Gods  who  ride  on 
the  parts  of  the  universe.  And  the  divisions  of  the  psychical  essence  in 
that  dialogue  shadow  forth  the  total  orders  of  the  Gods. 

I  omit  to  mention  that  Plato  composes  polities,  assimilating  them  to 

t 

'  ty  TifAaif  is  omitted  in  the  Greek. 


Qigitized  by 


Google 


12  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V 

divine  natures,  and  to  the  whole  world,  and  adorns  them  from  the  powers 
which  it  contains.  All  these  therefore,  through  the  similitude  of  mortal 
to  divine  concerns,  exhibit  to  us  in  images,  the  progressions,  orders,  and 
fabrications  of  divine  natures.  And  such  are  the  modes  of  theologic  doc- 
trine employed  by  Plato. 

It  is  evident  however,  from  what  has  been  already  said,  that  they  are 
necessarily  so  many  in  number.     For  those  who  treat  of  divine  concerns 
in  an  indicative  manner,  either  speak  symbolically  and  fabulously,  or 
through  images.     But  of  those  who  openly  announce  their  conceptions, 
some  frame  their  discourses  according  to  science,  but  others  according  to 
inspration  from  the   Gods.     And  he  who  desires  to  signify  divine  con* 
cerns  through  symbols  is  Orphic,  and  in  short,  accords  with  those  who 
iinrite  fables  concerning  the  Gods;     But  he  who  does  this  through  images 
is  Pythagoric.     For  the  mathematical  disciplines  were  invented  by  the 
Pythagoreans,  in  order  to  a  reminiscence  of  divine  concerns,  at  which, 
through  these  as  images  they  endeavour  to  arrive.    For  they  refer  both 
numbers  and  figures  to  the  Gods,  according  to  the  testimony  of  their  his- 
torians.    But  the  entheastic  character,  or  he  who  is  under  the  influence 
of  divine  inspiration,  unfolding  the  truth  itself  by  itself  concerning  the 
Oods,  most  perspicuously  ranks  among  the  highest  initiators.    For  these 
do  not  think  proper  to  unfold  the  divine  orders,  or  their  'peculiarities  to 
their  familiars,  through  certain  veils,  but  announce  their  powers  and  their 
numbers,  in  consequence  of  being  moved  by  the  Gods  theniselves.     But 
the  tradition  of  divine  concerns  according  to  science,  is  the  illustrious 
prerogative  of  the  philosophy  of  Plato.     For  Plato  alone,  as  it  appeaii 
to  me,  of  all  those  who  are  known  to  us,  has  attempted  methodically  to 
divide  and  reduce  into  order,  the  regular  progression  of  the  divine  genera, 
their  mutual  diflFerence,  the  common  peculiarities  of  the  total  orders,  and 
the  distributed  peculiarities  in  each.     But  the  truth  of  this  will  be  evi. 
dent  when  we  frame  precedaneous  demonstitttions  about  the   Parme* 
nides,  and  all  the  divisions  which  it  contains* 

At  present  we  shall  observe  that  Plato  does  not  admit  all  the  fabulous 

figments  of  dramatic  composition,  but  those  only  which  have  reference 

^to  the  beautiful  and  the  good,  and  which  are  not  discordant  with  a  di- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IV.  OP  PLATO.  IS 

vine  essence.  For  that  mythological  mode  which  indicates  divine  con^ 
cems  through  conjecture  is  ancient,  concealing  truth  under  a  multitude 
ofveils^ami  proceeding  in  a  manner  similar  to  nature,  which  extends 
sensible  figments  of  intelligibles,  material,  of  immaterial,  partible,  of  im- 
partible natures^  and  images,  and  things  which  have  a  false  being,  of 
things  perfectly  true.  But  Plato  rejects  the  more  tragical  mode  of  my- 
thologi^g  of  the  ancient  poets,  who.  thought  proper  to  establish  an 
arcane  theology  respecting  the  Gods,  and  on  this  account  devised  wan- 
derings, sections,  battles,  lacerations,  rapes  and  adulteries  of  the  Gods, 
and^any  other  such  symbols  of  the  truth  about  divine  natures,  whidi 
this  theology  conceals ;  this  mode  he  r^ects,  and  asserts  that  it  is  in 
every  respect  most  foreign  from  erudition.  But  he  considers  those  my- 
thological discourses  about  the  Gods,  as  more  persuasive,  and  more 
adapted  to  truth  and  the  philosophic  habit,  which  assert  that  a  divine 
nature  is  the  cause  of  all  good,  but  of  no  evil,  and  that  it  is  void  of  all 
mutation,  ever  preserving  its  own  order  immutable,  and  comprehending 
in  itself  the  fountain  of  truth,  but  never  becoming  the  cause  of  any  de- 
ception to  others^  For  such  types  of  theology,  Socrates  delivers  in  the 
Republic. 

All  the  fables  therefore  of  Plato^  guarding  the  truth  in  concealment, 
have  not  even  their  externally  apparent  apparatus  discordant  with  our 
undisciplined  and  unperverted  anticipation  respecting  the  Gods.  But 
they  bring  with  them  an  image  of  the  mundane  composition,  in  which 
both  the  apparent  beauty  is  worthy  of  divinity,  and  a  beauty  more  di- 
vine than  this,  is  established  in  the  unappmrent  lives  and  powers  of  the 
Gods.  This  therefore,  is  one  of  the  mythological  modes,  respecting  di- 
vine concerns,  which  from  the  apparently  unlawful,  irrational,  and  inor- 
dinate, passes  into  order  and  bound,  and  regards  as  its  scope  the  com- 
position of  the  beautiful  and  good. 

But  there  is  another  mode  which  he  delivers  in  the  Phaedrus.  And 
this  consists  in  every  where  preserving  theological  fables,  unmixed  with 
physical  narrations,  and  being  careful  in  no  respect  to  confound  or 
exchange  theology,  and  the  physical  theory  with  each  other.  For,  as  a 
divine  essence  is  separate  from  the  whole  of  nature,  in  like  manner,  it  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


14  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  L 

perfectly  proper  tliat  discourses  sespecting  the  Gods  should  be  pure  from 
physical  disquisitions.  For  ia  mixture  of  this  kind  is,  says  he,  laborious  : 
and  to  make  physical  passioiis  the  end  of  mythological  conjecture,  is  the 
employment  of  jlo  very  good  man  ;.such  for  iniktance,^  as  considering 
through  his  [pretended]  wisdom,  Chimttra,  Gc^goo,  and  things  of  a  simi* 
lar  kind»  as  the  same  with  physical  figments.  Socrates,  in  the  Phsedrus, 
reprobating  this  mode  of  mjrthblogizing^  fepresents  its  patrons  as  saying 
under  the  figure  of  a  fable,  that  Orithya  sporting  with  the  wind  Boreas, 
and  being  thrown  down  the  rocks,  means  nothing  more,  than  that  Orithya 
who  was  a  mortal,  was  ravished  by  Boreas  through  love.  For  it  appears 
to  me,  that  fabulous  narrations  about  the  gods,  should  always  have  their 
concealed  meaning  more  venerable  than  the  apparent  So  that  if  certain 
persons  introduce  to  us  physical  hypotheses  of  Platonic  fables,  and  such 
as  are  conversant  with  sublunaiy  afiaiirs^  we  piust  say  that  they  entirely 
wander  from  the  intention  of  the  philosopher,  and  that  those  hypotheses 
alone,  are  interpreters  of  the  truth  contained  in  these  fables,  which  have 
for  their  scope,  a  divine,  immaterial,  and  separate  hypostasis,  and  which 
looking  to  this,  make  the  compositions  and  analyses  of  the  fables,  adapted' 
to  our  inherent  anticipations  of  divine  concerns. 


CHAPTER  V. 

'  As  we  have  therefore  enumerated  all  these  modes  of  the  Platonic 
theology,  and  have  shown  what  compositions  and  cmalyses  of  fables  un 
adapted  to  the  tmth  respecting  the  Gods,  let  us  consider,  in  the  next 
place,  whence,  and  from  what  dialogues  principally,  we  think  the 
dogmas  of  Plato  concerning  the  Gods  may  be  collected,  and  by  a  spe- 
culation of  what  types  or  forms  we  may  be  able  to  distinguish  hts 
genuine  writings,  from  those  spurious  compositions  which  are  ascribed 
to  him. 
The  truth  then  concerning  the  Gods  pervades,  as  I  may  say,  through 


'  For  QtKitausf  it  is  necessary  to  read  oixiio^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ¥.  OF  PLATO.  15 

all  the  Pktbnic  dialogues,  and .  in  all  of  them  conceptions  of  the  first 
philosophy,  venerable,  clear,  and  stipernatural,  are  disseminated,  in 
some  indeed,  more  ohBcurel  J,  but  in  others .  more  *  coti^picuously  ;  con- 
ceptioBs  Which  excite  those  that  are  in  any  respect  able  to  participate  of 
thein,  to  the  immaterial  and  separate  essence  of  the  Gods. .  Acid,  us  in 
each  part  of  the  universe,  and  in  nature  herself,  ihe^  demiurgus  of  all 
that  the  world  contains,  establi^ed  resemblances  of.  the  .unknown 
hyparxis  of  the  Gods,  that  all  things  might  be  converted  to  a  divine  na- 
ture; through  their  alliance  with  it,  in  like  manner. I  am  of  1  opinion,  that 
the  divine  intellect  of  Plato  weaves  conceptions  about  theiQ^ods  in  all 
his  Writings,  and  leaves  nothing  deprivediof  the  meptidn  of  divinity,  that 
from  the  whole  of  them,  a  reminiscence  of  wholes  may  be  jobtained,  and 
imparted' to  the  genuine  lovers  of  divine  concerntf^,  . 

If  however,  it  be  requisite  to  lay  before  the  readtr  thosedialogues  out 
of  niiany,  which  principally  unfold  to  us  the  mysstic  discipline  about  the 
gods,  I  should  not  err  in  ranking  among  this  number,,  the  Phaado  and 
Phaedrus,  the  Banquet,  and  the  Philebus,  and  together  with  these,  the 
So(Aista  and  Pbliticus,.  the  Cratylus  and  IheTimaeus*  For  all  these  are 
full  through  the  whole  of  themselves,  as  I  may  say,  of.  the  divine  science 
of  Plato.  But  I  should  place  in  the  second  rank  after  these,  the  fable  in 
the  Gorgias,  and  that  in  the. Protagoras;  likewise;  the  assertions  about 
the  providence  of  the  Gods  in  the  Laws,  and  such  things  as  are  delivered 
about  the  Fates,  or  the  mother  of  the  Fates,  or  the  circulations  of  the 
universe,  in  the  tenth  book  of  the  Republic-  Again,  you  may,  if  you 
{^ease,  place  in  the  third  tank  those  Epistles,  through  which  we. may  be 
able  to  arrive  at  the  science  about  divine  natures.  For  in  these,  mention 
is  made  of  the  three  kings;  and  y&y  many  other  divine  dogmas  worthy 
the  Platonic  theory  are  delivered.  It  .is  necessary  therefore,  looking  to 
these,  to  explore  in  these  each  ord^  of  the  Gods. 

Thus  from  the  Philebus,  we  may  receive  the  science  respecting,  the  one 
good^  and  the  two  first  principles  of  things,  together  with  the  triad^ 
which  is  unfolded  into  light  from  these.    For  you  will  find  all  these 

'  t^i«So$  18  omitltd  ia  the  ov^pnaL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


16  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

distinctly  delivered  to  us  by  Flato  in  that  dialogue.  But  from  tkeTiu 
SMeus,  you  may  obtain  the  theory  about  intdUgibles,  a  divine  narration 
about  the  demiurgic  monad:  and  the  most  full  truth  about  the  mundane 
Gods.  But  from  the  Phsedrus,  [you  may  acquire  a  scientific  knowledge 
ot]all  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  genentt  and  of  the  liberated  ordeiis 
of  Gods,  which  are  proximately  established  above  the  celestial  circuk* 
tions.  From  the  Politicus,  you  may  obtain  the  theory  of  the  fabrica-t 
tion  in  the  heavens,  of  the  uneven  periods  of  the  universe,  and  of  the 
intellectual  causes  of  those  periods.  But  from  the  Sophista,  the  whole 
sublunary  generation,  and  the  peculiarity  of  the  Gods  who  are  allotted 
the  sublunary  region,  and  preside  over  its  generation^  and  corruptions. 
But  with  respect  to  each  of  the  Gods,  we  may  obtain  many  concepfion& 
adapted  to  sacred  concerns  from  the  Banquet,  many  from  the  Cratylus, 
and  many  from  the  Phaedo.  For  in  each  of  these  dialogues,  more  or 
less  mention  is  made  of  divine  names,  from  which  it  is  easy  for  those 
who  are  exercised  in  divine  concerns  to  discover  by  a  reasoning  process 
the  peculiarities  of  each« 

It  is  necessary  however,  to  evince  that  each  of  the  dogmas  accords 
with  Platonic  principles,  and  the  mystic  traditions  of  theologists.  For 
all  the  Grecian  theology  is  the  progeny  of  the  mystic  tradition  of  Of* 
pheus ;  Pythagoras  first  of  all  learning  from  Aglaophemus  the  orgies  of 
the  Gods,  but  Plato  in  the  second  place  receiving  an  all-perfect  science 
of  the  divinities  from  the  Pythagoric  and  Orphic  writings.  For  in  the 
Philebus  referring  the  theory  about  the  two  species  of  principles  [bound 
and  infinity]  to  the  Pythagoreans,  he  calls  them  men  dwelling  with  the 
Gods,  and  truly  blessed.  Philolaus  therefore,  the  Pythagorean,  has  left 
us  in  writing  many  admirable  conceptions  about  these  principles,  cele* 
brating  their  common  progression  into  beings,  and  their  separate  fabri«^ 
cation  of  things.  But  in  the  Timaeus,  Plato  endeavouring  to  teach  u^ 
about  the  sublunary  Gods,  and  their  order,  flies  to  theologists,  call? 
them  the  sons  of  the  Gods,  and  makes  them  the  fathers  of  the  truth 
about  those  divinities.  And  lastly,  he  delivers  the  orders  of  the  siiblti^ 
pary  Gods  proceeding  from  wholes,  according  to  the  progression  deli-j 
vered  by  them  of  the  intellectual  kings.    Again,  in  the  Cratylus  he  fql? 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ▼!.  OF  PLATO.  jy 

lows  the  traditions  of  theologists,  respecting  the  ordet*  of  t)ie  drrine  pm^ 
oessiom.  But  in  tlie  Gorgias,  he  adopts  the  Homeric  dogma,  redpeo^ 
log  the  triadic  hypostasis  of  the  demiurgi.  And  in  short,  he  ^ver^ 
where  discourses  concerning  the  Gods  agreeably  to  the  princif^  of 
theologists ;  rejecting  indeed,  the  tragical  part  of  inythological  fictioiH 
but  establishing  first  hypotheses  in  common  with  the  authors  of  hbVa. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Perhaps,  howerer,  some  rtie  may  here  object  to  us,  that  We  do  riot  m 
a  proper  manner  exhibit  the  every  where  dispersed  theology  of  IMato,  and 
that  we  endeavour  to  heap  together  diiFerent  particulars  from  difierent -dia- 
logues, as  if  we  were  studious  of  collecting  together  many  things  into  one 
mixture,  instead  of  deriving  them  all  from  on6  and  the  same  ibuntahi/ 
For  if  this  were  the  case,  we  might  refer  different  dogmas  to  different 
treatises  of  Plato,  but  we  shafl  by  no  means  have  a  precedaneous  doc* 
trine  concerning  the  Gods,  nor  will  there  be  any  dialogue  which  presents 
ns  with  an  all-perfect  and  entire  procession  of  the  divine  genera,  and  their 
co-ordination  with  each  other.  But  we  shall  be  similar  to  those  whaen« 
deavour  to  obtain  a  whole  from  parts,  through  the  Want  of  a  whole  prior 
to  parts,  and  to  weave  together  the  perfect  from  things  imperfect ;  when, 
bn  the  contrary,  the  imperfect  ought  to  have  the  first  cause  of  its  genera* 
tion  in  the  perfect.  For  the  Timaeus,  for  instance,  will  teach  us  the  theory 
of  the  intelligible  genera ;  and  the  Phsedrus  appears  to  present  us 
with  a  methodical  account  of  the  fir^t  intellectual  orders.  But  where  will 
be  the  co-ordination  of  intellectuals  to  intelligibles  ?  And  what  will  be  the 
generation  of  second  from  first  natures  ?  In  short,  after  what  manner  the 
progression  of  the  divine  orders  takes  place  frbta  the  one  principle  of  all 
things,  and  how  in  the  generations  of  the  Gods,  the  orders  between 
the  onc^  and  all-perfect  number,  are  filled  tip,  we  shall* be  unable  to 
evince. 

Farther  still,  it  may  ^  kaid^  %fifere  will  h6  ^e  venerableness  of  your 
Proc.  VoL^L  C 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Ill  ON  niE  TlIBOLOGY  BOOK  It 

bMStod  science  aboot  divine  natures  ?  For  it  is  absuiKl  to  call  these  clog^ 
nms  which  are  collected  from  many  places  Platonic ;  and  which».  as  yoa 
aqkoowledge,  are  introduced  from  foreign  names  to  the  philosophy  of 
Plato ;  nor  are  you  able  to  evince  one  whole  entire  truth  about  divine  na* 
l^nres.  Perhaps,  indeed,  they  will  say,  certain  persons,  junior  to  Plato^ 
have'di^ivered  in  their  writings  and  left  to  th^r  disciples,  one  perfect 
form  of  theology.  You^  therefore^  are  able  to  produce  one  entire  theory 
about  nature  from  the  Timaeus ;  but  from  the  Republic,  or  Laws,  the  most 
beautiful  dogmas  about  manners,  and  which  tend  to  one  form  of  philosp* 
phy.  Alone,  therefore,  neglecting  the  treatise  of  Plato^  which  contains 
all  the  good  of  the  first  philosophy,  and  which  nmy  be  called  the  summit 
«f  the  whole  theory,  you  will  be  deprived  of  the  most  perfect  knowledge 
of  beings,  unless  you  are  so  much  infatuated,  as  to  boast  on  account;  of 
fabulous  fictions,  though  an  analysis  of  things  of  this  kind  abounds  with 
much  of  the  probable,  but  not  of  the  demonstrative.  Besides,  things  of 
tins  kind  are  only  delivered  adventitiously  in  the  Platonic  dialogues ;  as 
the  &ble  in  the  Protagoras,  which  is  inserted  for  the  sake  of  the  politic 
science,  and  the  demonstrations  respecting  it.  In  like  manner,  the.  fable 
in  the  Republic  is  inserted  for  the  sake  of  j urtioe ;  but  in  the  Gorgia^ 
for  the  saJce  of  temperance.  Por  Plato  combines  fabulous  narratipns 
with  investigations  of  ethical  dogmas^  Bot  for  die  sake  of  the  fables,  but 
for  the  sake  of  the  leading  design,  that  we  may  not  only  exeiicise  the  in* 
tellectual  part  of  the  soul,  through  contending  reasons,  but  that  the  divine 
part  of  the  soul  may  more  perfectly  receive  the  knowledge  of  beings^ 
through  its  sympathy  with  more  mystic  concerns.  For,  from  other  dis- 
courses, we  appear  similar  to  those  who  are  compelled  to  the  reception 
of  truth ;  but  from  fables  we  suffer  in  an  ineffable  manner,  and  call  forth 
our  unperverted  conceptions,  venerating  the  mystic  information  which 
they  contain. 

Hence,  as  it  appears  to  me,  Timseus  with  great  propriety  thinks  it  fit 
that  we  should  produce  the  divine  genera^  followiog  the  inventors  of  fa- 
bles as  the  sons  of  the  Gods,'  and  subscribe  to  their  always  generating 


Digitized  by 


Gopgle 


secondary  natures  ftom  such  as  are  firsts  though  they  should  speak  wiib«> 
out  demonstration.  For  this  kind  of  discourse  is  not  demonfltrativ«y  but 
entbeastic,  and  was  indented  by  the  ancients^  not  through  necessity,  \fn% 
forthesake  of  persuasion,  not  regarding  mere  discipline,  but  sympatkj. 
with  things  themselves.  But  if  you  are  willing  to  speculate  not  only  tb^ 
causes  of  &bles,  but  of  other  theological  dogmas,  you  will  find  that  some 
of  them  are  scattered  in  the  Platonic  dialogues  for  the  sake  of  ethi.cal,'  and 
others  for  the  sake  of  physical  considerations.  For  in  the  Philebus,  Plato 
discourses  concerning  bound  and  the  infinite,  for  the  sake  of  pleasure  an4 
k  life  according  to  intellect.  For  I  think  the  latter  are  species  of  the  for^ 
mer.  In  the  Ttma^us,  the  discourse  about  the  intelligible  Gods,  is  assum* 
6d  for  the  sake  of  the  proposed  physiology.  On  which  account  it  is  every 
where  necessary  that  images  should  be  known  firom  paradigms;  blit 
Chat  the  paradigms  of  material  things  should  be  immaterial,  of  sea? 
sibles,  intelligible,  and  that  the  paradigms  of  physical  forms  should  be 
separate. 

But  again  in  the  Phsedrus,  Plato  celebrates  the  supercelestial  place, 
die  subcelestial  profundity,  and  every  genus  under  this,  for  the  sake  of 
amatory  mania :  the  manner  in  which  the  remmiscence  of  souls  takes 
place,  and  the  passage  to  these  firom  hence.  But  every  where,  as  I  may 
say,  the  leading  end  is  either  physical  or  political,  while  the  conception 
about  divine  natures  take  place,  either  for  the  sake  of  invention  or  per» 
faction.  How,  therefore,  can  such  a  theory  as  yours  be  any  longer  venerable 
flind  supernatural,  and  worthy  to  be  studied  beyond  every  thing,  when  it  is 
neither  able  to  evince  the  whole  in  itself,  nor  the  perfect,  nor  that  which 
is  precedaneous  in  the  writings  of  Plato,  but  is  destitute  of  all  these,  is 
violent  and  not  spontaneous,  and  does  not  possess  a  genuine,  but  an  ad* 
ventitious  otdety  as  in  a  drama  ?  And  such  are  the  objections  which  may 
be  urged  against  our  design* 

■  For  piliMMirf  k  U  neceM»7  to  read,  ra  fMy  ^iMv« 


..* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ON  Tim'EHBDI/>OY  BOOK  £ 


CHAPTER  VIL 


It  HOWEVER^  to  an  objection  of  this  kind,  shall  make  a  just  and  per- 
spicuous reply.  I  say  then,  that  Plato  every  where  discourses  about  the 
Gods  agreeably  to  ancient  rumour,  and  to  the  nature  of  things.  And 
sometimes  indeed,  for  the  sake  of  the  cause  of  the  things  proposed,  he 
reduces  them  to  the  principles  of  the  dogmas ;  and  thence,  as  from  a 
iratch  tower,  contemplates  the  nature  of  the  thing  proposed.  But  some^ 
times  he  establishes  the  theological  science  as  the  leading  end.  For  in  the 
JPhaednis  his  subject  respects  intelligible  beauty,  and  the  participation  of 
beauty  pervading  from  thence  through  all  things ;  and  in  the  Banquet  it: 
xespects  the  amatory  order. 

But  if  it  be  necessary  to  survey  in  one  Platonic  dialogue,  the  all-per-. 
ffect,  whole,  and  connected,  extending  as  far  as  to  the  compleat  number 
of  theology,  I  shall  perhaps  assert  a  paradox,  and  which  will  alone  be. 
apparent  to  our  familiars.    We  ought  however  to  dare,  since  we  b^ve 
entered  on  such  like  arguments,  and  affirm  against  our  opponents,  that, 
the  Parmenides,  and  the  mystic  conceptions  it  contains,  will  accomplish 
lU  you  desire.    For  in  this  dialogue  all  the  divine  genera  proceed  in. 
order  from  the  first  cause,  and  evince  their  mutual  connexion  and  de- 
pendence on  each  other.     And  those  which  are  highest  indeed,  connate^ 
with  the  oncy  and  of  a  primary  nature,  are  allotted  aunical,  occult  and 
simple  form  of  hypands ;  but  such  as  are  last,  are  multiplied,  are  dbtri-; 
buted  into  many  parts,  and  are  exuberant  in  number,  but  inferior,  in 
power  to  such  as  are  of  a  higher  order ;  and  such  as  are  middle,  accord- 
ing to  a  convenient  proportion,  are  more  composite  than  their  causes, 
but  more  simple  than  their  proper  progeny.    And  in  short,  all  the  axioms 
of  the  theologic  science,  appear  in  perfection  in  this  dialogue,  and  all  the 
divine  orders  are  exhibited  subsisting  in  connexion.    So  that  this  is  no- 
thing else  than  the  celebrated  geaecatioii  pf  the  Qods,  and  the  procession 
of  every  kind  of  being  from  the  inefiable  and  unknown  cause  of  wholes. 
The  Parmenides,  therefore^  enkiB«ll6»  m  the  lovers  of  Plato,  the  whole 
and  perfect  light  of  the  theological  science.  But  after  this,  the  before  men- 
tioned dialogues  distribute  parts  of  the  mystic  discipline  about  the  Gods, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CBAKVIII.  •     ornUTOi  <|f 

and  all  of  them,  as  I  may  say,  participate  of  dinne  msdom,  and  exdttt 
oor  spontaaeous  conceptians  respecting  a  <iiiynie  natiure.  And  it  is  iM^* 
cessary  to  refer  all  the  parts  of  this  mystic  disciplme  to  these  dialogves^ 
and  these  again  to  the  one  and  all*per&ct  theory  x)f  the  iParmenides.  For 
thus,  as  it  appears  to  me,  we  shall  suspend  the  more  imperfect  from  the 
perfect,  and  parts  from  wholes,  and  shall  exhibit  imasons  assimilated  to 
tilings,  of  which,  according  to  the  Platx>nic  Hmttns, -Ihey  afe  interpreters; 
Such  then  is  Qur  answer  to  the  objection  which  may  be  urged  a^inst  us  i 
and  thus  we  refer  the  Platonic  theory^  to  the  Pannettides ;  just  as  tike 
Umasus  is  acknowledged  by  all  who  are  in  the  least  degree  isftdligent,  to 
contain  the  whole  science  about  nature. 


CHAPTER  VIII- 

I  appear,  however,  by  these  means,  to  have  excited  for  myself  a  two- 
fold contest  against  those  who  att^npt  to  investigate  the  writings  <tf 
Plato;  and  I  see  two  sorts  of  persons,  who  will  (^pose  what  has  been 
said.  One  of  these  does  not  think  proper  to  explore  any  other  design  in  the 
Parmenides,  than  exereise  through  opportte  arguments,  or  to  introduce  in 
this  dialogue  a  croud*  of  arcane  and  intdlectual  dogmas,  which  are  foieign 
from  its  intention.     But  the  other  sort,  who  are  more  venerable  than 
these,  and* lovers  of  forms^  assert,  that  one  of  thd  hypotheses  is  about  the' 
first  God,  another  about  the  second  God,- and  the  whole  of  an  intdlec^^ 
tu^  nature,  and  a  third,^  about  thtf  natures  posterior  to  this, 'whether 
they  are  the  more  excdient  geneiu,  tor  souls^  or  arty  other  kind  of  beings. 
For  the  investigation  of  these  pwticulars  docs  not  pertain  fo  the  present- 
discourse. 

These,  therefore,  distribute  three  of  the  hypotheses  after  this  manner.  * 
But  tliey  do  not  think  .proper  to  busy  themselves  about  the  multitude  dT 
Gods,  the  itttdligible,  and  the  ibtellectit^I  genera,  thesupemiundane  and 
mundane  natures,  or  to  unfold  all" these  by  division,  or  tmsiiy  explore- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


It  ON  tHB  THEOLOGY  feOOK  f. 

tti^.  Few  accdrding  to  them,  thoii^  Plato  in  the  second  Tiypdthesis, 
treats  i^but  intellectual  beings,  yet  the  nature  df  intellect  is  one;  simple 
and  indivisible.*  Against  both  these  therefore,  must  be  contend,  who 
^itertains  that  opinion  of  the  Pattnenides,  which  we  haw  before  to'en- 
tionedw  The  contest  however  against  these  is  not  equal.  But  those 
who  make  the  Pannenides  a  logical  exercise,  are  again  attacked  by  those* 
i(rho  embrace  the  divine  mode  of  interpretation.  And  those  who  do  not 
U9fc^  the  multitude  of  beings,  and  the  orders  of  divine  natures,  are  in- 
deed, as  Homer  says,  in  every  respect  venerable  and  skilful  men,  but 
yet  for  tht  sake  of  the  Platonic  philosophy,  we  must  doubt  against  them, 
following  in  this  our  leader  to  the  most  holy  and  mystic  truth.  It  is 
]iroper  likewise  to  relate  as  far  as  contributes  to  our  purpose,  what  ap- 
pears to  us  to  be  the  truth  respecting  the  hypotheses  of  the  Parmenides ;, 
£n  thus  perhaps  by  a  reasoning  process.  We  may  embrace  the  whole  the- 
rfogy  of  Plato. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

.  In  the  first  place  then,  let  us  consider  those,  who  draw  down  thfi 
design  of  this  dialogue  from  the  truth  of  things  to  a  logical  exercise,  and 
see  whether  they  can  possibly  accord  with  the  writings  of  Plato.  It  is 
liierefore  evident  to  every  one,  that  Pamienides  proposes  to  himself  to 
deliver  in  reality  the  dialectic  method,  and  that  with  this  view  he  curso- 
rily assumes  it  in  a  similar  manner  in  each  of  the  things  which  have  a 
real  being,  as,  in  sameness,  difference,  similitude,  dissimilitude,  motion, 
and  permanency,  &c. ;  exhorting  at  the  same  time,  those  who  desire  to 
discover  the  nature  df  each  of  these  in  an  orderly  method,  to  this  exercise, 
as  to  a  great  contest.  He  likewise  asserts  that  it  was  by  no  means  an  easy 
undertaking  to  him  who  was  so  much  advanced  in  years,  assimilates  him* 
sdf  to  the  Ibycean  horse,  and  presents  us  with  every  argument  to  prpve 
that  this  method  is  a  serious  undertaking,  and  not  a  eontest  consisting  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IX.  OF:WhXf!0;  r 

mere  words.  How  tberefore»  n  it  pouiblei  that  we  can  sefer  to  onpty 
arguments  those  conceptions  V  about  which  the  graat  Parmeiudes^  eviiK 
ciog  that  they  require  mucli  serioua. discussion,  composed  this  discourse? 
How  likewise  is  it  reasonable  to  suppose  that  an  aged  man  wcmld  busy 
himself  with  mere  verbal  contests,  and  that  he.  who  loved  to  speculate 
the  truth  of  things,  would  bestow  so  much  study  on  this  metfaod,--he 
who  considered  every  thing  else,  as  having  bq.  real  eiktence,  and  who 
ascended  to  the  high  watch-tower  of  being  itself?  Indeed,  be  whoaxU 
mits  this  must  suppose  that  Parmenides  is  satiriaed  by  Plato- in  this  dia^ 
logue,  by  thus  representing  him  drawn  down  to  juvenile  contests,  from 
the  most  intellectual  visions  of  the  souL  . 

Butifyqu. are  willing,  let  us  consider  in  addition  to  the  above,  what 
Parmenides  promts,  and  on  what  subject  engaging  to  speak,  he  entertdi 
on  thisdi^cusnon.  Was  it  npt  then,  about  being  according  to  his  doe» 
trine,  and  the  unity  of  all  beings,  to  which  ^  extending  himself,  his  design 
was  concealed  from  the  vulgar,  while  he  exhorts  us  to  collect  the  multi- 
tude of  beings  into  one  undivided  union  I  If,  therefore,  this  is  the  one 
being,  or  Uiat  which  is  the  highest,  and  which  is  perfectly  established 
above  the  reasons  conversant  with  opinion,  is  it  not  absurd  to  confound 
do^as  about  intdligibles  with  doxastic  arguments  ?  For  indeed,  sucb  a 
form  of  discourse  is  not  adapted  to  the  hypothesis  about  true  beings,  nor 
dpes  the  intellection  of  unapparent  and  separate  causes  harmonize  with, 
dialectip  exercises ;  but  these  differ  from  each  other,  so  far  as  inteUect  is 
established  above  opinion,  as  Timaeus.  informs  us,  and  not  Timieus  only, 
but  likewise  the  daemoniacal  Aristotle,  who,  discoursing  on  a  power  of 
this  kind,  exhorts  us  to  make  our  investigations,  neither  about  things 
perfectly  unapparent  to  us,  nor  about  such  as  are  more  known. 

It  is  far  therefore  from  being  the  case,  that  Parmenides,  who  {daces 
the  science  of  beings  above  that  which  appears  to  be  truth  to  those  who 
rank  sense  before  intellect,  should  introduce  doxastic  knowledge  to  an 
intellective  nature,  since  a  knowledge  of  this  kind  is  dubious,  various, 
and  unstable ;  or  that  he  should  speculate  true  being  with  this  doxastic 

■  For  nmroXofi  it  19  neceisary  to  ^fead  nri/SeXAf. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


24  ON  TffE  THBOLOGY  II06K  L 

wisdom,  and  inane  diKittsion.  f^or  a  Various  form  of  knowledge  does 
not  barmbniae^  with  liiat  whieh  h  simple,  nor  the  multiform  with  ttie 
uniform,  nor  the  doxastic  with  the  intelligible. 

*  But  still  further,  nor  must  this  be  omitted,  that  such  a  mode  of  dis« 
cdurse  is  perfectly  foreign  from  the  discussion  of  Parqienides.  For  he 
discourses  about  all  beiiigs,  and  ddivers  the  order  of  wholes,  their  pro- 
gression begioning  fr6m  the  one,  and  their  conversion  ending  in  the  one. 
But  the  airgumentative  method  is  yery  remote  from  scientific  theory. 
Does  it  not  therefore  appear,  that  Plato  must  have  attributed  a  discord-* 
ant  hypothesis  to  Parmenides,  if  it  be  said  tlmt  he  merely  regards  an 
exercise  through  opposite  arguments,  and  that  for  the  sake  of  the  power 
employed  in  this  exercise,  be  excites  the  whole  of  this  evolution  of  rea- 
ions?.  Indeed,  it  will  be  found  that  in  all  the  other  dialogues,  Plato 
aitributes  hypotheses  to  each  of  the  philosophers  adapted  to  their  pecu* 
har  tenets.  Hius  to  Iteisfens,  he  assigns  the  doctrine  aboot  nature;  to 
Socrates,  that  of  a  republic ;  to  the  Elean  guest,  that  about  being ;  and 
to  the  priestess  Diotima,  that  respecting  love.  Afterwards,  each  of  the 
odier  dialogues  txmfines  itsdf  to  those  arguments  which  are  adapted  to 
the  writings  of  the  principal  person  of  the  dialogue^  But  Parmenides 
adobe  will  appear  to  us  wise  in  his  poenn,  and  in  his  diligent  investiga- 
tion of  true  being,  but  in  the  Platonic  sce»ie,  he  will  be  the  leader  of  a 
juvenile  muse.  This  opinion,  therefore,  accuses  Plato  of  dissimilitude  of 
imitation,  tibough  he  himself  condemns  the  poets,  for  ascribiug  to  the 
sons  ci  the  Gods  a  love  of  money,  and  a  life  subject  to  the  dominion  of 
the  passions.  How,  tfaeiefore,  can  we  refer  a  discussion  of  doxastic  and 
empty  arguments  to  the  leader  of  the  truth  of  beings  ? 

But  if  it  be  necessary  that  omitting  a  multitude  of  arguments,  we 
phould  make  Hato  himself  a  witness  of  the  proposed  discussion,  we  will 
cite  if  you  please  what  is  written  in  the  Tlieaetetus  and  Sophista ;  for  from 
these  dialogues  what  we  assert  will  be  apparent.  In  the  Thesetetus  then 
Socmtes  being  excited  by  a  young  man  to  a  confutation  of  those  who  assert 
that  being  is  immoveable,  attacks  among  these  an  opinion  of  this  kind 

'  For  fbmy  mffijm^m^  it  it  BtceMUty  to  xwd^ilfi  «ittjpftb9noy* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IX.  car  PLATO.  25 

entertaiood  bj  Parmawies^  and  at  the  satM  thae  assignd  the  cause. 
"  I  bhishy'  says  he,  **  for  PftrmeDides,  who  is  one  of  these,  th6t6  than 
for  all  the  rest ;  for  I,  wh«i  veay  young,  vras  conversant  with  him  i^hen 
he  was  very  elderty,  and  he  appeared  to  me  to  possess  a  certain  profiin- 
dky  perfectly  generotis.  I  am  afraid  therefore^  lest  we  do  not  under* 
stand  what  has  been  assarted,  and  much  more  am  I  fearful  that  we  fell 
short  of  the  meaning  of  Pannenides.^  With  great  propriety  thereforfe  Ab 
weasaai;,  that  the  proposed  discussion  does  not  regard  a  logical  exei'- 
ciMi  and  make  this  ihe  end  of  the  whole,  but  diat  it  pertains  to  the 
seieoce  of  tk^  first  principles  of  things.  For  how  could  Socrates  usidg  k 
pQwer.of  this  kind^  and  ne|^ecting  the  knowledge  of  things,  testify  that 
the  discourse  of  Parmenides  possessed  a  depth  perfectly  generous  ?  And 
wh«t  ¥enerableness  can  there  be  in  adopting  a  method  which  pi'oceeds 
doiCftsticaUy  through  opposite  reasons^  and  in  tindertaking  such  an  inven« 
tie*  of  arguments  ? 

i  Again,  in  the  Sopidsta,  excitmg  the  Eiean  guest  to  a  perspiciious  eVd- 
lutiaa  of  the  things  proposed  by  htm,  and  evindug  that  he  was  noW 
aQcusfccBBed  to  more  profound  discourses :  *'  Ii^orm  me,''  i^ys  he,  *^  whbi- 
tbpr  it  is  your  custom  to  giveaprohx  discussion  of  a  subject  which  you  arb 
able  to  demonstrate  to  any  one  by  interrogations ;  I  mean  such  discussions 
AS '  Pannenides  himself  formerly  used,  accompanied  with  all*beautiful 
reasoas,  and  of  whidi  J  was  an  auditor  when  I  was  very  young,  and  lik 
was  .very  dUerly  ?"  What  reason  then  can  be  assigned,  why  we  should 
not  believe  Socrates,  when  he  asserts  that  the  arguments  of  Parmenides 
wene  all^beautiful,  and  possessed  a  generous  profundity,  and  why  wq 
should  degrade  the  discussion  of  Parmenides,  hurl  it  from  essence  and 
beiBg,  and  transfer  it  to  a  vulgar,  trifling,  and  eitopty  contest,  neither 
ccflisidering  that  discourses  of  this  kind  are  alone  adapted  to  youth,  noir 
legarding  the  hypothesis  of  bfiing  characteriaed  by  if Ae  one,  nor  any  thing 
else  which  opposes  such  an  opinion  ? 

But  I  likewise  think  it  is  proper  that  the  authors  of  this  hypothesis, 

should  consider  the  powar  of  dialectic,  such  as  it  is  exhibited  by  Socra* 

tes  in  the  Republic ; — ^how,  as  he  says,  it  surrounds  all  disciplines  like  a 

defensive  enclosure,  and  deyates  those  that  use  it,  to  the  good  itself^  and 

Proc.  Vpx.L  P 


Digitized  by 


Google 


i^  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  B06fc  t 

the  first  unities,  purifies  the  eye  of  the  soul,  establishes  it  in  true  beings, 
and  the  one  princi|)le  of  all  things,  and  ends  at  last  in  that  which  is  no 
longer  hypothetical.  For  if  the  power  of  this  dialectic  is  so  great,  and 
the  end  of  this  path  so  mighty,  it  is  not  proper  to  confound  doxastic 
arguments,  with  a  method  of  this  kind.  For  the  former  regards  the  op]^ 
nions  of  men,  but  the  latter  is  called  garrulity  by  the  vulgar.  And  the  one 
is  perfectly  destitute  of  disci  plinative  science,  but  the  other  is  the  defen^ 
sive  enclosure  of  such  sciences,  and  the  passage  to  it  is  through  these^ 
Again,  the  doxastic  method  of  reasomng  has  for  its  end '  the  apparent, 
but  the  dialectic  method  endeavours  to  arrive  at  the  one  itself,  always 
employing  for  this  purpose  steps  of  ascent,  and  at  last,  beautifully  end$ 
in  the  nature  of  the  good. 

By  no  means  therefore,  is  it  fit  that  we  should  draw  down  to  doxastic 
arguments,  a  method  which  is  estaUished  among  the  most  accurate  sci« 
ences.  For  the  merely  logical  method  which  presides  over  the  demons 
strative  phantasy,  is  of  a  secondary  nature,  and  is  alone  pleased  with 
contentious  discussiolis ;  but  our  dialectic,  for  the  mo»t  part,  employs 
divisions  and  analyses  as  primary  sciences,  and  as  imitating  the  progres^^ 
sion  of  beings  from  the  one^  and  their  conversion  to  it  again.  But  it 
likewise  sometimes  uses  definitions  and  demonstrations,  and  prior  to 
these  the  definitive  method,  and  the  dividing  method  prior  to  this.^  Oa 
the  contrary,  the  doxastic  method  is  deprived  of  the  incontrovertible 
reasoning  of  demonstration.  Is  it  not,  therefore,  necessary  that  these 
powers  must  be  separated  from  each  other,  and  that  the  discussion  of 
Parmenides,  which  employs  our  dialectic,  must  be  free  from  the  empty 
variety  of  mere  argument^  and  must,  fabricate  its  reasonings  with  a  view 
to  being  itself,  and  not  to  that  which  is  appg^rent?  And  thus  much  may 
suffice  in  answer  to  those  who  reprobate  our  hypotheses.  For  if  all  this 
cannot  convince  them,  we  shall  in  vain  endeavour  to  persuade  thern^  and 
urge  them  to  the  speculation  of  things. 

'  TfAo;  is  omitted  in  the  originaL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


GRiP.  X.  or  PLATO.  3y 


CHAPTER  X. 

BiTT  a  greater  and  more  difficult  contest  remains  for  me,  against  those 
lowers  of  the  speculation. of  beings,  who  look  to  the  science  of  first  causes, 
as  the  end  proposed  in  the  hypothesis  of  the  Platonic  Parmenides ;  and 
this  contest  we  will  accomplish,  if  jou  please,  by  numerous  and  more 
known  arguments. 

And  in  the  first  place,  we  shall  define  what  that  is,  about  which  awt 
discourse  against  Uiem  will  be  employed ;  for  this,  I  think,  will  render  the 
mystic  doctrine  of  Plato  concerning  divine  natures,  apparent  in  the 
highest  degree.  There  are,  therefore,  nine  hypotheses  which  are  dis» 
cussed  by  Parmenides  in  this  dialogue,  as  we  have  evinced  in  our  com- 
mmitanes  upon  it.  And  the  five  precedaneous  hypotheses  suppose  that 
the^  one  has  a  subsistence,  and  through  this  hypothesis,  that  all  beings, 
the  mediums  jof  wholes,  and  the  terminations  of  the  progressions  of  things, 
may  be  supposed  to  subsist  But  the  four  hypotheses  which  follow  these, 
introduce  the  one^  not  having  a  subsistence,  according  to  the  exhortation 
of  the  dialectic  method,  show  that  by  taking  away  the  one^  all  beings, 
and  sudi  things  as  have  an  apparent  existence,  must  be  entirely  subvert- 
ed, and  propose  to  themselves  the  confutation  of  this  hypothesis.  And 
some  of  the  hypotheses  evidently  conclude  every  thing  according  to  rea- 
son,  but  others  (if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression)  perfectly  evince 
things  more  impossible^  than  impossibilities ;  which  circumstance  some 
prior  to  us  perceiving,  as  it  appears  to  me,  necessarily  to  happen  in  these 
hypotheses,  have  considered  it  as  deserving  discussion,'  in  their  treatises 
on  this  dialogue. 

With  respect  to  the  first  of  the  hypotheses  therefore,  almost  all  agree 
in  asserting,  that  Plato  through  this  celebrates  the  superessential  princi- 
ple of  wholes,  as  inefiable,  unknown,  and  above  all  being.  But  all  do 
not  explain  the  hypothesis  posterior  to  this  after  the  same  manner.  For 
^he  ancient  Platonists,  and  those  who  participated  the  philosophy  of 

*  For  hourn^ij  I  jead  twrft^s. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


28  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

PlotiDus  assert  that  an  intellectual  nature  presents  itself  to  the  view  in 
this  hypothesis,  subsisting  from  the  superessential  principle  of  things,  and 
endeavour  to  harmonize  to  the  one  and  all-perfect  power  of  intellect, 
such  conclusions  as  are  the  result  of  this  hypothesis.  But  that  leader  of 
Qurs  to  truth  about  the  Gods,  and  con&bulator  of  Plato  (that  I  may.  me 
the  language  of  Homer)  who  transferred  what  \ras  inde&iite  in  the  theory 
of  the  more  ancient  philosophers,  to  bound,  and  reduced  the  confiwioQ 
of  the  different  orders  to  an  intellectual  distinction,  in  the  writings  whtcb 
he  communicated  to  his  associates ; — this  our  leader,  in  his  tr^Uise  on 
the  present  subject,  calls  upon  us  to  adopt  a  distinct  division  of  the  con- 
clusions, to  transfer  this  division  to  the  divine  orders,^  and  to  harmonize 
the  first  and  most  simple  of  the  things  exhibited  to  the  first  of  bdngs; 
but  to  adapt  tbosei  in  the  middle  rank  to  middle  natures,  according  to 
the  order  which  they  are  allotted  among  beings;  and  such  as  are  last  and 
ijiultiform,  to  ultimate  progressions.  For  the  nature  of  being  is  not  one, 
Sample,  and  indivisible;  but  as  in  s^isibles,  the  mighty  heaven  is  one« 
yet  it.coniprehends  in  itself  a  multitude  of  bodies ;  and  the  monad  oon« 
Oectedly  contains  multitude,  but  in  the  multitude  there  is  an  order  of 
progression ;.  and  of  sensibles,  some  are  first,  some  miildle,  and  some  last ; 
and  prior  to  these,  in  souls,  from  one  soul  a  multitude  of  souls  subsists, 
and  of  these,  some  are  placed  in  an  order  near^,  but  others  more  remote 
firpm  their  wholeness,  and  others  again  fill  up  the  medium  of  the  ex- 
tremes ; — in  like  manner,  it  is  doubtless  necessary  that  among  perfectly 
true  beings,  such  genera  as  are  uniform  and  occult,  should  be  establbhed 
in  the.  one  and  first  cause  of  wholes,  but  that  others  should  proceed  juto 
all  multitude,  and  a  whole  number,  and  that  others  should  contain  the 
bond  of  these,  in  a  middle  situation.  It  is  likewise  by  no  means  proper 
to  harmonize  the  peculiarities  of  first  natures  with  such  as  are  second,  nor 
of  those  that  possess  a  subject  order,  with  such  as  are  more  unical,  but 
it  is  requisite  that  among  these,  some  should  have  powers  difierent  from 
othjers,  and  that  there  should  be  an  order  in  this  progression  of  true 
beings,  and  an  unfolding  of  second  from  fijrst  natures. 

In  short,  being  which  subsists  according  to,  or  is  characterized  by  the 
oncy  proceeds  indeed  from  the  unity  prior  to  beings,  but  generates  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP«  X.  OP  PLATO.  Sg 

whole  divine  genufi^  via.  the  iotelligibte,  iiiteUectiMJ,  supcniiMidaae,  and 
that  which  proceeds  as  &r  aa  to  the  muudaBe  ooier.  But  our  preceplea' 
likewise  asserts,  that  each  of  the  condusioiis  is  iadicadve  of  a  diviae  pe- 
culiarity. And  though  all  the  coackisioaahaciiionBe  ta  all  the  progres* 
sions  of  the  one  beings  or  of  b^ng  characterned  bj  the  m^,  yet  I  am  of 
opinion,  it  is  by  bo  means  wonderful,  that  some  eoodusioas  should  moFb 
accord  with  some  hypoitheses  than  with  others.  For  sudi  tilings  as  ex- 
press the  peculiarity:  <^  certain  orders,,  do  not  necenarily  bdong  to  all  the 
Gods;  but  such  as  belong  to  aU,  are  doubtless  by  a mudi  greater  feasoa 
pieseiit  with  each.  If,  therelbic^  we  asoibe  to  Plato,  an  adventitious 
division  ot  the  divine  orders,'  and  do  not  clearly  evince  that,  in  o^kt&t 
dialogues,  he  celebrate  the  progressions  of  the  Gods  from  on  high 
to  tibe  eKtremit;y  of  things,  sometimes  in  faUes  respecting  the  soul,  and 
at  other  times,  in  other  theological  modes,  we  shaH  absurdly  attribute  to 
him,  such  a  divbion  of  being,  and  jtogether  with  this,  of  the  progression 
of  the  one.  But  if  we  can  evince  from  other  dialogues,  that  he  (as  will 
be  notanifest  in  the  course  of  this  work)  has  cdebrated  all  the  kin^oms 
of  the  Gods,  in  a  certain  respect,  is  it  not  impossible,  that  in  die  most 
mystic  of  all  his  works,  he  should  deliver  through  the  first  hypothesis,  the 
exempt  transcendency  of  the  one  with  respect  to  all  the  g^iera  of  beings, 
to  being  itself,  to  a  psychical  essence,  to  form,  and  to  matter,  but  that 
he  should  make  no  mention  of  the  divine  progressions,  and  their  orderly 
separation  ?  For  if  it  is  proper  to  contemplate  last  things  only,  why  do 
we  touch  on  the  first  principle  before  other  things  ?  Or  if  we  think  fit  to 
unfold  the  multitude  of  the  proper  hypotheses,  why  do  we  pass  by  the 
genus  of  the  Gods,  and  the  divisions  which  it  contains  ?  Or  if  we  un- 
fold the  natures  subsisting  between  the  first  and  last  of  things,  why  do 
we  leave  unknown  the  whole  orders  of  those  divine  beings,  which  subsist 
between  the  one^  and  natures  that  are  in  any  respect  deified  ?  For  all 
these  particulars  evince,  that  the  whole  discourse  is  defective,  with  re- 
spect to  the  science  of  things  divine. 
But  still  farther,  Socrates,  in  the  Philebus,  calls  upon  those  that  love 

'  For  wpc^tm^  it  is  Mcenarj  to  rtsd  m^y. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


$0  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

the  cmitemplation  of  beings^  to  me  the  dividing  method,  and  always  to 
explore  the  monads  of  total  orders,  and  the  duads,  triads,  or  any  other 
numbers  proceeding  from  these.    If  this  then  is  rightly  determined,  it  is 
doubtless  necessary  that  the  Parmenides,  which  employs  the  whole  dia^ 
kclic  method,  and  discourses  about  being  which  is  characterized  by 
the  ofte,  should  neither  specul&te  multitude  about  the  one^  nor  remain  in 
the  onp  monad  of  beings,  nor  in  short,  introduce  to  the  one  which  is  above 
all  beings,  the  whole  multitude  of  first  beings  immediately,  but  should 
unfold,  as  in  the  fii*st. order,  such  beings  as  have  an  occult  subsistence, 
and  are  allied  to  the  one ;  but  as  in  the  middle  rank,  those  genera  of  the 
Gpds  which  subsist  according  to  progression,  and  which  are  more  divided 
than  the  extremely  united,  but  are  allotted  a  union  mor^  perfect,  than 
such  as  have  proceeded  to  the  utmost ;  and  should  unfold  as  in  the  last 
rank,  such  as  subsist  according  to  the  last  division  of  powers,  and  together 
T^ith  these,  such  as  have  a  deified  essence.     If,  therefore,  the  first  of  the 
hypotheses  is  about  the  one  which  is  above  all  multitude,  it  is  doubtless 
necessary  that  the  hypothesis  which  follows  this,  should  not  unfold  being 
itself  in  an  indefinite  and  indistinct  manner,  but  should  deliver  all  the 
orders, of  beings.     For  the  dividing  method  does  not  admit,   that  we 
should  introduce  the  whole  of  multitude  at  once  to  the  one^  as  Socrates 
teaches  us  in  the  Philebus. 

Besides,  we  may  evince  the  truth  of  what  we  assert  from  the  very  method 
of  the  demonstrations.  For  the  first  of  the  conclusions  become  immediately 
manifest  from  the  least,  most  simple,  most  known,  and  as  it  were  com« 
mon  conceptions.  But  those  which  are  next  in  order  to  these,  become 
apparent  through  a  greater  multitudje  of  conceptions,  and  such  as  are 
more  various.  And  the  last  conclusions  are  entirely  the  most  composite. 
For  he  always  uses  the  first  conclusions,  as  subservient  to  the  demonstrac 
tion  of  those  that  fpUow,*  and  presents  us  with  an  intellectual  paradigm 
of  the  order  observed  in  geometry,  or  other  disciplines,  in  the  connexion 
of  these  conclusions  with  each  other.  If,  therefore,  discourses  bring  with 
ihi^m  an  image  of  the  things  of  which  they  are  interpreters,  and  if,  as  are 


For  ffpfoyriM^y  it  ift  neceaeary  to  read  a^l^iAivmy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP^Xt.  OP  PLATO.  31 

the  evolutions  from  demonstrations,  such  must  tbe  order  necesBaiily 
be  of  the  things  exhibited,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  neceMary,  that,  such 
things  as  derive  their  beginning  from  the  most  simple  principles,  must  be 
in  every  respect  of  a  more  primary  nature,  and  must  be  arranged  as  pon^^ 
joined  with  the  one ;  bu.t  that  such  as  are  always  multiplied,  and  suspend*- 
ed  from  various  demonstrations,  must  have  proceeded  farther  from  the 
subsistence*  of  Me  owe. 

For  the  demonstrations  which  have  two  conclusions,  must  necessarily 
contain  the  conclusions  prior  to  themselves ;  but  those  which  contain  pri^ 
mary,  spontaneous,  and  simple  conceptions,  are  not  necessarily  united 
with  such  as  are  more  composite^  which  are  exhibited  through  more 
abundant  media,  and  which  are  farther  distant  from  the  principle  of 
beings.  It  appears  therefore,  that  some  of  the  conclusions  are  indicative 
of  more  divine  orders,  but  others,  of  such  as  are  more  subordinate; 
some,  of  more  united,  and  others,  of  more  multiplied  orders ;  and  agaiii, 
some,  of  more  uniform,  and  others,  of  more  multiform  progressions.  Fw 
demonstrations  are  universally  from  caused,  and  things  first.  If,  there- 
fore, first  are  the  causes  of  second  conclusions,  there  is  an  order  of  causes, 
and  things  caused,  in  the  multitude  of  the  conclusions.  For,  indeed,  to 
confound  all  things,  and  speculate  them  indefinitely  in  one,  neither  ac* 
cords  with  the  nature  of  things,  nor  the  science  of  Plato* 


CHAPTER  Xt 

Agaiv,  therefore^  Jet  us  discuss  this  afiair  in  another  way,  and  view 
with  the  dianbetic  power,  where  any  thing  futile  is  delivered.  I^or  let  it 
be  said,  if  you  please,  and  we  will  first  of  all  allow  it,  that  the  conclusions 
of  this  second  hypothesis  are  about  true  bdng.  But  as  this  is  multitude, 
and  not  only  one  itself,  like  the  me  prior  to  bemgs ;   for  being  is  that 

'  Fot  a%Qvrw9»if  k  id  neceadarjr  to  read  vin^sicms. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S3 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 


wfauA  18  passive  to  tke  anty  as  the  £Iean  guest  in  the  Sopbisia  infimns  us; 
a»d  as  it  is  vniversaUy  acknowledged  by  our  opponents,  who  establish 
dialt  which  is  first  AS  Me  oMj  but  intellect,  as  one  Manyj  soul,  as  one  and 
numy^  and  body,  as  many  ^md  me ; — as  therefore,  this  has  been  asserted  k 
tlmisaiid  times,  I  mean  that  in  true  being  there  is  multitude  together  with 
umon,  whether  will  they  say  ikat  these  things  harmonize  with  the  whole 
of  being,  but  not  with  its  parts,  or  both  with  the  whole  and  its  parts? 
And  again,  we  ask  than,  whether  they  attribute  all  things  to  each  part  of 
bemg,  or  whether  they  ascribe  different  things  to  different  parts  ? 

If^  therefore,  they  ai«  of  opinion, ,  that  each  particular  should  alone 
karmomze  with  the  whole  of  being,  bang  will  consist  of  non^beings,  that 
which  is  moved,  of  things  immoveable,  that  which  abides,  of  things  de- 
prived of  pamanency,  and  universally,  all  things  will  consist  of  their 
opposites,  and  we  shall  no  longer  agree  with  the  discourse  of  Parmenides', 
who  says  that  the  parts  of  being  characterized  by  the  one,  are  in  a  certain 
respect  wholes,  and  that  each  of  them  is  one  and  being,  in  a  manner 
sin^r  to  the  whole.  But  if  we  attribute  all  things  to  each  part,  and 
there  is  nothing  which  we  do  not  make  all  things,  how  can  the  summit  of 
being,  and  that  which  is  most  eminently  one,  contain  a  wholeness,  and 
an  incomprehensible  multitude  of  parts  ?  How  can  it  at  one  and  the  same 
time  contain  the  whole  of  number^  figure,  motion  and  permanency,  and 
in  short  all  forms  and  genera?  For  these  difier  from  each  other,  and  the 
hypothesis  will  assert  things  impossible.  For  things  near  to,  will  he  simi- 
larly multiplied  with  things  remote  from  the  ane^  and  that  which  is  first, 
will  not  be  a  less  multitude  than  that  which  is  last ;  nor  again,  will  the 
last  of  things  be  a  less  one  than  the  first,  and  things  in  the  middle  will 
have  no  difference  with  respect  to  division  from  the  extremes. 

As  therefore,  it  is  not  proper  to  ascribe  all  this  multitude  of  conclu*- 
sions  to  the  whole  akne,  nor  to  consider  all  things  in  a  similar  manner  ii) 
all  the  parts  of  being,  it  remains  that  different  conclusions  must  harmonize 
with  difierent  things.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  either  the  enume^ 
ration  of  the  conclusions  should  be  inordinate,  or  ordinate.  But  if  they 
say  they  are  inordinate,  they  neither  speak  agreeably  to  the  dialectic 
method,  nor  to  the  mode  of  demonstrations,  which  always  generate  things 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  1.        .  OF  PLATa  sa 

secondary  from  snbh  as  are  first,  noft  to  the  scienoeof  Plato^  ndiicb  aiii^ys 
accompaDies  the  order  of  things.  But  if  they  say  the  conclusions  are  re^ 
gular»  I  think  it  is  entirely  necessary,  that  they  should  either  b^in  Irom 
things  first  according  to  nature,  or  from  things  last.  But  if  from  things 
laat  being  ckaraettrised  by  the  one  will  be  the  last^  and  that  which  is  mo^ed 
according  to  time,  the  first.  This,  however,  is  impossiUe.  For  that 
which  participates  of  time,  must  by  a  much  greater  priority  participate 
of  first  being.  But  that  which  participates  of  first  being,  does  not  neces* 
sarily  participate  of  time.  First  being,  therefore,  is  above  time.  If  then 
Plato  begins  from  first  being,  but  ends  in  that  which  participates  of  time, 
be  proceeds  supemally  from  the  first  to  the  last  parts  of  true  being* 
Hence,  the  first  conclusions  are  to  be  referred  to  the  first  orders,  the 
middle,,  for  the  same  reason,  to  the  middle  orders,  and  the  last,  as  is  efvi- 
debt,  to  such  as  are  last.  For  it  is  necessary,  as  our  discourse  has  evinced, 
that  difierent  conclusions  should  be  assigned  to  different  things,  and  that 
»  distribution  of  this  kind  should  commence  irom  sueh  things  as  are 
highest. 

But  likewise,  the  order  of  the^  hypotheses,  as  it  appears  tome,  is  a  suffix 
cient  argument  of  the  truth  of  our  assertion.  Fcht  with  us  the  one  which 
19  etempt  from  all  multitude,  is  allotted  the  first  order,  and  from  this  the 
evolution  of  all  the  arguments  commences.  But  the  second  order  afbec 
this,  is  about  true  beings,  ami  the  unity  which  these  participate.  And 
the  third  order  in  regular  succession,  is  about  soul.  Whether,  therefore, 
is  it  about  every  soul  or  not?  In  answer  to  this,  we  diaJl  observe,  that  our 
leader  Syrianus  has  beautifially  shown,  that  the  discourse  about  whole 
souls  is  comprehended  in  the  second  hypothesis.  If,  therdbre^  the  order 
o(  these  three  hypotheses  proceeds  according  to  the  nature  of  things,  it  is 
evident  that  the  second  is  produced  from  the  first,  and  the  last  from  the 
second.  For  I  would  ask  those  who  are  not  entirdy  unskilled  in  discourses 
of  this  kind,  what  can  be  more  allied  to  the  oncy  than  being  characterized 
by  the  one^  which  the  first  of  the  conclusions  of  the  second  hypothesis  mt^ 
folds?  Or  what  can  be  more  allied  to  soul,  than  that  which  participates 
of  time,  which  subsists  divisibly,  and  which  is  the  last  thing  exhibited  ia 
this  hypothesis?  For  the  life  of  partial  as  well  as  of  total  souls  is  according 

Froc.  Vol.  I.  E 


Digitized  by 


Google 


54  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  L 

to  time.  And  first  being-  is  that  which  first  participates  of  the  oncj  and 
through  its  connexion  with  being,  has  a  redundant  hyparxis  with  respect 
to  the  iniparticipable  unity.  But  if  this  hypothesis  is  the  middle^  and  if 
we  aptly  harmonize  the  highest  conclusions  with  things  highest,  we  should 
doubtless  harnoonize  middles  with  middles.  For  this  hypothesis  com- 
mencing from  first  being,  proceeds  through  all  the  genera  posterior  to  it, 
till  it  ends  in  a  nature  participating  of  time.  « 

But,  farther,  from  Ihe  common  confession  of  those  interpreters  of  Plato, 
who  were  skilled  in  divine  concerns,  we  can  demonstrate  the  same  things 
as  we  have  above  asserted.  For  Plotinus,  in  his  book  On  Numbers^  en- 
quiring whether  beings  subsist  prior  to  numbers,  or  numbers  prior  to  beings, 
clearly  asserts  that  the  first  being  subsists  prior  to  numbers,  and  that  it 
generates  the  divine  number.  But  if  this  is  rightly  determined  by  him, 
and  being  is  generative  of  the  first  number,  but  number  is  produced  by 
being,  it  is  not  proper  to  confound  the  order  of  these  genera,  nor  to  collect 
them  into  one  hypostasis,  nor,  since  Plato  separately  produces  first  being, 
and  separately  number,  to  refer  each  of  the  conclusions  to  the  same  order. 
For  it  is  by  no  means  lawful,  that  cause  and  the  thing  caused,  should 
have  either  the  same  power,  or  the  same  order :  but  these  are  distinct 
from  each  other ;  and  the  science  concerning  them  is  likewise  distinct, 
and  neither  the  nature,  nor  the  definition  of  them  is  one  and  the  same« 

But,  after  Plotinus,  Porphyry  in  his  treatise  On  Principlesy  evinces  by 
many  and  beautiful  arguments,  that  intellect  is  eternal,  but  that  at  the 
same  time,  it  contains  in  itself  something  prior  to  the  eternal,  and  through 
which  it  is  conjoined  with  the  one.  For  the  one  is  above  all  eternity,  but 
the  eternal  has  a  second,  or  rather  third  order  in  intellect.  For  it  appears 
to  me  to  be  necessary  that  eternity  should  be  established  in  the  middle  of 
that  which  is  prior  to  the  eternal,  and  the  eternal.  But  of  this  hereafter. 
At  the  same  time,  thus  much  may  be  collected  from  what  has  been  said, 
that  intellect  contains  something  in  itself  better  than  the  eternal.  Ad«* 
mitting  this,  therefore,  we  ask  the  father  of  this  assertion,  whether  this 
something  better  than  the  eternal  is  not  only  being  characterized  by  the 
one,  but  is  a  whole  and  parts,  and  all  multitude,  number  and  figure,  that 
which  is  moved,  and  that  which  is  permanent;   or  whether  we  are  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP,  XI.  OF  PLATO.  35 

ascribe  some  of  the  conclusions  to  it^  but  not  others  P  For  it  is  impossible 
that  all  these  can  accord  with  a  nature  prior  to  ^^mity,  since  every  in« 
tellectual  *  motion,  and  likewise  permanency,  are  established  in  etemity. 
But  if  we  are  to  ascribe  some  of  the  conclusions  to  it,  and  not  others,  it  is 
evident  that  other  orders  in  intellect  are  to  be  investigated,  and  that  each 
of  the  conclusions  is  to  be  referred  to  that  order,  to  which  it  appears  par* 
ticularly  adapted.  For  intellect  is  not  one  in  number,  and  an  atom,  as  it 
appeared  to  be  to  some  of  the  ancients,  but  it  comprehends  in  itself  the 
whole  progression  of  first  being. 

But  the  third  who  makes  for  our  purpose  after  these,  is  the  divine  Jam* 
blichus,  who,  in  his  treatise  Concerning  the  Gods^  accuses  those  who  place 
the  genera  of  being  in  intelligibles,  because  the  number  and  variety  of  these 
is  more  remote  from  the  one.  But  afterwards  he  informs  us  where  these 
ought  to  be  placed.  For  they  are  produced  in  the  end  of  Uie  intellectual 
order,  by  the  Gods  which  there  subsist.  How  the  genera  of  being,  how* 
evOT,  both  are,  and  are  not  in  intelligibles,  will  be  hereaft^  apparent.  But 
if,  according  to  his  arrangement  qf  the  divine  orders,  inteUigibles  ar^ 
exempt  from  the  genera  of  being,  much  more  are  they  exempt  from 
similitude  and  dissimilitude^  equality  and  inequaUty«  Each  c^  the  con* 
elusions,  therefore,  ought  not  in  a  similar  manner  to  be  accommodated 
to  all  things,  so  as  to  refer  them  to  the  whole  breadth  of  the  intelligible, 
or  intdlectual  order.  Hence  from  what  the  best  of  the  interpreters  have 
said,  when  philosophizing  according  to  their  own  doctrines,  both  the 
multitude  of  the  divine  orders,  and  of  the  Platonic  arguments,  are  to  be 
considered  as  proceeding  according  to  an  orderly  distinction. 

In  addition,  hkewise,  to  what  has  been  said,  this  also  may  be  asserted, 
that  we  cannot,  on  any  other  hypothesis,  obtain  a  rational  solution  of  th« 
many  doubts  which  present  themselves  on  this  subject,  but  shall .  igno« 
rantly  ascribe  what  is  rash  and  vain  to  this  treatise  of  Plato.  For  in  the 
first  place,  why  are  there  only  so  many  conclusions,  and  neither  more  nor 
less  ?  For  there  are  fourteen  conclusions.  But  as  there  are  so  many,  we 
cannot  assign  the  reason  of  this,  unless  we  distribute  them  in  conjunction 
with  things  themselves.  In  the  second  place,  neither  shall  we  be  able  to 
find '  the  cause  of  the  order  of  the  conclusioos  with  respect  to  each  other, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S6  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  .BOOK  L 

and  how  some  have  a  prior^  and  others  a  posterior  establishment,  accord-^ 
»g  to  the  reason  of  science,  unless  the  order  or  the  conclusions  proceeds 
in  conjunction  with  the  progression  of  beings.  In  the  third  place,  why 
do  some  of  the  conclusions  become  known  from  things  proximately  dcp 
monstrated,  but  others  from  preceding  demonstrations  ?.  For  that  the  one 
is  a  whole  ^nd  contains  parts,  is  demonstrated  from  being,  which  is  cha- 
racteriaed  by  the  one ;  but  its  subsistence  in  itself  and  in  another,  Is  placed 
in  a  proximate  order,  after  the  possession  of  figure,  but  is  demonstrated 
from  whole  and  parts.  Or  why  are  some  things  often  demonstrated,  fixmi 
two  of  the  particulars  previously  evinced,  but  others  from  one  of  them  ? 
For  we  shall  be  ignorant  of  each  of  these,  and  shall  ndther  be  able  scien- 
tifically <K>  speculate  their  number,  nor  their  order,  nor  their  alliance  to 
each  other,  unless  following  things  themselves,  we  evince  that  this  whole 
hypothesis  is  a  dialectic  arrangement,  proceeding  from  on  high  through 
all  the  middle  genera,  as  far  as  to  the  termination  of  first  being. 

Again,  if  we  should  say,  that  all  the  conclusions  demonstrate  syllogisti-* 
cally  only,  in  what  respect  shall  we  differ  from  those,  who  assert  that  the 
whole  of  this  discussion  consists  of  doxastic  arguments,  and  only  regwds 
a  mere  verbal  contest?  But  if  it  is  not  only  syllogistic,  but  likewise  de- 
monstrative, it  is  doubtless  necessary,  that  the  middle  should  be  the  cause 
of,  and  by  nature  prior  to  the  conclusion.  As,  therefore,  we  make  the 
conclusions  of  the  preceding  reasons,  the  media  of  those  that  follow,  the 
things  which  the  arguments-  respect,  must  doubtkss  have  a  similar  order 
as  to  being,  and  their  progeny  must  be  the  causes  of  things  subject,  and 
generative  of  such  as  are  secondary.  But  if  this  be  admitted,  how  cao 
we  allow  that  all  of  them  have  the  same  peculiarity  and  nature  ?  For 
cause,  and  that  which  is  produced  from  cause,  are  serrated  from  each 
other. 

But  this  likewise  will  happ^i  to  those  who  assert  that  one  nature  is  to 
be  explored  in  all  the  arguments,  that  they  will  by  no  means  perceive 
how  in  the  three  first  conclusions,  the  one  remains  unseparated  from  being, 
but  is  first  separated  in  the  fourth  conclusion.  But  in  all  the  following 
conclusions,  the  one  is  explwed  considered  as  subsisting  itself  by  its^ 
Is  it  not  therefoK  necessary,  that  these  orders  must  differ  from  each 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  PLATO.  37 

other?  For  that  vhich  is  without  separation,  in  coDsequeoce  of  baviog 
an  occult  and  undivided  si^ist6nce,  is  more  allied  to  the  one^  but  that 
which  is  separated,'hafi  proceeded  farther  from  the  first  principle  of  things. 

Again,  if  you  are  willing  to  consider  the  multitude  of  the  argumente, 
and  the  extent  of  the  hypothesis,  how. much  it  differs  from  that  which 
follows  it,~neither  from  this  will  it  appear  to  you  to  be  entirely  about  one 
and  an  unseparated  nature.  For  reasonings  about  divine  concerns,  are  con- 
tracted in  the  more  principal  causes,  because  in  these  the  occult  is  more 
abundant  than  the  perspicuous,  and  the  ineffable  than  the  known.  But 
they  become  multiplied  and  evolved,  by  proceeding  to  divine  orders  more 
proximate  to  our  nature.  For  such  things  as  are  more  allied  to  that 
which  is  ineffable,  unknown,  and  exempt  in  inaccessible  places,  are  allotted 
an  hyparxis  more  foreign  from  verbal  enunciation.  But  such  things  as 
have  proceeded  farther,  are  both  more  known  to  us,  and  more  apparent 
to  the  phantasy,  than  such  as  have  a  prior  subsistence. 

This,  therefore,  being  abundantly  proved,  it  is  necessary  that  the 
second  hypothesis,  should  unfold  all  the  divine  orders,  and  should  pro- 
ceed on  high,  from  the  most  simple  and  unical  to  the  whole  multitude, 
and  all  the  number  of  divine  natures,  in  which  the  order  of  true  being 
ends,  which  indeed  is  spread  under  the  unities  of  tl^  Gods,  and  at  the 
same  time  is  divided  in  conjunction  with  their  occult  and  ineffkble  pecu- 
liarities. If,  therefore,  we  are  not  deceived  in  admitting  this,  it  follows, 
that  from  this  hypothesis,  the  continuity  of  the  divine  orders^  and  the  pro- 
gression of  second  from  first  natures,  is  to  be  assumed,  together  with  the 
peculiarity  of  all  the  divine  gemera.  And  indeed,  what  their  communion 
is  with  each  other,  and  what  their  distinction  proceeding  according  to 
measure,  likewise,  the  auxiliaries  which  may  be  found  in  other  dialogues 
respecting  the  truth  of  real  beings,  or  the  unities  which  they  contain,  are 
all  to  be  referred  to  this  hypothesis.  For,  here  we  may  contemplate  the 
total  progressions  of  the  Gods,  and  their  all-perfect  orders,  according  to 
theological  science.  For  as  we  have  before  shown  that  the  whole  treatise 
of  the  Parmenides  has  reference  to  the  truth  of  things,  and  that  it  was 
-fM)t  devised 'as  a  vain  evolution  of  words,  it  is  doubtless  necessary,  Aat 
the  nine  hypotheses  which  it  discusses,  employing  the  dialectic  method, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


38  '  OJJ  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

but  speculating  with  divine  science,  should  be  about  things  and  certain 
natures,  which  are  either  middle  or  last.  If,  therefore,  Parmenides  ac- 
knowledges that  his  whole  discourse  will  be  about  the  one^  and  how  it 
subsists  with  respect  to  itself,  and  all  other  things,  it  is  evident  that  the 
speculation  of  the  one^  must  commence  from  that  which  is  highest,  but 
end  in  that  which  is  the  last  of  all  things.  For  the  hyparxis  of  the  one 
proceeds  from  on  high,  as  far  as  to  the  most  obscure  hypostasis  of  things. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

As  the  first  hypothesis,  however,  demonstrates  by  negations  the  inef- 
fable supereminence  of  the  first  principle  of  things,  and  evinces  that  he  is 
exempt  from  all  essence  and  knowledge, — it  is  evident  that  the  hypothesis 
after  this,  as  being  proximate  to  it,  must  unfold  the  whole  order  of  the 
Gods.  For  Parmenides  does  not  alone  assume  the  intellectual  and  essen* 
tial  peculiarity  of  the  Gods,  but  hkewise  the  divine  characteristic  of  their 
hyparxis  through  the  whole  of  this  hypothesis.  For  what  other  one  can 
tlmt  be  which  is  participated  by  being,  than  that  which  is  in  every  being 
divine,  and  through  which  all  things  are  conjoined  with  the  imparticipablc 
one  ?  For  as  bodies  through  their  life  are  conjoined  with  soul,  and  as  souls 
through  their  intellective  partj  are  extended  to  total  intellect,  and  the  first 
intelligence,  in  like  manner  true  beings  through  the  one  which  they  contain 
are  reduced  to  an  exempt  union,  and  subsist  in  unproceeding  union  with 
this  first  cause. 

But  because  this  hypothesis  commences  from  that  which  is  one  beings 
or  being  characterized  by  the  onCy  and  establishes  the  summit  of  intelligibles 
as  the  first  after  the  one^  but  ends  in  an  essence  which  participates  of  time, 
s^nd  deduces  divine  souls  to  the  extremities  of  the  divine  orders,  it  is  ne- 
cessary that  the  third  hypothesis  should  demonstrate  by  various  con?f 
elusions,  the  whole  mijltitude  of  partial  souls,  and  the  diversities  which 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  HI.  OF  PLATO.  39 

they  contain.     And  thus  far  the  separate  and  incorporeal  hypostasis 
proceeds. 

After  this  follows  that  nature  which  is  divisible  about  bodies,  and  in^ 
separable  from  matter,  which  the  fourth  hypothesis  delivers  supemally 
suspended  from  the  Gods.  And  the  last  hypothesis  is  the  procession  of 
matter,  whether  considered  as  one,  or  as  various,  which  the  fifth  hypo- 
thesis demonstrates  by  negations,  according  to  its  dissimilar  similitude' 
to  the  first.  But  sometimes,  indeed,  the  negations  are  privations,  and 
sometimes  the  exempt  causes  of  all  the  productions.  And  what  is  the 
mo&t  wonderful  of  all,  the  highest  negations  are  only  enunciative,  but 
some  in  a  supereminent  manner,  and  others  according  to  deficiency.  But 
each  of  the  negations  consequent  to  these  is  affirmative ;  the  one  para- 
digmatically,  but  the  other  iconicaJly,  or  after  the  manner  of  an  image. 
But  the  middle  corresponds  to  the  order  of  soul,  for  it  is  composed  from 
affirmative  and  negative  conclusions.  But  it  possesses  negations  coor- 
dinate to  affirmations.  Nor  is  it  alone  multipHed,  like  material  natures,' 
nor  does  it  possess  an  adventitious  one ;  but  the  one  which  it  contains, 
though  it  is  still  one,  yet  subsists  in  motion  and  multiplication,  and  in  its 
progressions  is,  as  it  were,  absorbed  by  essence.  And  such  are  the  hypo- 
theses which  unfold  all  beings,  both  separable  and  inseparable,  togethqr 
with  the  causes  of  wholes,  as  well  exempt,  as  subsisting  in  things  them- 
selves, according  to  the  hyparxis  of  the  one. 

But  there  are  four  other  hypotheses  besides  these,  which  by  taking  away 
the  oncy  evince  that  all  things  must  be  entirely  subverted,  both  beings  and 
things  in  generation,  and  that  no  being  can  any  longer  have  any  subsist* 
ence ;  and  this,  in  order  that  he  may  demonstrate  the  one  to  be  the  cause 
of  being  and  preservation,  that  through  it  all  things  participate  of  the 
nature  of  being,  and  that  each  has  its  hyparxis  suspended  from  the  one^ 
And  in  short,  we  syllogistically  collect  this  through  all  beings,  that  if  the 
one  is,  all  things  subsist  as  far  as  to  the  last  hypostasis,  and  if  it  is  not,  no 
being  has  any  subsistence.     The  one^  therefore,  is  both  the  hypostatic  and 

'  For  uvofMivn^ra,  it  is  necessary  to  read  oftoioniTA. 
*  Instead  oS  ort  (»$ra  oKa,  read  ouri  »$  ra  iwXct. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  t 

preservative  cause  of  all  iinngs ;  which  Parmenides  also  himself  coll^cU 
at  the  end  of  the  dialogue.  With  respect,  however,  to  the  hypothesis  of 
Uie  Parmenides,  its  division,  and  the  speculatioQ  of  its  several  parts,  we 
have  sufficiently  treated  in  pur  commentatries  on  that  dialc^e ;  so  that  it 
would  be  superfluous  to  enter  into  a  prolix  discussion  of  these  particulars 
at  present.  But  as  from  what  has  been  said,  it  appears  whence  we  may 
assume  the  whole  of  theology,  and  from  what  dialogues  we  may  collect 
into  one  the  thecdogy  distributed  according  to  parts,  we  shall  in  the  next 
place  treat  about  the  common  dogmas  of  Plato,  which  are  adapted  to 
sacred  concerns,  and  which  extend  to  all  the  divine  orders,  and  shall 
evince  that  each  of  these  is  defined  by  him  according  to  the  most  perfect 
science.  Fot^  things  common  are  prior  to  such  as  are  peculiar,  and  are 
niOTe  known  according  to  nature. 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

In  the  first  place,  therefore,  we  shall  assume  the  things  which  are  de- 
monstrated in  the  Laws,  and  contemplate  how  they  take  the  lead,  with 
respect  to  the  truth  about  the  Gods,  and  are  the  most  ancient  of  all  the 
other  mystic  conceptions  about  a  divine  nature.  Three  things,  therefore, 
are  asserted  by  Plato  in  these  writings ;  that  there  are  Gods ;  that  their 
providence  extends  to  all  things ;  and  that  they  administer  all  things  ac* 
cording  to  justice,  and  suffer  no  perversion  from  worse  natures. 

That  these  then  obtain  the  first  rank'  among  all  theological  dogmas,  is 
perfectly  evident.  For  what  can  be  of  a  more  leading  nature,  than  the 
hyparxis  of  the  Gods,  or  than  boniform  providence,  .or  immutable  and 
undeviating  power  ?  Through  which  they  produce  secondary  natures  uni- 
formly, preserve  themselves  in  an  undefiled  manner,  and  convert  them  to 
themselves.     But  the  Gods  indeed  govern  other  things,  but  suffer  nothing 

*  For  flepxj  Stftn-epa,  it  18  necessary  to  re^  ofxf^vnfu^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  XIIL  OF  PLATO.  41 

from  subordinate  natures,  nor  are  changed  with  the  variety  of  the  things 
to  which  their  providence  extends.  We  shall  learn,  however,  how  these 
things  are  defined  according  to  nature,  if  we  endeavour  to  embrace  by  a 
reasoning  process  the  scientific  method  of  Plato  about  each  of  them ;  and 
prior  to  these,  survey  by  what  irrefragable  arguments  he  proves  that  there 
are  Gods ;  and  thus  afterwards  consider  such  problems  as  are  conjcnned 
with  this  dogma* 

Of  all  beings,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  that  some  should  move  only, 
but  that  others  should  be  moved  only,  and  that  the  natures  situated  be- 
tween these,  should  both  move  and  be  moved.  And  with  respect  to  these 
kst  it  is  necessary,  either  that  they  should  move  others  being  themselves 
moved  by  others,  or  that  they  should  be  self-motive.  These  four  hypo- 
stases hkewise,  are  necessarily  placed  in  an  orderly  series,  one  after  another; 
that  which  is  moved  only  and  suffers,  depending  on  other  primary  causes ; 
that  which  moves  others,  and  is  at  the  same  time  moved,  being  prior  to 
this ;  that  which  is  self-motive,  and  which  is  beyond  that  which  both 
moves  and  is  moved,  beginning  from  itself,  and  through  its  own  motion 
imparting  the  representation  of  being  moved,  to  other  things ;  and  that 
which  is  immoveable,  preceding  whatever  participates  either  producing 
or  passive  motion.  For  every  thing  self-motive,  in  consequence  of  pos- 
sessing its  perfection  in  a  transition  and  interval  of  life,  depends  on  an- 
other more  ancient  cause,  which  always  subsists  according  to  samenesd, 
and  in  a  similar  manner,  and  whose  life  is  not  in  time,  but  in  eternity. 
For  time  is  an  image  of  eternity. 

If,  therefore,  all  things  which  are  moved  by  themselves,  are  moved  ac- 
cording to  time,  but  the  eternal  form  of  motion  is  above  that  which  is 
4?arried  in  time,  the  self-motive  nature  will  be  second  in  order,  and  not  the- 
first  of  beings.  But  that  which  moves  others,  and  is  Droved  by  others, 
must  necessarily  be  suspended  from  a  self-motive  nature :  and  not  this 
alone,  but  hkewise  every  alter-motive  fabrication,  as  the  Athenian  guest 
demonstrates.  For  if  all  things,  says  he,  should  stand  still,  unless  self- 
motive  natures  had  a  subsistence  among  thi^ngs,  there  would  be  no  such 
thing  as  that  which  is  first  moved.  For  that  which  is  immoveable,  is  by 
no  means  naturally  adapted  to  be  moved,  nor  will  there  then  be  that 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  F 


Digitized  by 


Google 


4$  ON  THE  THEDLOGt  BOOK  L 

irbich  is  ^rst  moved ;  but  the  alter^motive  nature  is  wdigent  of  another 
ttoving  power.  The  self-motive  nature,  therefore,  alone,  as  beginning 
ff^am  its  own  energy,  will  move  both  itself  and  others  in.  a  secondary 
manner.  For  a  thing  of  this  kind  imparts  the  power  of  being  moved  to 
ailter-^notive  natures,  in  the  same  manner  as  an  immoveable  nature  inr* 
parts  a  motive  power  to  aU  beings.  In  the  third  place,  that  which  is: 
moved  only,  must  first  of  all  be  suspended  from  things  moved  by  another, 
but  moving  others.  For  it  is  necessary,  both  that  other  things,  and  the 
series  of  things  moved,  which  extends  in  an  orderly  manner  from  on  high 
to  the  last  of  things,  should  be  filled  with  their  proper  media. 

All  bodies^  therefore,,  belong  to  those  things  which  are  naturally  moved 
eoly,  and  are*  passive.  For  they  are  productive  of  nothing,  on  account 
of  possessing  an  hypostasis  endued  with  interval,  and  participating^  of 
snagnitude  and  bnlk;  since  every  thing  productive  and  motive  of  others^ 
naturally  produces  and  moves,  by  employing  an  incorporeal  power^ 

3ut  of  incorporoat  natures,  some  are  divisible  about  bodies,,  but 
cihers  are  exempt  &ovel  such  a  division  about  the  last  of  things^ 
Those  incorporeals,  ^dierefore,  which  arc  divisible  about  the  bulks  dt^ 
bodies,  whether  they  subsist  in  quaKties,  or  in  material  forms,  belong  to 
the  ^number  of  things  moved  by  another,  but  at  the  same  time  moving 
others.  For  these,  because  they  possess  an  incorporeal  allotment,  parti* 
cipate  of  a  motive  power ;  but  because  they  are  divided  about  bodies,  are 
d^iv^d  of  the  power  of  verging  to  themselves,  are  divided  together  with 
their  subjects,  and  are  full  of  sluggishness  from  these,,  they  are  indigent 
of  a  motive  nature  which  is  not  borne  along  in  a  foreign  seat,  but  possesses 
an  hypostasis  in  itself.  Where>  therefore,  shall  we  obtain  that  which 
moves  itself?  For  things  extended  into  natures  possessing  bulk  and  interval 
or  whicb  are  divided  in  these,  and  subsist  inaepafably  about  them,  must 
necesearily  eitiier  be  moved  only,  or  be  motive  through  others*  But  it  is 
ftecessary,  as  we  have  before  observed,  that  a  self-motive  nature  should 
be  prior  to  these,  which  is  perfectly  established  ih  itself,  and  not  in  others, 
and  which  fixes  its  energies  in  itself,  and  not  in  things  different  from 
itself.  There  is,  therefore,  another  certain  nature  exempt  from  bodies^ 
both  in  the  heavens  and  in  these  very  mutable  elements,  from  which  bo- 
dies primarily  derive  the  power  of  being  moved.  Hence,  if  it  be  requisite 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIIL  OF  PLATO.  45 

to  discover  what  such  an  essence  as  this  is,  (rightly  following  Socrates, 
and  considering  what  the  end  of  things  is,)  which  by  being  present  to  alter- 
motive  natures,  imparts  to  them  a  representation  of  self-motion,  to  which 
of  the  abore  mentioned  natures  shall  we  ascribe  the  power  of  things  being 
moved  from  themselves?  For  all  inanimate  natures  are  alone  alter-motive, 
and  whatever  they  suffer,  they  are  adapted  to  suffer,  through  a  certain  power 
externally  moving  and  compelling.  It  remains,  therefore,  that  animated 
natures  must  possess  this  representation,  and  that  they  are  self-motive  m 
a  secondary  degree,  but  that  the  soul  which  is  in  them,  primarily  moves 
itself,  and  is  moved  by  itself,  and  that  through  a  power  derived  from  itself 
as  it  imparts  life  to  bodies,  so  likewise  it  extends  to  them  from  itself  a  ve* 
presentation  of  being  moved  by  themselves. 

If,  therefore,  the  self-motive  essence  is  more  ancient  than  alter-motive 
natures,  but  soul  is  primarily  self-motive,  from  which  the  image  of  sdf^ 
motion  is  imparted  to  bodies,  soul  will  be  beyond  bodies,  and  the  motion 
of  every  body,  will  be  the  progeny  of  soul,  and  of  the  motion  it  contains. 
Pence  it  is  necessary  that  the  whole  heaven  and  all  the  bodies  it  contains 
possessing  various  motions,  and  being  moved  with  these  different  motions; 
according  to  nature  (for  a  circulation  is  natural  to  every  body  of  this  kind) 
should  have  ruling  souls,  which  are  essentially  more  ancient  than  bodies^ 
iand  which  are  moved  in  themselves,  and  supernally  illuminate  these  with 
the  power  of  being  moved.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  these  souls 
which  dispose  in  an  orderly  manner  the  whole  world  and  the  parts  it  con- 
tains,  and  who  impart  to  every  thing  corporeal  which  is  of  itself  destitute 
of  life,  the  power  of  being  moved,  inspiring  it,  for  this  purpose,  with  the 
cause  of  motion,  should  either  move  all  things  conformably  to  reason,  or 
after  a  contrary  manner,  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  assert.  But  if  indeed, 
this  world  and  every  thing  in  it  which  is  disposed  in  an  orderly  manner^ 
and  is  moved  equally  and  perpetually  according  to  nature,  as  is  demon- 
strated, partly  in  the  mathematical  disciplines,  and  partly  in  physical  dis- 
cussions, is  suspended  from  an  irrational  soul,  which  moving  itself  moves 
also  other  things,  neither  the  order  of  the  periods,  nor  the  motion  which  is 
bounded  by  one  reason,  nor  the  position  of  bodies,  nor  any  other  of  thoste 
things  which  are  generated  according  to  nature,  will  have  a  stable  cause. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


44  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  f. 

and  which  i&able  to  distribute  every  tiling  in  an  orderly  manner,  and  accord-* 
ing  to  an  invariable  sameness  of  subsistence*  For  every  thing  irrational  is. 
naturally  adapted  to  be  adorned  by  something  different  fronoi  itself,  and  i& 
indefinite  and  unadorned  iaits  own  nature.  But  tacoiBmit  all  heaven  to 
a  tlxing  of  this  kind>  and  a  circulation  revolving  according  to  reason^  and 
with  an  invariable  sameness,  is  by  no  means  adapted,  either  to  the  nature  of 
things,  or  to  our  undisciplined  conceptions.  If  however,  an  intellectual  soul, 
and  which  employs  reason,  governs  all  things,  and  if  every  thing  wlxich  is 
moved  with  a  perpetual  lation,  is  governed  by  a  soul  of  this  kind,  and.  there 
is.  no  one  of  the  wholes  in  the  imiverse  destitute  of  soul  (for  no  body  is 
honorable  if  deprived  of  such  a  power  as.  this,  as  Theophrastus- somewhere 
says)  if  this  be  the  case,  whether  does  it  possess  tliis  intellectual,  perfect^ 
and  beneficent  powers  according  to  participation,  or  according  to  essence? 
For  iff  according  to  essence,  it  is.  necessary  that  CTery  soul  should 
be  of  this  kind,  since  each  according  to  its  awn  nature  is  self«motive« 
Bat  if,  accordingto  participation^  there  will  be  another  intellect  subsisting 
in  energy,  more  aacient  than  soul,  which  essentially  possesses  intellection^ 
and  by  its  very  beiug  pre-assumes  in  itself  the  uniform  knowledge  of 
wholes  ;  since  it  is  also  necessary  that  the  soul  which,  is  essentialized  ac* 
cording  to  reason^  should  possess  that  which  pertains,  to  intellect  through 
participation,  and  that  the  intellectual  nature  should  be  twofold ;  the 
one  subsisting  primarily  in  a  divine  intellect  itself;  but  the  other,  ^hich 
proceeds  from  this,  subsisting  secondarily  in  souL  To  which,  you  may 
add,  if  you  please,  the  presence  of  intellectual  illumination  in  body.  For 
whence  is  the  whole  of  this  heaven  either  spherical  or  moved  ia  a  circle^ 
and  whence  does  it  revolve  with  a  sameness  of  circulation  according  to 
one  definite  order  ?  For  how  could  it  always  be  allotted  the  same  idea  and 
power  immutably  accoiding  to  nature,  if  it  did  not  participate  of  specific 
formation  according  to  intellect?  For  soul,  indeed,  is  the  supplier  of 
motion ;  but  the  cause  of  a  firm  establishment,  and  that  which  reduces 
the  unstable  mutation  of  things  that  are  moved,  into  sameness,  and  also 
a  life  which  is  bounded  by  one  reason,  and  a  circulation  which  subsists 
with  invariable  sameness,  will  evidently  be  superior  to  soul. 

Body,  therefore,  and  the  whole  of  this  sensible  nature  belong  to  things 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CfttAP.  Xllt  OF  PLATO;  ^ 

which  are  itkf^r-^motive.  Biit  soul  is  self-motive,  binding  in  itself  all  cor- 
poreal motions  ;  and  prior  to  this  is  intellect  which  is  immoveable.  Let 
no  one,  hoVv^cver,  suppose  that  I  assert  this  immobility  of  intellect  to  re- 
semble thut  which  is  sluggish,  destitute  of  life,.'  and  without  respiration, 
but  that  it  is  the  leading  cause  of  alt  motion,  and  the  fountain^  if  you  are 
wiHing  so  to  denominate  it,  of  all  life,  both  of  that  which  is  converted  to 
itself,  and  of  that  which  has  its  hypostasis  in  other  things.  Through  these 
causes  also,  the  world  is  denominated  by  TiniBeusyan  animal  endued  witl^ 
soul  and  intellect ;  being  called  by  him  an  animal  according  to  its  own 
nature,  and  the  life  pervading  to  H  from*  soul,  and  which  is  distributed 
aboi^t  it,  but  animated  or  endued  with  soul,,  according  ta  the  presence  of 
a  divine  soul  in  it,  and  endued  with  intellect,  according  to  intellectual 
domination.  Eor  the  supply  of  life,  the  government  of  soul,  and  the  par* 
ticipation  of  intellect  connect  and  contain  the  whole  of  heaven. 

If,  however>  this  intellect  is  essentially  intellect,  since  Timseus  indi* 
eating  that  the  essence  of  intellect  i&  the  same  with  its  intellection,  d^io- 
minates  it  divine ;  for  he  says>  that  soul  receiving  a  divine  intellect  led  ai| 
vprightand  wise  life ;  if,  therefore,  this  be  the  case,  it  is  necessary  that  the 
whole  world  should  be  suspended  from  its  divinity,  and  that  motion  in- 
deed should  be  present  to  this  universe  from,  soul,  but  that  its  perpetual 
permanency  and  sqmeness  of  subsistence  should  be  derived  from  intellect, 
and  that  its  one  unions  the  conspiration  in  it  and  sympathy,  and  its  all- 
perfect  measure  should  originate  from  that  unity,^  from  which  intellect  is 
uniform,  soul  is  one^'  every  being  is  whole  and  perfect  according  to  its 
own  nature,  and  every  thing  secondary  together  with  perfection,  in  it& 
own  proper  nature,  participates  of  another  more  excellent  peculiarity, 
from  an  order  which^  is  always  estabhshed  above  it     For  that  which  is 
corporeal  being  alter'4notive,  derives  from  soul  the  representation  of  sel£« 
motive  pow^r,.and  is.thrx)ugh.it  an  animal.      But  soul  being  self-motive 
participates  of  a  life  according  to  intellect,  and  energizing  according  to 
time,  possesses  a  never-ceasing  energy,  and  an  ev^errvigilant  life  from  it» 

'  For  o^flov  read  o^Anr.. 

^  For  xai  rris  ivaZog,  read^  xcn  otxo  n};  §vah6^. 

^  For.  xcuo  vov,  tvos*^  ftia  xai  i]  ^v^,  read^yoi  o  vou^  evou^r^s,  xcu  yf '^'vx^  tt^ic^d^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


46  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOO  K  I. 

proximity  to  intellect.  And  intellect  possessing  its  life  in  eternity,  always 
subsisting  essentially  in  energy/  and  fixing  all  its  stable  intellection  at 
once  in  intellect,  is  entirely  deific  through  the  cause  prior  to  itself.  For 
it  has  two-fold  energies  as  Plotinus  says,  some  as  intellect,  but  others 
as  being  inebriated  with  nectar.  And  elsewhere  he  observes,  that  this  in- 
tellect, by  that  which  is  prior  to  itself  and  is  not  intellect,  is  a  god ;  in  the 
same  manner  as  soul,  by  its  summit  which  is  above  soul,  is  intellect ;  and 
as  body,  by  the  power  which  is  prior  to  body,  is  soul. 

All  things  therefore,  as  we  have  said,  are  suspended  from  tke  one  through 
intellect  and  soul  as  media*  And  intellect  indeed  has  the  form  of  unity ; 
but  soul  has  the  form  of  intellect ;  and  the  body  of  the  world  is  vital 
But  every  thing  is  conjoined  with  tliat  which  is  prior  to  itself.  And  of 
the  natures  posterior  to  these,  one  in  a  more  proximate^  but  the  other  in 
a  more  remote  degree,  enjoys  that  which  is  divine.  And  divinity,  indeed^ 
is  prior  tb  intellect,  being  primarily  carried  in  an  intellectual  nature;  but 
intfeUeet  is  most  divine,  as  being  deified  prior  to  other  things;  and  soul  is 
divine,  so  far  as  it  requires  an  intellectual  medium.  But  the  body  which 
participates  of  a  soul  of  thi«  kind,  so  for  as  body  indeed,  is  also  itself 
divine ;  for  the  illumination  of  divine*  light  pervades  supemally  as  far  as 
tb  the  last  dependencies  ;  yet  it  is  not  simply  divine;  but  soul  by  looking 
to  intellect,  and  living  from  itself,  is  primarily  divine. 

My  reasoning  is  also  the  same  about  each  of  the  whole  spheres,  and 
about  the  bodies  they  contain.  For  all  these  imitate  the  whole  heaven, 
since  these  likewise  have  a  perpetual  allotment;  and  with  respect  to  the 
^sublunary  elements,  they  have  not  entirely  an  essential  mutation,  but  they 
abide  in  the  universe  according  to  their  wholenesses,  and  contain  in  them* 
selves  partial  animals.  For  every  wholeness  has  posterior  to  itself  more 
partial  essences.  As,  therefore,  in  the  heavens,  the  number  of  the  stars^ 
proceeds  together  with  the  whole  spheres,  and  as  in  the  earth  the  multi- 
tude of  partial  terrestrial  animals  subsists  together  with  their  wholeness, 
thus  also  it  appears  to  me  to  be  necessary  that  in  the  wholes  which  have 

*  For  oum  eve^i^,  read,  an  »v  evegy^ta. 

*  The  sense  requires  that  itm  should  be  here  supplied. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  xnr. 


«r  PLATOr: 


n 


an  intermediate  subsifttoneet  each  element  should  be  filled  up  vfith  apptbr 
priate  numbers.  For  how  in  the  extremes  can  wholes  whicli  subsi&t  prkur 
to  parts^  be  arranged  together  with  parts,  unless  there  is  the  same  analogy 
of  them  in  the  intermediate  natures  ? 

But  if  each  of  the  spheres  is  an  animal,  and  is  always  established  after 
the  same  manner,  and  gives  completion  to  the  universe,  as  possessing  life 
indeed,  it  will  always  primarily  participate  of  soul,  but  as  preserving  its 
own  order  immutable  iathe  world,  it  will  be  comprehended  by  intellect, 
and  as  one  and  a  whole,  and  the  leader  and  ruler  of  its  proper  parts^  it 
will  be  illuminated  by  divine  union.  Not  only  the  universe,  therefore, 
but  each  also  of  its  perpetual  parts  is  animated  and  endued  with  in- 
tellect, and  as  much  as  possible  is  similar  to  the  universe.'  For  each. 
of  these  parts^  is  a  universe  with  respect  to  its  kindred  multitude.  Id 
short,  there  is  indeed  one  corporeal-formed  wholeness  of  the  universe, 
but  there  are  many  others  under  this,  depending  on  this  one ;  there  is  one 
soul  of  the  universe,  and  after  this,  other  souls,  together  with  this  dispos- 
ing in  an  orderly  manner  the  whole  parts  of  the  universe  with  undefiled 
purity  ;  one  intellect,  and  an  intellectiial  number  under  this,  participated 
by  these  souls ;  and  one  god  who  connectedly  contains  at  once  all  muh* 
iiane  and  supermundane^  natures,  and  a  multitude  of  other  gods,  who 
distribute  intellectual  essences,  and  the  souls  suspended  from  these,  and 
all  the  parts  of  the  world.  For  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  each  of  the 
productions  of  nature  is  generative  of  things  similar  to  itself,  but  that 
wholes  and.  the  first  of  mundane  beings  should  not  ia  a  much  greater 
degree  extend  in  themselves  the  paradigm  of  a  generation  of  this  kind» 
For  the  similar  is  more  allied,  and  more  naturally  adapted  to  the  reason 
of  cause  than  the  dissimilar,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  same  than  the 
different,  and  bound  than  the  infinite.  These  things,  however,  we  shall 
accurately  survey  in  what  follows.  But  we  shalLnow  direct  our  attentiob 
to  the  second  of  the  things  demonstrated  in  the  Laws,  viz.  that  the  Gods^ 
providentially  attend  at  once  to  wholes  and  parts,  and  shall  summarily 


'Instead  of  o/cmiov  fki}  xctra.  ivvaii^v,  it  is  necessary  to  read  xai  xetru  tvfufjuv  r(p  irctm^  9ii9t0¥,  a&-holbi 
the  sense  of  the  whole  sentence  atid  the  version  of  Portus  require. 

*  It' seems  exquisite  to  supj^ly  here  the  WGxdjjin^xoffifrmr^s  in  the  translation*. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


4S  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  !• 

iKScuss  the  irreprehensible  coDception  of  Plato  about  the  provjdence  of 
the  Gods« 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

From  what  has  been  said,  therefore,  it  is  evident  to  everyone,  that  the 
Gods  being  the  causes  of  all  motion,  some  of  them  are  essential  and 
vivific,  according  to  a  self-motive,  self-vital,  and  self-energetic  power.  But 
others  of  them  are  intellectual,  and  excite  by  their  very  being  all  secon- 
darj'  natures  to  the  perfection  of  life,  according  to  the  fountain  and 
principle  of  all  second  and  third  progressions  of  motion.  And  others  are 
unical^  or  characterized  by  unity,  deifying  by  participation  all  the  whole 
genera  of  themselves,  according  to  a  primary,  all-perfect,  and  unknown 
power  of  energy,  and  who  are  the  leaders  of  one  kind  of  motion,  but 
are  not  the  principle  of  another.  But  again  others  supply  to  secondary 
natures  motion  according  to  place  or  quality,  but  are  essentially  the 
causes  of  motion  to  themselves-  For  every  thing  which  is  the  cause  of 
essence  to  other  things  is  much  prior  to  this  the  cause  to  itself  of  its  own 
proper  energies  and  perfection.  Farther  still,  that  which  is  self-motive  is 
again  the  principle  of  motion,  and  being  and  life  are  imparted  by  soul  to 
every  thing  in  the  world,  and  not  local  motion  only  and  the  other  kinds 
of  motion,  but  the  progression  into  being  is  from  soul,  and  by  a  much 
greater  priority  from  an  intellectual  essence,  which  binds  to  itself  the  life 
of  self-motive  natures  and  precedes  according  to  cause  all  temporal  energy. 
And  in  a  still  greater  degree  do  motion,  being,  and  life  proceed  from  a 
unical  hyparxis,  which  connectedly  contains  intellect  and  soul,  is  the 
source  of  total  good,  and  proceeds  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things.  For  of 
life  indeed,  not  all  the  parts  of  the  world  are  capable  of  participating,  nor 
of  intellect  and  a  gnostic  power ;  but  of  tJie  one  all  things  participate,  as  far 

'  For  iguTifov  read  iitmfa. 


Digitized  by. 


Google 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  PLATO.  4g, 

as  to  matter  itself,  both  'wholes  and  parts,  things  which  subsist  according  to 
nature,  and  the  contraries  to  these ;  and  there  is  not  any  thing  which  is  de* 
prived  of  a  cause  of  this  kind,  nor  can  any  thing  ever  participate  of  being, 
if  it  is  deprived  of  the  one.  If,  therefore,  the  Gods  produce  all  things,  and 
contain  all  things,  in  the  unknown  comprehensions  of  themselves,  how  is 
it  possible  there  should  not  be  a  providence  of  all  things  in  these  compre-' 
hensions,  pervading  supernally  as  far  as  to  the  most  partial  natures  ?  For 
it  is  every  where  fit  that  oflfepring  should  enjoy  the  providential  care  of 
their  causes.  But  all  alter-motive  are  the  progeny  of  self-motive  natures. 
And  things  which  subsist  in  time,  either  in  the  whole  of  time,  or  in  a  part 
of  it,  are  the  effects  of  eternal  natures ;  because  that  which  always  is,  is  the 
cause  of  that  which  sometimes  exists.  And  divine  and  unical  genera,  as  they 
give  subsistence  to  all  multiplied  natures,  precede  them  in  existence.  In 
short,  there  is  no  essence,  or  multitude  of  powers,  which  is  not  allotted  its 
generation  from  the  one.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  all  these  should  be 
partakers  of  the  providence  of  preceding  causes,  being  vivified  indeed  from 
the  psychical  gods,  and  circulating  according  to  temporal  periods ;  and 
participating  of  sameness  and  at  the  same  time  a  stable  condition  of  forms 
from  the  intellectual  gods ;'  but  receiving  into  themselves  the  presence  of 
anion,  of  measure,  and  of  the  distribution  of  good  from  the  first  Gods. 
It  is  necessary,  therefore,  either  that  the  Gods  should  know  that  a  provi- 
dential care  of  their  own  offspring  is  natural  to  them,  and  should  not  only 
give  subsistence  to  secondary  beings,  and  supply  them  with  life,  essence 
and  union,  but  also  previously  comprehend  in  themselves  the  primary 
cause  of  the  goods  they  contain,  or,  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  assert^  that 
being  Gods,  they  are  ignorant  of  what  is  proper  and  fit. 

For  what  ignorance  can  there  be  of  beautiful  things,  with  those  who 
are  the  causes  of  beauty,  or  of  things  good^  with  those  who  are  allotted 
an  hyparxis  defined  by  the  nature  of  the  goodf  But  if  they  are 
Ignorant,  neither  do  souls  govern  the  universe  according  to  intellect, 
nof  are  intellects  carried  in  souls  as  in  a  vehicle,  nor  prior  to  these  do  the 
unities  of  the  Gods  contractedly  comprehend  in  themselves  all  know-» 

'  It  it  necessarj  b^re  to  supply  the  wordi,  ix  rm  yof^y  fiwy. 

Ftoc.  Vol.  L  G 


Digitized  by 


Google 


50  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  T. 

ledge^  which  we  have  acknowledged  they  do  through  the  former  demonstra- 
tions. If,  therefore,  they  are  not  deprived  of  knowledge,  being  the  fathers, . 
leaders  and  governors  of  every  thing  in  the  worlds  and'  to  them  as  being 
such  a  providential  care  of  the  things  governed  by,  and  following  them, 
and  generated  by  them,  pertains,  whether  shall  we  say  that  they  knowing- 
the  law  which  is  according  to  nature,  accomplish  this  law,  or  that  through 
imbecility  they  are  depri\  ed  of  a  prdvidential  attention  to  their  possessions 
or  progeny,  for  it  is  of  no  consequence  as  to  the  present  discussion  which, 
of  these  two  appellations  you  are  willing  to  adopt  ?  For  if  through  want 
of  power  they  neglect  the  superintendence  of  wholes,  what  is  the  cause  of 
this  want  of  power  ?  For  they  do  not  move  things  externally,  nor.  are  other 
things  indeed  the  causes  of  essence,  but  they  assume  the  government  oC 
Ae  things  they  have  produced,  but  they  rule  over  all  things^  as  if  from  the 
9tera  of  a  ship,  themselves  supplying  being,,  themselves  containing  the 
neasurea  c^  life>  and  themsdres  distributing  to  things  their  respective 
energies. 

Whetlmr  aho^  are  they  mnable  to  provide  at  once  for  all  things,  or  they 
do  not  leave  each  of  the  parts  deititute  of  their  providential  careF  And 
if  they  are  not  curators  of  every  thing  in  the  world,  whether  do  they  pro- 
videatiaUy  superintend  greater  things,,  but  neglect  such  as  are  less  ?  Or 
do  they  pay  attention  to  the  less,  but  neglect  to  take  care  of  the  greater  ^ 
For  if  we  deprive  them  of  a  providential  attention  to  all  things  similarly^ 
through  the  want  of  power,  how,  while  we  attribute  to  them^  a  greater 
thing,  viz.  the  production  of  all  things^  can  we  refuse  to  grant  that  whick 
18  naturally  consequent  to  this^  a  providential  attention  to  their  produc- 
tions ?  For  it  is  the  province  of  the  power  which  produces  a  greater  thing,, 
to  dispose  in  a  becoming  manner  that  which  is  less.  But  if  they  are 
curators  of  less  things,  and  neglect  such  as  are  greater,  how  can^this  mode 
of  providence  be  right  ?  For  that  which  is  more  allied,  and  more  similar 
to  any  thing,  is  more  appropriately  and  fitly  disposed  by  nature  to  the 
participation  of  the  good  which  that  thing  confers  on  it.  If,  however, 
the  Gods  think  that  the  first  of  mundane  natures  deserve  their  providen- 
tial care,  and  that  perfection  of  which  tliey  are  the  sources,  but  are  unable 

*  Hou  U  omitted  m  the  original^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIV.  DP  PLATO.  Si 

to  extend  tbdr  regard  to  the  last  of  things,  what  is  it  whidi  can  restrain 
the  presence  of  the  Gods  from  pervading  to  all  things  ?  What  is  it  which 
can  impede  their  unenvying  and  exuberant  energy  ?  How  can  those  who 
«re  capable  of  effecting  greater  things,  be  unable  to  govern  such  as  are  less? 
Or  how  can  those  who  produce  the  essence  even  of  the  smallest  things,  not 
be  the  lords  of  the  perfection  of  them,  through  a  privation  of  power?  For 
all  these  things  are  hostile  to  our  natural  conceptions.  It  remains,  there* 
fore,  that  the  Gods  must  know  what  is  fit  and  appropriate,  and  that  they 
must  possess  a  power  adapted  to  the  perfection  of  their  own  nature,  and 
to  the  government  of  the  whole  of  things.  But  if  they  know  that  which 
is  according  to  nature,  and  this  to  those  who  are  the  generating  causes  of 
all  things  is  to  take  care  of  all  thin^,  and  an  exuberance  of  power, — if 
this  be  the  case,  they  are  not  deprived  of  a  providential  attention  of  this 
kind.  Whether,  also,  together  with  what  has  been  said,  is  there  a  will  of 
providence  in  them  ?  Or  is  this  alone  wanting  both  to  their  knowledge 
and  power?  And  on  this  account  are  things  deprived*  of  their  providential 
aire?  For  if  indeed  knowing  what  is  fit  for  themselves^  and  being  able  to 
accomplish  what  they  know,  they  are  unwilling  to  provide  for  their  own 
offspring,  they  will  be  indigent  of  goodness,  their  unenvying  exuberance 
will  perish,  and  we  shall  do  nothing  else  than  abolish  the  hyparxis  ac* 
cording  to  which  they  are  essentialized.  For  the  very  being  of  the  Gods 
is  defined  by  the  good,  and  in  this  they  have  their  subsistence.  But  to 
provide  for  things  of  a  subject  nature,  is  to  confer  on  them  a  certain 
good.  How,  therefore,  can  we  deprive  the  Gods  of  providence,  without 
at  the  same  time  depriving  them  of  goodness  ?  And  how  if  we  subvert 
their  goodness  is  it  possible,  that  we  should  not  also  ignorantly  subvert 
their  hyparxis  which  we  established  by  the  former  demonstrations  ?  Hence 
it  is  necessary  to  admit  as  a  thing  consequent  to  the  very  being  of  the 
Gods  that  they  are  good  according  to  every  virtue.  And  again,  it  is  con* 
sequent  to  this  that  they  do  not  withdraw  themselves  from  a  providential 
attention,  to  secondary  natures,  either  through  indolence,  or  imbecility, 
or  ignorance.     But  to  this  I  think  it  is  also  consequent  that  there  is  with 

'  For  uwfwfir^i  it  is  requisite  to  read,  ir^pgij/roi. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


5«  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  h 

them  the  most  excellent  knowledge,  unpolluted  power,  and  unenvying 
and  exuberant  will.  From  which  it  appears  that  they  provide  for  the 
whole  of  things,  and  omit  nothing  which  is  requisite  to  the  supply  of 
good. 

Let,  however,  no  one  think  that  the  Gods  extend  such  a  providence 
about  secondary  things,  as  is  either  of  a  busy  or  laborious  nature,  or  that 
this  is  the  case  with  their  exempt  transcendency,  which  is  established  re- 
mote from  mortal  difficulty.  For  their  blessedness  is  not  wilKng  to  be  de»- 
filed  with  the  difficulty  of  administration,  since  even  the  life  of  good  men 
is  accompanied  with  facility,  and  is  void  of  tnolestation  and  pain.  But 
all  labours  and  molestation  arise  from  the  impediments  of  matter.  If, 
however^  it  be  requisite  to  define  the  mode  of  the  providence  of  the  Gods, 
it  must  be  admitted  that  it  is  spontaneous,  unpolluted,  immaterial,  and 
ineffable.  For  the  Gods  do  not  govern  all  things  either  by  investigating 
what  is  fit,  or  exploring  the  good  of  every  thing  by  ambiguous  reasonings, 
or  by  looking  externally,  and  following  their  eflects  as  men  do  in  the  pro- 
vidence which  they  exert  on  their  own  afiairs ;  but  pre^assuming  in  them* 
selves  the  measures  of  the  whole  of  things,  and  producing  the  essence  of 
every  thing  from  themselves,,  and  also  looking  to  themselves,  they  lead 
and  perfect  all  things  in  a  silent  path,  by  their  very  being,  and  fill  them 
with  good.  Neither,  likewise^  do  they  produce  in  a  manner  similar  to 
nature,  -energizing  only  by  their  very  being,  unaccompanied  with  deli- 
berate choice,  nor  energizing  in  a  manner  similar  to  partial  souls  in  con- 
junction with  will,  are  they  deprived  of  production  according  to  essence ; 
but  they  contract  both  these  into  one  union,  and  they  will  indeed  such 
things  as  they  are  able  to  eflfect  by  their  very  bdng,  but  by  their  very 
essence  being  capable  of  and  producing  all  things,  they  contain  the  cause 
of  production  in  their  unenvying  and  exuberant  will.  By  what  busy 
energy,  therefore,  with  what  difficulty,  or  with  the  punishment  of  what 
Ixion,  is  the  providence  either  of  whole  souls,  or  of  intellectual  essences, 
or  of  the  Gods  themselvea  accomplished,  unless  it  should  be  said,  that  to 
impart  good  in  any  respect  is  laborious  to  the  Gods  ?  But  that  which  is 
according  to  nature  is  not  laborious  to  any  thing.  For  neither  is  it  labo- 
rious to  fire  to  impart  heat,  nor  to  snow  to  refrigerate,  nor  in  short  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  PLAXa.  53 

^odies  to  energize  according  to  tl^eir  own  proper  powers.  And  prior  to 
bodies,  neither  is  it  laborious  to  natures  to^nourish,  or  generate,  or  increase* 
For  these  are  the  works  of  natures.  Nor  again,  prior  to  these,  is  it  labo- 
rious to  souls.  For  these  indeed  produce  many  energies  from  deliberate 
choice,  many  from  their  very  befng,  and  are  the  causes  of  many  motions 
by  alone  being  present.  So  that  if  indeed  the  communication  of  good  is 
according  to  natiire  to  the  Gods,  providence  also  is  according  to  nature. 
And  these  things  we  must  say  are  accomplished  by  the  Gods  with  facility, 
and  by  their  very  being  alone.  But  if  these  things  are  not  according  to 
nature,  neither  will  the  Gods  be  naturally  good.  For  the  good  is  the  sup- 
plier of  good  ;  just  as  life  is  the  source  of  another  life,  and  intellect  is  the 
source  of  intellectual  illumination.  And  every  thing  which  has  a  primary 
subsistence  in  each  nature  is  generative  of  that  which  has  a  secondary 
subsistence. 

That  however,  which  is  especially  the  illustrious  prerogative  of  the 
Platonic  theology,  I  should  say  is  this,  that  according  to  it,  neither  is  the 
exempt  essence  of  the  Gods  convierted  to  secondary  natures,  through  apro« 
vidential  care  for  things  subordinate,  nor  is  their  providential  presence  with 
all  things  diminished  through  their  transcending  the  whole  of  things  with 
undefiled  purity,  but  at  the  same  time  it  assigns  to  them  a  separate  subsist-^ 
ence,  and  the  being  unmingled  with  every  subordinate  nature,  and  also 
the  being  extended  toall  things,  and  the  taking  care  of  and  adorning  their 
own  progeny.  For  the  manner  in  which  they  pervade  through  all  things  is 
not  corporeal,  as  that  of  light  is  through  the  air,  nor  is  it  divisible  about 
bodies,  in  the  same  manner  as  tn  nature,  nor  converted  to  subordinate 
natures,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  a  partial  soul,  but  it  is  separate 
from  body,  and  without  conversion  tait,  is  immaterial,  unmingled,  tmre-^ 
strained,  uniformi  pMrimary  and  exempt.  In  short,  such  a  mode  of  the 
providence  of  the  Gods  as  this,  must  at  present  be  conceived.  For»it  is 
evident  that  it  will  be  appropriate  according  to  each  order  of  the  Gods. 
For  soul  indeed,  is  said  to  provide  for  secondary  natures  in  one  way,  and 
intellect  in  another.  But  the  providence  ot  divinity  who  is  pnor  to  intel- 
lect is  exerted  according  to  a  transcendency  both  of  intellect  and  souK 
And  of  the  Gods  themselves^  the  providence  of  the  sublunary  is  different 
from  that  of  the  celestial  divinities.     Of  the  Gods  also  who  are  beyond  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


54  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

world,  there  are  many  orders,  and  the  mode  of  provideooe  is<lifferent 
according  to  each. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


The  third  problem  after  these  we  shall  connect  witli  the  former,  and 
survey  how  we  are  to  assume  the  unpervertible  in  the  Gods,  who  perform 
all  things  according  to  justice,  and  who  do  not  in  the  smallest  degree 
subvert  its  boundary,  or  its  undeviating  rectitude,  in  their  providential 
attention  to  all  other  things,  and  in  the  mutatiohs  of  human  affairs.  I 
thii^  therefore,  that  this  is  apparent  to  every  one,  that  every  where  that 
mhich  governs  according  to  natuK,  and  pays  all  possiUe  attention  to  the 
felicity  c^the  gaverned,  after  this  manner  becomes  the  leader  of  that  which 
it  governs,  and  directs  it  to  that  which  is  best.  For  neither  has  the  pilot 
who  rules  over  the  sailors  and  the  ship  any  other  precedaneous  end  than 
the  safety  of  those  that  «arl  in  the  «hip,  and  of  the  ship  itself,  nor  does 
the  physician  who  is  the  curator  of  the  diseased,  endeavour  to  do  all  things 
for  the  sake  of  any  thing  dse  than  the  health  of  the  subjects  of  his  care, 
whether  it  be  requisite  to  cut  them,  or  administer  to  them  a  purgative 
medicine.  Nor  would  the  general  of  an  army  or  a  guardian  say  that  they 
look  to  any  other  end,  than  the  one  to  the  liberty  of  those  that  are  guarded, 
and  the  other  to  the  liberty  of  the  soldiers*  Nor  will  any  other  to  whom 
it  belongs  to  be  the  leader  or  curator  of  certain  persons,  endeavour  to 
subvert  the  good  of  those  that  follow  him,  which  it  is  his  business  to  pro- 
cure, and  with  a  view  to  which  he  disposes  in  a  becoming  manner  every 
thing  belonging  to  those  whom  he  governs.  •  If  therefore  we  grant  that  the 
<7ods  ai^  the  leaders  of  the  whole  of  things,  and  that  their  providence  ex- 
tends to  all  things,  since  they  are  good,  and  possess  every  virtue,  how  is 
it  possible  they  should  neglect  the  felicity  of  the  objects  of  their  provi- 
deotial  care  ?    Or  how  can  they  be  inferior  to  other  leaders  in  the  provi- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XV.  OF  PLATOi  SS^ 

dence  of  sij^rdinate  natures^?'  Since  the  Gods  indeed  always  look  to* 
diat  which  is  better,  and  establish  this  as  the  end  of  all  tiieir  government, 
but  other  leaders  overlook  the  good  of  men,  and  embrace  vice  rather  than 
virtue,  in  consequence  of  being  perverted  by  the  gifts  of  the  depraved. 

And  universally,  whether  you  are  vrilling  to  call  the  Gods  leaders,  or 
rulers,  or  guardians,  or  fathers^  a  divine  nature  will  appear  to  be  in-  want 
of  no  one  of  such  names.     For  alF  things  that  are  venerable  and  honor- 
able subsist  in  them  primarily.     And  on  this  account  indeed,  here  also 
some  things  are  naturally  more  venerable  and  honorable  than  others, 
because  they  exhibit  an  ultimate  resemblance  of  the  Gods.     But  what 
occasion  is  there  to  speak  further  on  this  subject  ^    For  I  think  that  we 
hear  from  those  who  are  wise  in  divine  concerns  paternal,  guardian,  ruling 
and  peeonian  powers  celebrated.     How  is  it  possible  therefore  that  the 
images  of  the  Gods' which  subsist  according,  to  nature,  regarding  the  end 
which  is  adapted  to  them^  should  providentially  attend  to  the  order  of 
^e  things  which  they  govern,  but  that  the  Gods  themselves  with  whom 
tiierek  the  whole  ofgood,  true  and  real  vtrttie,  and  a  blameless  life,  should  ^ 
not  direct  their  government  to  the  virtue  and^  vice  of  men  ?    Aiid  how 
can  it  be  admitted,  on  this  supposition,  that  they  exhibit  virtue  victorious^ 
in  the  universe,  and  vice  vanquished?    Will  they  not  also  thus  corrupt 
the  measures  of  justice  by  the  worship  paid  to  them  by>  the  depraved, 
subvert  the  boundary  of  undeviating  science,  and  cause  the  gifts  of  vice  to 
appear  more  honorable  than  the  pursuits  of  virtue  ?    For  this  mode  of 
providence  is  neither  advantageous  to  these  leaders^  nor  to  those  that 
follow  them#    For  to  those  who  have  become  wicked,  there  will  be  no 
fiberation  from  guilt,  since  they  will  always  endeavour  to  anticipate  justice, 
and  pervert  the  measures  of  desert..    But  it  will  be  necessary,  which  it  is 
not  lawful  to  assert,  that  the  Gods  should  regard  as  their  fitaal  end  the 
vice  of  the  subjects  of  their  providence,  neglect  thdr  true  salvation^  and 
consequently  be  alone  the  causes  of  adumbrant  good«     This  universe  also^ 
and  the  whole  world  will  be  filled  with  disorder  and  incurable  perturbations- 
depravity  remaining  in  it,  and  being  replete  with  that  discord  which  exists  * 
iQ  badly  governed  cities.     Though  is  it  not  pjerfectly  impossible  that  parts^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


55  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

should  be  governed  according  to  nature  in  a  greater  degree  than  wholes, 
human  than  divine  concerns,  and  images  than  primary  causes? 

Hence  if  men  properly  attend  to  the  weltare  of  men  in  governing  them, 
honoring  some,  but  disgracing  others,  and  every  where  giving  a  proper 
direction  to  the  works  of  vice  by  the  measures  of  virtue,  it  is  much  more 
necessary  that  the  Gods  should  be  the  immutable  governors  of  the  whole 
of  things.  For  men  are  allotted  this  virtue  through  similitude  to  the  Gods. 
But  if  we  acknowledge  that  men  who  corrupt  the  safety  and  well-being 
of  those  whom  they  govern,  imitate  in  a  greater  degree  the  providence  of 
the  Gods,  we  shall  ignorantly  at  one  and  the  same  time  entirely  subvert 
the  truth  concerning  the  Gods,  and  the  transceadency  of  virtue.   For  thi* 
I  think  is  evident  to  every  one,  that  what  is  more  similar  to  the  Gods  is 
more  happy  than  those  thin^  that  are  deprived  of  them  *  through  dissimi« 
litudeand  diversity.     So  that  if  among  men  indeed,  the  uncorrupled  and 
undeviating  form  of  providence  is  honorable,  it  must  undoubtedly  be  in  a 
much  greater  degree  honorable  with  the  Gods.     But  if  with  them,  mortal 
gifts  are  more  venerable  than  the  divine  measures  of  justice,  with  men 
alsoeartb'bem  gifts  will  be  more  honorable  than  Olympian  goods,  and  the 
bkmdisbments  of  vice  than  the  works  of  virtue.     With  a  view  therefore  to 
the  .most  perfect  feHcity,  Plato  in  the  La w^  delivers  to.  us  through  these 
demonstrations,  the  hj^parxis  of  the  Gods,  their  providential  care  extend* 
ing  to  all  things,  and  their  immutable  energy  ;  which  things,  indeed,  are 
common  to  all  the  Gods,  but  are  most  principal  and  first  according  to 
nature  in  the  doctrine  pertaining  to  them.     For  this  triad  appears  to  per- 
vade as  far  as  to  the  most  partial  natures  in  the  divine  orders,  originating 
supernally  from  the  occult  genera  of  Gods.     For  a  uniform  hyparxis,  a 
power  which  providentially  takes  care  of  all  secondary  natures,  and  an 
undeviating  and  immutable  intellect,  are  in  all  the  Gpds  that  are  prior  to 
and  in  the  world. 

'  For  ourov  it  is  necessary  to  read  «vr(ir 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVI.  OF  PLATO.  57 


CHAPTER  XVL 

Again,  from  another  principle  we  may  be  able  to  apprehend  the  theo* 
logical  demonstrations  in  the  Republic.  For  these  are  common  to  all  the 
divine  orders,  similarly  extend  to  all  the  discussion  about  the  Gods,  and 
unfold  to  us  truth  in  uninterrupted  connexion  with  what  has  been  before 
said.  In  the  second  book  of  the  Republic  therefore,  Socrates  describes 
certain  theological  types  for  mythological  poets,  and  exhorts  his  pupils  to 
purify  themselves  from  those  tragic  discipUnes,  which  some  do  not  refuse 
to  introduce  to  a  divine  nature,  concealing  in  these  as  in  veils  the  arcane 
mysteries  coneeming  the  Gods.  Socrates  therefore,  as  J  have  said,  nar- 
rating the  types  and  laws  of  divine  fables,  which  afford  this  apparent 
meaning,  and  the  inward  concealed  scope,  which  regards  as  its  end  the 
beautiful  and  the  natural  in  the  fictions  about  the  Gods, — ^in  the  first 
place  indeed,  thinks  fit  to  evince  according  to  our  unperverted  concep* 
tion  about  the  Gods  and  their  goodness,  that  they  are  the  suppliers  of  all 
good,  but  the  causes  of  j)o  evil  to  any  being  at  any  time.  In  the  second 
place,  he  says  that  they  are  essentially  immutable,  and  that  they  neither 
have  various  forms,  deceiving  and  fascinating,  nor  are  the  authors  of  the 
greatest  evil  lying,  in  deeds  or  in  words,  or  of  error  and  folly.  These 
therefore  being  two  laws,  the  former  has  two  conclusions,  viz.  that  the 
Gods  are  not  the  causes  of  evils,  and  that  they  are  the  causes  of  all  good* 
Hie  second  law  also  in  a  similar  manner  has  two  other  conclusions ;  and 
these  are,  that  every  divine  nature  is  immutable,  and  is  established  pure 
from  falsehood  and  artificial  variety*  All  the  things  demonstrated  there* 
fore,  depend  on  these  three  common  conceptions  about  a  divine  nature, 
viz.  on  the  coaceptions  about  its  goodness,  immutability  and  truth.  For 
the  first  and  ineffable  fountain  of  good  is  with  the  Gods ;  together  with 
eternity,  which  is  the  cause  of  a  power  that  has  an  invariable  sameness  of 
subsistence  r  and  the  first  intellect  which  is  beings  themselves,  and  the 
truth  which  is  in  real  beings. 

Proc.  •  Vol.  I.  H 


Digitized  by 


Google 


58  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 


CHAFfER   XVII. 

That  therefore,  which  has  the  hyparxis  of  itself,  and  the  whole  of  its^ 
essence  defined  in  the  good,  and  which  bj  its  very  being  produces  all  things,* 
must  necessarily  be  productive  of  every  good,  but  of  no  eviL  For  if  there 
was  any  thing  primarily  good,  which  is  not  God,  perhaps  some  one  might 
say  that  divinity  is  indeed  a  cause  of  good,  but  that  he  doe»  not  impart  ta 
beings  every  good.  If,  however,  not  only  every  God  is  good,  but  that 
which  is  primarily  boniform  and  beneficent  is  God,  (for  that  which  is  pri- 
marily good  will  not  be  the  second  after  the  Gods,  because  every  where^ 
things  which  have  a  secondary  subsistence,  receive  the  peculiarity  of  their 
hyparus  from  those  that  subsist  primarily) — thk  being  the  case,  it  is  per- 
fectly necessary  that  divinity  should  be  the  cause  df  good,,  and  of  all  such 
goods  as  proceed  into  secondary  descents,  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things. 
Fof  as  the  power  which  is  the  cause  of  life,  gives  subsistence  to  all  life,  a» 
the  power  which  is  the  cause  of  knowledge,  produces  all  knowledge,  as  the 
power  which  is  the  cause  of  beauty,  produces  every  thing  beautiful,  as  well 
tlie  beauty  which  is  in  words,  ad  that  which  is  in  the  pha^nomena,  and  thus 
every  primary  cause  produces  all  similars  from  itself  and  binds  to  itself  the 
one  hypostasis  of  things  which  subsist  according  to  one  form,— after  thesame 
manner  I  think  the  first  and  most  principal  good,  and  uniform  hyparxis,  es- 
tablishes in  and  about  itself,  the  causes  and. comprehensions  of  all  goods  at 
once.  Nor  is  there  any  thing  good  which  does  not  possess  this  power  from; 
it,  nor  beneficeivt  which  being  converted  to  it,  does  not  participate  of  tjiis^ 
cause.  For  all  goods  are  from  thence  produced,  perfected  and  preserved'? 
and  the  one  series  and  order  of  universal  good,  depends  on  that  fountain. 
Through  the  same  cause  of  hyparxis  therefore,  the  Gods  are  the  suppliers 
of  all  good,  and  of  no  evil.  For  that  which  is  primarily  good,  gives  subsist- 
ence to  every  good  from  itself,  and  is  not  the  cause  of  an  allotment  con- 
trary to  itself;  since  that  which  is  productive  of  life,  ie  not  the  cause  of 
the  privation  of  life,  and  that  which  is  the  source  of  beauty  is  exempt 
from  the  nature  of  that  which  i&  void  of  beauty  and  is  deformed,  and  fromt 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVII.  OF  PLATO.  59 

the  causes  of  this.  Hence,  of  that  which  primarily  constitutes  good,  it  is 
not  lawful  to  assert  that  it  is  the  cause  of  contrary  progeny ;  but  the  na- 
ture of  goods  proceeds  from  thence  undefiled,  unmingled  and  uniform. 

And  the  divine  cause  indeed  of  goods  is  established  eternally  in  itself,- 
extending  to  all  secondary  natures,  an  unen vying  and  exuberant  partici- 
pation of  good.     Of  its  participants,  however,  some  preserve  the  partici- 
pation with  incorruptible  purity,  receiving  their  proper  good  in  undefiled 
bosoms,  and  thus  through  an  abundance  of  power  possess  inevitably  an  al- 
lotment of  goods  adapted  to  them.     But  those  natures  which  are  arranged 
in  the  last  of  the  whole  of  things,  entirely  indeed  enjoy  according  to  their 
nature  the  goodness  of  the  Gods ;  for  it  is  not  possible  that  things  perfectly 
destitute  of  good  should  either  have  a  being,  or  subsist  at  first ;  but  re- 
ceiving an  efilux  of  this  kind,  they  neither  preserve  the  gift  which  pervades 
to  them,  pure  and  unmingled,  nor  do  they  retain  their  proper  good  stably, 
and  with  invariable  saipeness,  but  becoming  imbecil,  partial  and  material, 
and  filled  with  the  privation  of  vitahty  of  their  subject,  they  exhibit  to 
order  indeed,  the  privation  of  order,  to  reason  irrationality,  and  to  virtue, 
the  contrary  to  it,  vice.     And  with  respect  indeed  to  the  natures  which 
r$ink  as  wholes,'  each  of  these  is  exempt  from  a  perversion  of  tliis  kind^ 
things  more  perfect  in  them  always  having  dominion  according  to  nature. 
But  partial  natures  through  a  diminution  of  power  always  diverging  *  into 
multitude,  division  and  interval,  obscure  indeed  the  participation  of  good, 
but  substitute  the  contrary  in  the  mixture  with  good,  and  which  is  van* 
quished  by  the  combination.   For  neither  here  is  it  lawful  for  evil  to  subsist 
immingled,  and  perfectly  destitute  of  good ;  but  though  some  particular 
thing  may  be  evil  to  a  part,  yet  it  is  entirely  good  to  the  whole  and  to  the 
universe.  For  the  universe  is  always  happy,  and  always  consists  of  perfect 
parts,  and  -which  subsist  according  to  nature.     But  that  which  is  preter- 
natural is  always  evil  to  partial  natures,  and  deformity,  privation  of  sym- 
metry, perversion,  and  a  resemblance  of  subsistence  are  in.  these.     For 
that  which  is  corrupted,  is  indeed  corrupted  to  itself,  and  departs  from 
its  proper  perfection,  but  to  the  universe  it  is  incorruptible  and  inde- 
structible. 

'  For  aXXon  it  is  necessary  to  r^d  oX^v. 
*  For  efji^fiaivovra  read  eK^aivovra. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


60  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

And  every  tiling  which  is  deprived  of  good,  so  far  indeed  as  pertains 
to  itself,  and  its  own  subsistence,  is  deprived  of  it  through  imbecility  of  na- 
ture ;  but  it  is  good  to  the  whole,  and  so  far  as  it  is  a  part  of  the  universe* 
For  it  is  not  possible  that  either  a  privation  of  life,  or  deformity  and  im* 
moderation,  or  in  short  privation  can  be  inserted  in  the  universe  ;  but  its 
whole  number  is  always  perfect,  being  held  together  by  the  goodness  of 
wholes.  And  life  is  every  where  present,  together  with  existence,  and  the 
being  perfect,  so  far  as  each  thing  gives  completion  to  the  whole.  Di- 
vinity therefore,  as  we  have  said,  is  the  cause'  of  good  ;  but  the  shadowy 
subsistence  of  evil  does  not  subsist  from  power,  but  from  the  imbecility 
of  the  natures  which  receive  the  illuminations  of  the  Gods.  Nor  is  evil 
in  wholes^  but  in  partial  natures,  nor  yet  in  all  these.  For  the  first  of 
partial  natures  and  partial  intellectual  genera  are  eternally  boniform* 
But  the  media  among  these,  and  which  energize  according  to  time,  con* 
necting  the  participation  of  the  good  with  temporal  mutation  and  motion, 
are  incapable  of  preserving  the  gift  of  the  Gods  immoveable,  uniform  and 
simple;  by  their  variety  obscuring*  the  simplicity  of  this  gift,  by  their 
multiform  its  uniform  nature,  and  by  their  commixture  its  purity  and 
incorruptibility.  For  they  do  not  consist  of  incorruptible  first  genera,, 
nor  have  they  a  simple  essence,  nor  uniform  powers,  but  such  as  are 
compK)sed  of  the  contraries  to  these,  as  Socrates  somewhere  says  in  the 
Pheedrus.  And  the  last  of  partial  natures  and  which  are  also  material,  in 
a  much  greater  degree  pervert  their  proper  good.  For  they  are  mingled 
with  a  privation  of  life,  and  have  a  subsistence  resembling  that  of  an 
image,  since  it  is  replete  with  much  of  non-entity,  consists  of  things  hostile 
to  each  other,  and  of  circumstances  which  are  mutable  and  dispersed 
through  the  whole  of  time,  so  that  they  never  cease  to  evince  in  every  thing 
that  they  are  given  up  to  corruption,  privation  of  symmetry,  deformity^ 
and  all-various  mutations,  being  not  only  extended  in. their  energies,  like  the 
natures  prior  to  them,  but  being  replete  both  in  their  powers  and  energies 
with  that  which  is  preternatural,  and  with  material  imbecility.  For  things 
which  become  situated  in  a  foreign  [^ace,  by  co-introducing  whole  together 

'  Iii$  necessary  here  to  supply  the  word  amov. 

*  For  irafaa-xguafyrra  it  i$  requisite  to  read  wipi^xiafyvra. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVII.  OF  PLATO.  (J{ 

tvith  fonn,  rule  over  the  subject  nature ;  but  again  receding  to  that  which 
is  partial,  from  their  proper  wholeness,  and  participating  of  partibility,  im- 
becility, war  and  the  division  which  is  the  source  of  generation,  they 
are  necessarily  all- variously  changed.  Neither,  therefore,  is  every  being 
perfectly  good  ;  for  there  would  not  be  the  corruption  and  generation  of 
bodies,  nor  the  purification  and  punishment  of  souls.  Nor  is  there  any 
evil  in  wholes  :  for  the  world  would  not  be  a  blessed  god,  if  the  most 
principal  parts  of  which  it  consists  were  imperfect.  Nor  are  the  Gods 
the  causes  of  evils,  in  the  same  manner  as  they  are  of  goods  ;  but  evil 
originates  from  the  imbecility  of  the  recipients  of  good,  and  a  subsistence 
in  the  last  of  things.  Nor  is  the  evil  which  has  a  shadowy  subsistence  in 
partial  natures  unmingled  with  good.  But  this  participates  of  it  in  a 
certain  respect,  by  its  very  existence  being  detained  by  good.  Nor  in 
short,  is  it  possible  for  evil  which  is  perfectly  destitute  of  all  good  to  have 
a  subsistence.  For  evil  itself  is  even  beyond  that  which  in  no  respect 
whatever  has  an  existence,  just  as  the  good  itself  is  beyond  that  which  is 
perfectly  being.  Nor  is  the  evil  which  is  in  partial  natures  left  in  a  dis- 
ordered state,  but  even  this  is  made  subservient  to  good  purposes  by  the 
Gods,  and  on  this  account  justice  purifies  souls  from  depravity.  But 
another  order  of  gods  purifies  from  the  depravity  which  is  in  bodies. 
All  things  however  are  converted  as  much  as  possible  to  the  goodness  of 
the  Gods.  And  wholes  indeed  remain  in  their  proper  boundaries,  and 
also  the  perfect  and  beneficent  genera  of  beings.  But  more  partial  and 
imperfect  natures  are  adorned  and  arranged  in  a  becoming  manner, 
become  subservient  to  the  completion  of  wholes,  are  called  upward  to  the 
beautiful,  are  changed,  and  in  every  way  enjoy  the  participation  of  the 
good,  so  far  as  this  can  be  accomplished  by  them. 

For  there  cannot  be  a  greater  good  to  each  of  these,  than  \frhat  the  Gods 
impart  according  to  measures  to  their  progeny  :  but  all  thinjjs,  each  sepa- 
rately, and  all  in  common,  receive  such  a  portion  of  good,  as  it  is  pos- 
sible for  them  to  participate.  But  if  some  things  are  filled  with  greater, 
and  others  with  less  goods,  the  power  of  the  recipients,  and  the  measures 
of  the  distribution  must  be  assigned  as  the  cause  of  this.  For  different 
things  are  adapted  to  diiSerent  beings  according  to  their  nature.     But  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


62  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

Gods  always  extend  good>  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sun  always  emits 
light.  For  a  different  thing  receives  this  light  differently  according  to  its 
order,  and  receives  the  greatest  portion  of  light  it  is  capaljle  of  receiving. 
For  all  things  are  led  according  to  justice,  and  good  is  not  absent  from  any 
thing,  but  is  present  to  every  thing,  according  to  an  appropriate  boundary 
of  participation.  And  as  the  Athenian  guest  says,  all  things  are  In  a 
good  condition,  and  are  arranged  by  the  Gods.  Let  no  one  therefore  say, 
that  there  are  precedaneous  productive  principles  of  evil  in  nature,  or  in- 
tellectual paradigms  of  evils,  in.  the  same  manner  as  there  are  of  goods, 
or  that  there  is  a  malific  soul,  or  an  evil-producing  cause  in  the  Gods,  nor 
let  him  introduce  sedition  and  eternal  war  against  the  first  good.  For  all 
these  are  foreign  from  the  science  of  Plato,  and  being  morfe  remote  from 
the  truth  wander  into  barbaric  folly,  and  gigantic  mythology.  Nor  if 
certain  persons  speaking  obscurely  in  arcane  narrations,  devise  things  of 
this  kind,  shall  we  make  any  alteration  in  the  apparent  apparatus  of  what 
they  indicate.  But  the  truth  indeed  of  those  things  is  to  be  investigated, 
and  in  the  mean  time,  the  science  of  Plato  must  be  genuinely  received  in 
the  pure  bosoms  of  the  soul,  and  must  be  preserved  undefiled  and  im- 
mingled  with  contrary  opinions. 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 

In  the  next  place,  let  us  survey  the  immutability  and  simplicity  of  the 
Gods,  what  the  nature  of  each  of  them  is,  and  how  both  these  appear  to 
be  adapted  to  the  hyparxis  of  the  Gods,  according  to  the  narration  of 
Plato.  TheGods,  therefore,  are  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things.  But 
filling  these,  as  we  have  said,  with  good,  they  are  themselves  perfectly  good ; 
each  of  them  according  to  his  proper  order  possesses  that  which  is  most 
excellent ;  and  he  whole  genus  of  the  Gods  is  at  once  allotted  predomi- 
nance according  to  an  exuberance  of  good.     But  here  again,  we  must 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVIII.  OF  PLATO^  gg 

oppose  those  who  interpret  m  a  divisible  manner  that  which  is  most  excel- 
lent in  the  Gods,  and  who  say,  that  if  the  first  cause  is  most  excellent, 
that  which  is  posterior  to  the  first  is  not  so*     For  it  is  necessary,  say 
they,  that  what  is  produced  should  be  inferior  to  that  by  which  it  is  pro- 
duced.    And  this  indeed  is  rightly  asserted  by  them.     For  it  is  necessary 
in  the  Gods,  to  preserve  the  order  of  causes  unconfused,  and  to  define 
separately  their  second  and  third  progressions.     But  together  with  a  pro- 
gression of  this  kind,  and  with  *  the  unfolding  into  light  of  things  secon- 
dary from  those  that  are  first,  that  which  is  most  excellent  must  also  be 
surveyed  in  eadi  of  the  Gods.     For  each  of  the  Gods  in  his  own  charac- 
teristic peculiarity  is  allotted  a  transcendency  which  is  primary  and  per- 
fectly good.     One  of  them  indeed,  that  we  may  speak  of  something 
known,  is  allotted  this  transcendency,  and  is  most  excellent  as  possessing 
a  prophetic  power,  another  as  demiurgic,  but  another  as  a  perfector  of 
works.     And  Timaeus  indicating  this  to  us,  continually  calls  the  first  de-^ 
mmrgus  the  best  of  causes.     For  the  world,  says  he,  is  the  most  beautiful 
of  generated  natures,  and  its  artificer  is  the  best  of  causes ;  though  the 
intelligible  paradigm,  and  which  is  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligibfes  is  prior 
to  the  demiurgus.     But  this  is  most  beautiful  and  at  the  same  time  most 
excellent,  as  the  demiurgic  paradigm ;  and  the  maker  and  at  the  same 
time  father  of  the  universe  is  most  excellent,  as  a  demiurgic  God.    In  the 
Republic  also,  Socrates  speaking  of  the  Gods,  very  properly  observes, 
that  each  of  them  being  as  much  as  possible  most  beautiful  and  most 
excellent,  remains  always  with  a  simplicity  of  subsistence  in  his  own  form. 
For  each  of  them  being  allotted  that  which  is  first  and  the  summit  in  his 
own  series,  does  not  depart  from  his  own  order,  but  contains  the  blessed- 
ness and  felicity  of  his  own  proper  power.     And  neither  does  he  exchange 
his  present  for  a  worse  order ;  for  it  is  not  lawful  for  that  which  possesses 
all  virtue  to  be  changed  into  a  worse  condition  ;  nor  does  he  pass  into  a 
better  order.     For  where  can  there  be  any  thing  better  than  that  which  is 
most  excellent  ?    But  this  is  present  with  each  of  the  divinities  according 
to  his  own  order,  as  we  have  said,  and  &,lso  with  every  genus  of  the  Gods» 


»  For  TO  it  is  necessary  to  read  rj. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

It  is  necessary  therefore  that  every  divine  nature  should  be  established 
immutably,  abiding  in  its  own  accustomed  manner.  Hence  from  these 
things  the  self-sufficiency,  undefiled  purity,  and  invariable  sameness  of  sub- 
sistence of  the  Gods  is  apparent.  For  if  they  are  not  changed  to  a  more 
excellent  condition  of  being,  as  possessing  that  which  is  best  in  their  own 
nature,  they  are  sufficient  to  themselves,  and  are  not  io  want  of  any  good. 
And  if  they  are  not  ^t  any  time  changed  to  a  worse  condition,  they  re- 
main undefiled,  established  in  their  own  transcendencies.  If  also  they 
guard  the  perfection  of  themselves  immutably,  they  subsist  always  with 
invariable  sameness.  What  the  self-sufficiency  therefore  of  the  Gods  is, 
what  their  immutability,  and  what  their  sameness  of  subsistence,  we  shall 
in  the  next  place  consider. 

The  world  then  iasaid  to  be  self*sufficient,  because  its  subsistence  is  per- 
fect from  things  perfect,  and  a  whole  from  wholes ;  and  because  it  i^  filled 
with  all  appropriate  goods  from  its  generating  father.     But  a  perfection 
a.nd  self-sufficiency  of  this  kind  is  partible«  and  is  said  to  consist  of  many 
things  coalescing  in  one,  and  is  filled  from  separate  causes  according  to 
participation.    The  order  of  divine  souls  also,  is  said  to  be  self-sufficient, 
as  being  full  of  appropriate  virtues,  and  always  preserving  the  measure  of 
its  own  blessedness  without  indigence.     But  here  likewise  the  self-suffix 
ciency  is  in  want  of  powers.    For  these  souls  have  not  their  intellections 
directed  to  the  same  intelligibles ;  but  they  energize  according  to  time, 
and  obtain  the  complete  perfection  of  their  contemplation  in  whole  periods 
of  time.    The  self-sufficiency  therefore  of  divine  souls,  and  the  whole 
perfection  of  their  life  is  not  at  once  present.    Again,  the  intellectual 
world  is  said  to  be  self*sufficient,  as  having  its  whole  good  established  ii) 
eternity,  comprehending  at  once  its  whole  blessedness,  and  being  indigent 
of  nothing,  because  all  life  and  all  intelligence  are  present  with  it,  and 
nothing  is  deficient,  nor  does  it  desire  any  thing  as  absent.     But  this,  in- 
deed, is  sufficient  to  itself  in  its  own  order,  yet  it  falls  short  of  the  self- 
sufficiency  of  the  Gods.    For  every  intellect  is  boniform,  yet  is  not  good- 
ness itself,  nor  primarily  good ;  but  each  of  the  Gods  is  a  unity,  by-* 
parxis  and  goodness.    The  peculiarity  however  of  byparxis  changes  the 
progression  of  the  goodness  of  each*     For  one  divinity  is  a  perfective 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  XVIII.  OF  PLATO.  ^5 

goodness^  another  is  a  goodness  connective  of  the  whole  of  things,  and 
another  is  a  collective  goodness.  But  each  is  simply  a  goodness  sufficient 
to  itself.  Or  it  may  be  said,  that  each  is  a  goodness  possessing  the  self* 
sufficient  and  the  all-perfect,  neither  according  to  participation,  nor  ilhH&i- 
nation,  but  by  being  that  very  thing  which  it  is.  For  intellect  is  sul]^:ient 
to  itself  by  'participation,  and  soul  by  illumination,  but  this  universe^  ac* 
cording  to  a  similitude  to  a  divine  nature.  The  Gods  themselves,  however, 
are  self-sufBicient  through  and  by  themselves,  filling  themsdves,  or  rather 
subsisting  as  the  plenitudes  of  all  good.  :   ' 

But  with  respect  to  the  immutability  of  the  Gods,  of  what  kind  shall 
we  say  it  is  ?  Is  it  such  as  that  of  a  [naturally]  circulating  body  ?  For 
neither  is  this  adapted  to  receive  any  thing  from  inferior  natures,  tior  is 
It  filled  with  the  mutation  arising  from  generation,  and  the  disorder  which 
occurs  in  the  sublunary  regions.  For  the  nature  of  the  celestial  bodies  is 
immaterial  and  immutable.  But  this  indeed  is  great  and  venerable,  as  in 
corporeal  hypostases,  yet  it  is  inferior  to  the  natuw  of  die  Gods.  Fdr 
every  body  possesses  both  its  being,  and  its  perpetual  immutability  from 
other  precedaneons  causes.  But  neither  is  the  impassive  and  the  immu^ 
table  in  the  Gods  such  as  the  immutability  of  souls.  For  these  commu*« 
nicate  in  a  certain  respect  with  bodies^  and  are  the  media  of  an  impartible 
essence,  and  of  an  essence  divided  about  bodies.  Nor  again  is  the  im- 
mutability of  intellectual  essences  equivalent  to  that  of  the  Gods.  For 
intellect  is  immutable,  impassive,  and  unmingled  with  secondary  natures, 
on  account  of  its  union  with  the  Gods.  And  so  far  indeed  a&  it  is  uniform, 
it  is  a  thing  of  this  kind ;  but  so  far  as  it  is  manifold,  it  has  something 
which  is  more  excellent,  and  something  which  is  subordinate,  in  itself. 
But  the  Gods  alone  having  established  their  unions  according  to  this  trans« 
cendency  of  being8,are  immutable  dominat](H)8,are  primary  and  impassive. 
For  there  is  nothing  in  them  which  is  not  one  and  byparxis.  But  as  fire 
abolishes  every  thing  which  is  foreign  to  it  and  of  a  contrary  power,  as 
light  expels  all  darkness,  and  as  lightning  proceeds  through  all  things  with- 
out defilement,  thus  also  the  unities  of  the  Gods  unite  all  multitude,  and 
abolish  every  thing  which  tends  to  dispersion  and  all-perfect  division.  But 
Ihey  deify  every  thing  which  participates  of  them,  receiving  nothii^irom 

Froc.  Vol.  I.  I 


Digitized  by 


Google 


60  O^  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  f. 

their  participants^  and  do  not '  diminish  their  own  proper  union  by  the 
participation. 

Hence  also  the  Gods  being  present  every  where,  are  similarly,  exempt 
from  all  things,  and  containing  all  things  are  vanquished  by  no  one  of  the 
things  tliey  contain  ;  but  they  are  unmingled  with  all  things. and  unde* 
filed.  In  the  third  place,  this  world  indeed  is  said  to  subsist  with  inva* 
riable  sameness,  so  far  as  it  is  allotted  an  order  in  itself  which  is  always 
preserved  indissoluble.  At  the  same  time  however,  since  it  possesses  a 
corporeal  form,  it  is  not  destitute  of  mutation,  as  the  £lean  guest  observes. 
The  psychical  order  likewise  is  said  to  obtain  an  essence  always  estabUshed 
in  sameness ;  and  this  is  rightly  said.  For  it  is  entirely  impassive  accord- 
ing to  essence ;  but  it  has  energies  extended  into  time,  and  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Pfaaedrus,  at  different  times  it  understands  different  intelligii^es, 
and  in  its  progressions  about  intellect  comes  into  contact  with  different 
forms.  Besides  these  also,  much-hoxiored  intellect  is  said  both  to  subsist 
and  to  understand  with  invariable  and  perpetual  sameness,  establishing  at 
once  in  eternity  its  ^ftence,  powers,  and  energies.  Throng  the  multitude 
however  of  its  intellections,  and  through  the  variety  of  intelligible  species 
and  genera,  there  is  not  only  an  invariable  sameness,  but  also  a  difference 
of  subsistence  in  intellect.  For  difference  there  is  consubsistent  with 
sameness.  And  there  is  not  only  a  wandering  of  corporeal  motions,  and 
of  the  psychical  periods,  but  likewise  of  intellect  itself,  so  far  as  it  pro- 
duces the  intelligence  of  itself  into  multitude;  and  evolves  the  intelligible. 
For  soul  indeed  evolves  intellect,  but  intellect  the  intelligible,  as  PloUnus 
somewhere  rightly  observes,  when  speaking  of  the  intelligible  subjections. 
For  such  are  the  wanderings  of  intellect  and  which  it  is  lawful  for  it  to  make. 
If  therefore  we  should  say  that  a  perpetual  sameness  of  subsistence  is  pri* 
marily  in  the  Gods  alone,  and  is  especially  inherent  in  them,  we  shall  not 
deviate  from  the  truth,  and  we  shall  accord  with  Plato,  who  says  in  the 
Politicus,  that  an  eternally  invariable  sameness  of  subsistence  alone  per- 
tains to  the  most  divine  of  all  things.  The  Gods,  therefore,  bind  to  them- 
selves the  causes  of  a  sameness  of  this  kind,  ^nd  guard  with  immutablq 

^  f  u;(  b  omitted  in  tht  origmal. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIX.  OF  PEATO.  ^ 

sameness  their  proper  hjparxis  establisbed  according  to  the  unknown  union 
of  themselves.  And  Such  is  the  immutability  of  the  Gods,  which  is  con*- 
tained  in  self-sufficiency,  impassivity  and  sameness. 


CHAPTER   XIX. 

In  the  next  place,  let  us  consider  what  power  the  simplicity  of  the 
Gods  possesses ;  for  this  Socrates  adds  in  his  discourse  concerning  a  divine 
nature,  not  admitting  that  which  is  various,  and  multiform,  and  whicli 
appears  different  at  different  times,  but  referring  to  divinity  the  uniform 
and  the  simple.  F4ach  of  the  divinities  therefore,  as  he  says,  remains 
simply  in  his  own  form.  What  then  shall  we  conclude  respecting  this 
simplicity?  That  it  is  not  such  as  that  which  is  defined  to  be  oqe  in 
number.  For  a  thing  of  this  kind  is  composed  of  many  things,  and  abun- 
dantly mingled.  But  it  appears  to  be  simple  so  far  as  it  has  distinctly  a 
common  form.  Nor  is  it  such  as  the  simplicity  which  is  in  many  things 
according  to  an  arranged  species  or  genus.  For  these  are  indeed  more 
simple  than  the  individuals  in  which  they  are  inherent,  but  are  replete  with 
variety,  communicate  with  matter,  and  receive  the  diversities  of  material 
natures.  Nor  is  it  such  as  the  form  of  nature.  For  nature  is  divided 
about  bodies,  verges  to  corporeal  masses,  emits  many  powers  about  the 
composition  subject  to  it,  and  is  indeed  more  simple  than  bodies,  but  has 
an  essence  mingled  with  their  variety.  Nor  is  it  such  as  the  psychical  sim- 
plicity. For  soul  subsisting  as  a  medium  between  an  impartible  essence, 
and  an  essence  which  is  divided  about  bodies,  communicates  with  bot|i 
the  extremes.  And  by  that  which  is  multiform  indeed  in  its  nature  it  is 
conjoined  with  things  subordinate,  but  its  head  is  established  on  hi^,  and 
according  to  this  it  is  especially  divine,  and  allied  to  intellect. 

Nor  again  is  the  simplicity  of  the  Gods  such  as  that  of  inteUect.  For 
every  intellect  is  impartible  and  uniform,  but  at  the  same  time  it  possesses 
multitude  and  progression  ;  by  which  it  is  evident,  that  it  has  a  habitude 


Digitized  by 


Google 


6q  on  the  theology  ,        BOOK  I. 

%o  secondary  natures,  to  itself,  and  about  itself.  It  is  aho  in  itself,  and  is 
not  only  uniform,  but  also  multiform,  and  as  it  is  said,  is  one  many.  It 
is  therefore  allotted  an  essence  subordinate  to  the  first  simplicity.  But 
the  Gods  have  their  hyparxis  defined  in  one  simplicity  alone,  being  exempt 
indeed  from  all  multitude  so  far  as  they  are  gods,  and  transcending  all  di- 
vision and  interval,  or  habitude  to  secondary  natures,  and  all  composition. 
And  they  indeed  are  in  inaccessible  places,  expanded  above  the  whole  of 
things,  and  eternally  ride  on  beings«  But  the  illuminations  proceeding 
from  them  to  secondary  natures,  being  mingled  in  many  places  with  their 
participants  which  are  composite  and  various,  are  filled  with  a  peculiarity 
similar  to  them.  Let  no  one  therefore  wonder,  if  the  Gods  being  essentia 
alized  in  one  simplicity  according  to  transcendency,  various  phantasms  are 
hurled  fortlj  before  the  presence  of  them ;  nor,  if  they  being  uniform 
the  appearances  are  multiform,  as  we  have  learnt  in  the  most  perfect  of 
the  mysteries.  For  nature,  and  the  demiurgic  intellect  extend  corpo- 
real-formed images  of  things  incorporeal,  sensible  images  of  intelligible, 
and  of  tilings  without  interval,  images  endued  with  intervaL  For  So- 
crates also  in  the  Phsedrus  indicating  things  of  this  kind,  and  evincing 
that  the  mysteries  into  which  souls  without  bodies  are  initiated  are  most 
blessed,  and  truly  perfect,  says,  that  they  are  initiated  into  entire,  simple 
and  immoveable  visions,  such  souls  becoming  situated  there,  and  united 
with  the  Gods  themselves,  but  not  meeting  with  the  resemblances  which 
are  emitted  from  the  Gods  into  these  sublunary  realms.  For  these  are 
more  partial  and  composite,  and  present  themselves  to  the  view  attended 
with  motion.  But  illuminated,  uniform,  simple,  and,  as  Socrates  says, 
immoveable  spectacles  exhibit  themselves  to  the  attendants  of  the  Gods, 
and  to  souls  that  abandon  the  abundant  tumult  of  generation,  and  who 
ascend  to  divinity  pure  and  divested  of  the  garments  of  mortality.  And 
thus  much  is  concluded  by  us  respecting  the  simplicity  of  the  Gods.  For 
it  is  necessary  that  the  natm'e  which  generates  things  multiform  should  be 
simple,*  and  should  precede  what  is  generated,  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
uniform  precedes  the  multiplied.    I^  therefore,  the  Gods  are  the  causes  of 

'  After  airXouy  in  the  original,  it  U  requisite  to  insert  eiyai  xmu 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX.  OF  FLATO.  ^ 

all  compofiitioai  imd  produce  from  themselves  the  variety  of  beings,  it  is 
certainly  necessary  that  the  one  of  their  nature  irhicb  is  generative  of  the 
whole  of  things,  should  have  its  subsistence  in  simplicity.  For  as  incor- 
poreal causes  precede  bodies,  immoveable  causes  things  that  are  moved, 
and  impartible  causes  all  partible  natures,  after  the  same  manner  uniform 
intellectual  powers  precede  multiform  natures,  unmingled  powers,  things 
that  are  mingled  togetiber,  and  simple  powers,  things  of  a  variegated  na- 
ture* 


CHAPTER  XXv 

Iir  the  next  place,  let  us  speak  concerning  the  tnilii  which  is  in  the 
Giods  ;  for  this  in  addition  to  what  has  been  said  is  concluded  by  Socrates, 
because  a  divine  nature  is  without  falsehood,  and  is  neither  the  cause  of 
deception  or  ignorance  to  us,  or  to  any  other  beings.  We  must  under- 
stand therefore,  that  divine  truth  is  exempt  from  the  truth  which  consists 
in  words,  so  far  as  this  truth  is  composite,  and  in  a  certain  respect  is  mingled 
with  its  contrary,  and  because  its  subsistence  consists  of  things  that  are 
not  true.  For  the  first  parts  do  not  admit  of  a  truth  of  this  kind,  unless 
some  one  being  persuaded  by  what  Socrates  asserts  in  the  Cratylus,  should 
say  that  these  also  are  afler  another  manner  true.  Divine  truth  also  is  ex- 
empt from  psychical  truth,  whether  it  is  surveyed  in  opinions  or  in  scien- 
ces,so  far  as  it  is  inacertain  respect  divisible,  and  is  not  beings  themselves, 
but  is  assimilated  to  and  co4iarmonized  with  beings,  and  as  being  perfected 
in  motion  and  mutation  falls  short  of  the  truth  which  is  always  firm,  stable 
and  of  a  principal  nature.  Divine  truth  is  likewise  again  exempt  from 
intellectual  truth,  because  though  this  subsists  according  to  essence,  and 
is  said  to  be  and  is,  beings  themselves,  through  the  power  of  sameness, 
yet  again,  through  difference,  it  is  separated  from  the  essence  of  them,  and 
preserves  its  peculiar  hypostasis  unconfused  with  respect  to  them.    The 


Digitized  by 


Google 


70  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I^ 


V 


truth  thei'efore  of  the  Gods  alone,  is  the  undivided  uaion  and  ali-perfect 
communion  of  them.  And  through  this  the  ineffable  knowledge  of  the 
Grods,  surpasses  all  knowledge,  and  all  secondary  forms  of  knowledge 
participate  of  an  appropriate  perfection.  But  this  knowledge  alone  of 
the  Gods  contractedly  comprehends  the^e  secondary  forms  of  knowledge, 
^d  all  beings  according  to  an  ineffable  union.  And  throufgh  this  the 
Gods  know  all  things  at  once,  wholes  and  parts,  beings  and  non*beings, 
things  eternal  and  things  temporal,  not  in  the  same  manner  as  intellect  by 
the  universal  knows  a  part,  and  by  being,  non-being,  but  they  know  every 
thing  immediately,  such  things  as  are  common,  and  such  as  are  particulars, 
though  you  should  speak  of  the  most  absurd  of  all  things,  though  you 
should  speak  of  the  infinity  of  contingencies,  or  even  of  matter  itself. 

If,  however,  you  investigate  the  mode  of  the  knowledge  and  trathof 
the  Gods,  concerning  all  things  that  have  a  subsistence^n  any  respect 
whatever,  it  is  ineffable  and  incomprt'hensible  by  the  projecting  energies  of 
Hie  human  intellect ;  but  is  aJone  known  to  the  Gods  themselves.     And  I 
indeed  admire  those  Platonists  that  attj  ibute  to  intellect  the  knowledge  of 
a.U  thin^,  of  individuals,  of  things  preternatural,  and  in  short,  of  evils, 
and  on  this  account  establish  intellectual   paradigms  of  these.     But  I 
much  more  admire  those  who  separate  the  intellectual  peculiarity  from 
divine  union.     For  intellect  is  the  first  fiabrication  and  progeny  of  the 
Gods.     These  therefore  assign  to  intellect  whole  and  first  causes^  and  such 
as  are  according  to  nature,  and  to  the  Gods  a  power  which  is  capable  of 
adorning  and  generating  all  tbmgs.     For  the  one  is  every  where,  but  whole 
is  not  every  where.     And  of  Me  one  indeed  matter  participates  and  f*very 
being;  but  of  intellect  and  intellectual  species  and  genera,  all  things  do 
Dot  participate.     All  things  therefore  are  alone  from  the  Gods,  and  real 
truth  is  with  tliem  who  know  all  things  unically.     For  on  this  account 
also,  in  oracles  the  Gods  similarly  teach  all  things,  wholes  and  parts,  things 
eternal,  and  such  as  are  generated  through  the  whole  of  time.     For  being 
exempt  from  eternal  beings,  and  from  those  that  ei^ist  in  time,  thcv  con- 
tract in  themselves  the  knowledge  of  each  and  of  all  things,  according  to 
one  united  truth.     If  therefore  any  falsehood  occurs  in  the  oracles  of  the 
Gods,  we  must  not  say  tha^  a  thing  of  tliis  kind  originates  fiporo  the  Gods, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX.  OF  PLATO.  7 1 

but  from  tbe  recipients^  or  the  instruments,  or  the  places,  or  the  times. 
For  all  these  contribute  to  the  participation  of  divine  knowledge,  and 
when  they  are  appropriately  co-adapted  to  the  Gods,  they  receive  a  pure 
illumination  of  the  truth  which  is  established  in  them.  But  when  they 
are  t^parated  from  the  Gods  throu^  inaptitude,  and  become  discordant 
with  them,  then  they  obscure  the  truth  which  proceeds  from  them.  Wha£ 
kind  of  falsehood  therefore  can  be  said  to  be  derived  from  the  Gods,  who 
produce  all  the  species  of  knowledge  ?  What  deception  can  there  be  with 
those  w1k>  establish  in  themselves  the  whole  of  truth  ?  In  the  same  man- 
ner, as  it  appears  to  me,  the  Gods  extend  good  to  all  things,  but  always 
that  which  is  willing  and  able  receives  the  extended  good,  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Phaedriis.  And  a  divine  nature  indeed  is  causeless  of  evil, 
but  that  which  departs  from  it,  and  gravitates  downward,  is  elongated 
through  Itself;  thus  also,  the  Gods  indeed  are  alv^ays  the  suppliers  of 
truth,  but  those  natures  are  illuminated  by  them,  who  are  lawfully  their 
participants.  For  the  Elean  wise  jnan  says,  that  the  eye  of  the  soul  in 
the  multitude,  is  not  strong  enough  to  look  to  the  truth. 

The  Athenian  guest  also  celebrates  this  truth  which  subsists  primarily  in 
the  Gods ;  for  he  says  that  truth  is  the  leader  to  the  Gods  of  every 
good,  and  likewise  of  every  good  to  men.  For  as  the  truth  which  is  in 
souls  conjoins  them  with  intellect,  and  as  intellectual  truth  conducts  all 
the  intellectual  orders  to  the  one,  thus  also  the  truth  of  the  Gods  unites 
the  divine  unities  to  the  fountain  of  all  good,  with  which  being  conjoined^ 
they  are  filled  with  all  boniform  power.  For  every  where  the  hyparxis  of 
truth  has  a  cause  which  is  collective  of  multitude  into  one  ;  since  in  the 
Republic  also,  the  light  proceeding  irom  the  good^  and  which  conjoins 
intellect  with  the  intelligible,  is  denominated  by  Plato  truth.  This  cha- 
racteristic property  therefore,  which  unites  and  binds  together  the  natures 
that  fill  and  the  natures  that  are  filled,  according  to  all  the  orders  of  the 
Gods,  must  be  arranged  as  originating  supernally  and  proceeding  as  far 
as  to  the  last  of  things. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


72  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 


CHAWER  XXL 

To  us  however  diftcussing  what  pertains  to  cv^ery  dirine  tiature^  what 
we  assert  will  be  known  from  those  commonly  received  truths  adduced  in 
the  Phaedrusy  and  which  we  have  before  mentioned*  Socrates  therefore 
says  that  every  thing  divine  is  beautiful,  wise^  and  good/  and  he  indicates 
that  this  triad  pervades  to  all  the  progressions  of  the  Gods.  What  there* 
fore  is  the  goodness^  what  the  wisdom,  and  what  the  beauty  of  the  Gods  ? 
With  respect  to  the  goodness  of  the  Gods  therefore,  we  have  before  ob* 
served,  that  it  preserves  and  gives  subsistence  to  the  whole  of  things^  that 
it  every  where  exists  as  thesummit,  as  that  which  fills  subordinate  natures, 
and  as  pre-existing  in  every  order  analogous  to  the  first  principle  of  ttie 
divine  orders*  For  according  to  this  all  the  Gods  are  conjoined  with  the 
one  cause  of  all  thingSy  and  on  account  of  this  primarily  derive  their 
subsistence  as  Gods*  For  in  all  beings  there  is  not  any  thing  more  perfect 
than  the  good,  and  the  Gods*  To  the  most  excellent  of  beings  therefore, 
and  which  are  in  every  respect  perfect,  the  best  find  most  perfect  of 
things  is  adapted. 


CHAPTER  XXIL 

But  in  the  PhilebuS,' I^lato  delivers  to  us  the  three  most  principal  ele- 
ments of  the  good,  vix.  the  desirable,  the  sufficient,  and  the  perfect.  For 
it  is  necessary  that  it  should  convert  all  things  to  itself,  and  fill  all  things, 
and  that  it  should  be  in  no  respect  deficient,  and  should  not  diminish  its 
exuberance.  Let  no  one  therefore  conceive  the  desirable  to  be  such  as 
that  which  is  frequently  extended  in  sensibles  as  the  object  of  appetite. 

'  lomrov  18  •nrooeoutfly  printed  jmtead  of  ayatov. 

I 
/ 


Digitized  by 


Goi^gle 


CHAP.  XXll.  OF  PLATO.  73 

For  such  is  apparent  beauty.     Nor  let  him  suppose  it  to  be  such  as  is  in- 
deed able  to  energize  upon  and  excite  to  itself  the  natures  which  are  able 
to  participate  it,  but  which  at  the  same  time  may  be  apprehended  by  in- 
telligence, and  is  educed  by  us  according  to  a  projecting  energy,  and  an 
adhesion  of  the  dianoetic  power.     For  it  is  ineffable,   and  prior  to  all 
knowledge  extends  to  all  beings.     For  all  things  desire  the  goody  and  are 
converted  to  it.     But  if  it  be  requisite  summarily  to  unfold  the  characte- 
ristic peculiarity  of  the  desirable,  as  the  supplier  of  light  proceeds  by  his 
rays  into  secondary  natures,  converts  the  eye  to  himself,  causes  it  to  be 
solar-form,  and  to  resemble  hifhself,  and  through  a  different  similitude 
conjoins  it  with  his  own  fulgid  splendour,  thus  also  I  think  the  desirable 
of  the  Gods  allures  and  draws  upward  all  things  to  the  Gods  in  an  ineff- 
able manner  by  its  own  proper  illuminations,  being  every  where  present 
to  all  things,  and  not  deserting  any  order  whatever  of  beings.  .  Since  even 
matter  itself  is  said  to  be  extended  to  this  desirable,  and  through  this 
desire  is  filled  with  as  many  goods  as  it  is  able  to  participate.     It  is  there- 
fore the  centre  of  all  beings,  and  all  beings,  and  all  the  Gods  have  their 
essences,  powers  and  energies  about  this.     And  the  extension  and  desire 
of  things  towards  this  is  inextinguishable.     For  all  beings  aspire  after  this 
desirable  which  is  unknown  and  incomprehensible.     Not  being  able  there- 
fore either  to  know  or  receive  that  which  they  desire,  they  dance  round 
it,  and  are  parturient  and  as  it  werp  prophetic  with  respect  to  it.     But 
they  have  an  unceasing  and  never^nding  desire  of  its  unknown  and  in- 
effable nature,  al  the  same  time  that  they   are  unable  to  embrace  and 
embosom  it.     For  being  at  once  exempt  from  all  things,  it  is  similarly 
present  to  and  moves  all  things  about  itself,  and  is  at  the  same  time  by  all 
of   them  incomprehensible.     By   this  motion  also  and  this  desire   it 
preserves  all  things,     But  by  its  unknown  transcendency  through  which 
it  surpasses  the  whole  of  things,  it  preserves  its  proper  union  unmingled 
with  secondary  nati^res.     Such  therefore  is  the  desirable. 

But  the  sufficient  is  full  of  boniform  power,  proceeds  to  all  things,  and 
extends  to  all  beings  the  gifts  of  the  Gods,  For  we  conceive  such  a 
sufficiency  as  this  to  be  a  power  pervading  and  protending  to  the  last 
of  things,  extending  the  unenvying  and  exuberant  will  of  the  Gods,  and 

Froc.  Vol.  I.  K 


Digitized  by 


Google 


74  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  1. 

not  abiding  in  itself,  but  unically  comprehending  the  super-plenitude,  the 
never-failing,  the  infinite,  and  that  which  is  generative  of  good  in  the 
divine  hyparxis.  For  the  desirable  being  firmly  established,  and  surpas- 
sing the  whole  of  things,  and  arranging  all  beings  about  itself,  the  suffi- 
cient'begins  the  progression  and  multiplication  of  all  good,  calls  forth  that 
which  is  primary  in  the  uniform  hyparxis  of  the  desirable,  by  its  own  pro- 
lific '  exuberance,  and  by  the  beneficent  replenishings  which  pervade  to 
all  things,  and  copiously  produces  and  imparts  it  to  every  being.  It  is 
owing  to  the  sufficient  therefore,  that  the  stability  of  divine  natures,  and 
that  which  proceeds  from  its  proper  causes  is  full  of  goodness,  and  that, 
in  short,  all  beings  are  benefited,  abiding  in,  proceeding  from,  and  being 
united  to  their  principles,  and  essentially  separated  from  them.  Through 
this  power  therefore,  the  intellectual  genera  give  subsistence  to  natures 
similar  to  themselves,  souls  desire  to  generate,  and  imitate  the  beings  prior 
to  souls,  natures  deliver  their  productive  principles  into  another  place, 
and  all  things  possess,  in  short,  the  love  of  generation.  For  the  suflficiency 
of  the  goodness  of  the  Gods,  proceeding  from  this  goodness,  is  dissemi- 
nated in  all  beings,  and  moves  all  things  to  the  unenvying  communication 
of  good ;  intellect  indeed  to  the  communication  of  intellectual,  but  soul 
of  psychical,  and  nature  of  natural  good. 

All  things  therefore  abide  throueh  the  desirable  of  goodness,  and  gene- 
rate and  proceed  into  second  and  third  generations  through  the  suflScient 
But  the  third  thing,  the  perfect,  is  convertive  of  the  whole  of  things,  and 
circularly  collects  them  to  their  causes ;  and  this  is  accomplished  by  divine, 
intellectual,  psychical  and  physical  perfection.  For  all  things  participate 
of  conversion,  since  the  infinity  of  progression  is  through  this  again  re- 
called to  its  principles  ;  and  the  perfect  is  mingled  from  the  desirable  and 
sufficient.  For  every  thing  of  this  kind  is  the  object  of  desire,  and  is 
generative  of  things  similar  to  itself.  Or  in  the  works  of  nature  also,  are 
not  perfect  things  every  where  lovely  and  prolific  through  tlie  acme  of 
their  beauty  ?  The  desirable  therefore  establishes,  all  things,  and  com- 
prehends them  in  itself.     The  sufficient  excites  them  into    progressions 

'  Instead  of  fuovifuf  it  is  necessaiy  to  read  yovifio;. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXni.  OF  PLATO.  tfg 

arid  generations.  And  the  perfect  consummately  leads  progressions  to 
conversions  and  convolutions.  But  through  these  three  causes,  the  good^ 
ness  of  the  Gods  fixing  th&unical  power  and  authority  of  its  proper  hy- 
postasis in  this  triad,  is  the  primary  and  most  principal  fountain  and 
vestal  seat  of  things  which  have  any  kind  of  subsistence  whatever. 


CHAPTER  XXIIL 


After  this,  wisdomyis  allotted  the  second  order,  being  th^  intelligence 
of  the  Gods,  or  rather  the  hyparxis  of  their  intelligence.  For  intelligence 
indeed,  is  intellectual  knowledge ;  but  the  wisdom  of  the  Gods  is  ineffa- 
ble knowledge,  which  is  united  to  the  object  of  knowledge  and  the  intel- 
hgible  union  of  the  Gods.  But  it  appears  to  me  that  Plato  especially 
surveyed  this  in  the  triad  [of  the  beautiful,  the  wise  and  the  good,]  as 
may  be, inferred  from  the  conceptions  scattered  about  it  in  many  places. 
I  say  then  that  Diotima  in  the  Banquet  is  of  opinion  that  wisdom  is  full 
of  that  which  is  known,  and  that  it  neither  seeks,  nor  investigates,  but 
possesses  the  intelligible.  Hence,  she  says,  that  no  one  of  the  Gods  phi^ 
losophizes,  nor  desires  to  become  wise ;  for  a  God  is  wise.  Hence  that 
which  is  philosophic  is  imperfect,  and  indigent  of  truth  ;  but  that  which 
is  wise  is  full  and  unindigent,  and  has  every  thing  present  which  it  wishes 
and  desires  nothipg.  But  the  desirable  and  the  appetible  are  proposed 
to  the  philosopher.  Socrates,  however,  in  the  Republic  considers  that 
which  is  generative  of  truth  and  intellect,  as  affording  an  indicaticm  of 
wisdom,  to  our  souls  indeed  the  ascent  to  divine  plenitude  being  accom- 
plished through  knowledge,'  but  to  the  Gods  intellect  being  present  from 
the  fuln^s  of  knowledge.^    For  the  progression  in  them  is  not  from  an 

'  For  ytvyqersco;  it  is  requisite  to  read  yMorso};. 
^  The  same  emendation  is  necessary  here  as  above* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


76  O^  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

imperfect  habit  to  the  perfect ;  but  from  a  self-perfect  hyparxis  a  power 
prolificof  inferior  natures  proceeds.  But  in  the  Theaetetus  he  indicates 
that  the  perfective  of  things  imperfect,  and  that  which  calls  forth  con- 
cealed intelligence  in  souls,  pertain  to  wisdom.  For  he  says,  it  compels 
me  to  obstetrication,  but  prevents  me  from  generating.  It  is  evident 
therefore,  from  these  things,  that  the  genus  of  wisdom  is  triadic.  Heqce 
it  is  full  of  being  and  truth,  is  generative  of  intellectual  truth,  and  is 
perfective  of  intellectual  natures  that  are  in  energy,  and  itself  possesses  a 
stable  power.  We  must  admit  therefore,  that  these  things  pertain  to  the 
wisdom  of  the  Gods.  For  this  wisdom  is  full  indeed  of  divine  goodness, 
generates  divine  truth,  and  perfects  all  things  posterior  to  itself. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Im"  the  next  place  let  us  consider  the  beautiful,  what  it  is,  and  how 
it  primarily  subsists  in  the  Gods.  It  is  said  therefore  to  be  boniform 
beauty,  and  intelligible  beauty,  to  be  more  ancient  than  intellectual 
beauty,  and  to  be  beauty  itself,  and  the  cause  of  beauty  to  all  beings  ; 
and  all  such  like  epithets.  And  it  is  rightly  said.  But  it  is  separate  not 
only  from  the  beauty  which  is  apparent  in  corporeal  masses,  from  the 
symmetry  which  is  in  these  from  psychical  elegance,  and  intellectual 
splendour,  but  also  from  the  second  and  third  progressions  in  the  Gods ; 
and  subsisting  in  the  intelligible  place  of  survey,  it  proceeds  from  this  to 
all  the  genera  of  the  Gods,  and  illuminates  their  superessential  unities, 
and  all  the  essences  suspended  from  these  unities,  as  far  as  to  the  appa- 
rent vehicles  of  the  Gods.  As  therefore  through  the  first  goodness  all 
the  Gods  are  boniform,  and  through  intelligible  wisdom  they  have  a 
knowledge  ineffable,  and  established  above  intellect,  thus  also,  I  think, 
through  the  summit  of  beauty,  every  thing  divine  is  lovely.    For   from 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIV.  OF  PLATO.  77 

thence  all  the  Gods  derive  beauty,  and  being  filled  with  it,  fill  the 
natures  posterior  to  themselves,  exciting  all  things,  agitating  them  with 
Bacchic  fury  about  the  love  of  themselves,  and  pouring  supernally  on  all 
things  the  divine  effluxion  of  beauty. 

Such  therefore,  in  short,  is  divine  beauty,  the  supplier  of  divine  hilarity, 
familiarity  and  friendship.  For  through  this  the  Gods  are  united  to  and 
rejoice  in  each  other,  admire,  and  are  delighted  in  communicating  with 
each  other,  and  in  their  mutual  replenishings,  and  do  not  desert  the  order 
which  they  are  always  allotted  in  the  distributions  of  themselves.  Pluto 
also  delivers  three  indications  of  this  beauty,  in  the  Banquet  indeed, 
denominating  it  the  delicate;  for  the  perfect  and  that  which  is  most 
blessed,  accedes  to  the  beautiful  through  the  participation  of  goodness. 
But  he  thus  speaks  of  it  in  that  dialogue:  "  That  which  is  truly  beauti- 
ful, is  delicate,  perfect  and  most  blessed.*'  One  of  the  indications  there- 
fore of  the  beautiful,  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  viz.  the  delicate.  But  we 
may  assume  another  indication  of  it  from  the  Phaedrus,  viz.  the  splendid. 
For  Plato  attributing  this  to  the  beautiful  says  :  "  It  was  then  that  we 
were  permitted  to  see  splendid  beauty  shining  upon  us  &c/'  And  after- 
wards he  adds :  "  And  arriving  hither  we  apprehended  it  shining  most 
manifestly  through  the  clearest  of  the  senses/'  And  at  last  he  says : 
**  But  now  beauty  alone  has  this  allotment  to  be  most  splendid  and  most 
lovely."  These  two  things  therefore  are  to  be  assumed, as  indications  of 
beauty.  Another  indication  of  beauty  is  this,  that  it  is  the  object  of  love, 
which  now  also  Plato  appears  to  me  to  have  called  most  lovely.  And 
in  many  other  places  he  shows  that  the  amatory  fiiry  is  conversant  with 
the  beautiful,  defining,  and  in  short,  suspending  love  from  the  monad  of 
beauty.     "  For  love,  says  he,  is  conversant  with  the  beautiful.'' 

Because,  therefore,  beauty  converts  and  moves  all  things  to  itself, 
causes  them  to  energize  enthusiastically,  and  recalls  them  through  love, 
it  is  the  object  of  love,  being  the  Jleader  of  the  whole  amatory  series^ 
walking  on  the  extremities  of  its  feet,  and  exciting  all  things  to  itselr 
through  desire  and  astonishment.  But  again  because  it  extends  to 
secondary  natures  plenitudes  from  itself,  in  conjunction  with  hilarity  and 
divine  facility,  alluring,  enflaming,  and  elevating  all  things,  and  pouring  on 


Digitized  by 


Google 


73  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  1. 

them  illuminations  from  on  high,  it  is  delicate,  and  is  said  to  be  so  ^  by 
Hato.  And  because  it  bounds  this  triad,  and  covers  as  with  a  veil  the 
inefiable  union  of  the  Gods,  swims  as  it  were  on  the  light  of  forms, 
causes  intelligible  light  to  shine  forth^  and  announces  the  occult  nature 
of  goodness,  it  is  denominated  splendid,  lucid  and  manifest.  For 
the  goodness  of  the  Gods  is  supreme  and  most  united ;  their  wisdom  is 
in  a  certain  respect  now  parturient  with  intelligible  light,  and  the  first 
forms ;  but  their  beauty  is  established  in  the  highest  forms,  is  the  lumin- 
ous precursor  of  divine  light,  and  is  the  first  thing  that  is  apparent  to 
ascending  souls,  being  more  splendid  and  more  lovely  to  the  view  and  to 
embrace  than  every  luciferous  essence,  and  when  it  appears  is  received 
with  astonishment.  This  triad  therefore  filling  all  things,  and  proceeding 
through  all  things,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  the  natures  which  are 
filled  should  be  converted  to  and  conjoined  with  each  of  the  three  through 
kindred,  and  not  through  the  same  inedia.  For  of  different  things  that 
are  filled  by  this  triad  there  is  a  difierent  medium ;  and  difierent  powers 
are  converted  to  a  different  perfection  of  the  Gods.  I  think  therefore, 
it  is  manifest  to  every  one,  and  it  is  frequently  asserted  by  Plato,  that 
the  cause  which  congregates  all  secondary  natures  to  divine  beauty, 
which  familiarizes  them  to  it  and  is  the  source  of  their  being  filled  with 
it,  and  of  their  derivation  from  thence,  is  nothing  else  than  love,  which 
always  conjoins  according  to  the  beautiful,  secondary  to  the  first  '  Gods, 
and  the  more  excellent  genera,  and  the  best  of  souls.  But  again^  truth  is 
certainly  the  leader  to,  and  establishes  beings  in,  divine  wisdom,  with 
which  intellect  being  filled,  possesses  a  knowledge  of  beings,  and  souh 
participating  of  this  energize'  intellectually.  'For  the  full  participation 
of  true  wisdom  is  effected  through  truth,  since  this  every  where  illumi* 
nates  intellective  natures,  and  conjoins  them  with  the  objects  of 
intellection,  just  as  truth  also  is  the  first  thing  that  congregates  intellect 
and  the  intelligible.  To  those  however  who  hasten  to  be  conjoined  with 
the  good,  knowledge  and  co-operation  are  no  longer  requisite,  but  collo^ 
cation,  a  firm  establishment  and  quiet  are  necessary. 

'  Instead  of  xpo^  eturw  it  is  requisite  to  read  vporri^Tot^. ' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXV.  OF  PLATO.  79 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


What  therefore  is  it  which  unites  us  to  the  good?  What  is  it  which  causes 
in  us  a  cessation  of  energy  and  motion  ?  What  is  it  which  estabhshes  all 
divine  natures  in  the  first  and  ineflfable  unity  of  goodness  ?  And  how  does 
it  come  to  pass  that  every  thing  being  estabHshed  in  that  which  is  prior 
to  itself  according  to  the  good  which  is  in  itself,  again  establishes  things 
posterior  to  itself  according  to  cause  ?  It  is,  in  short,  the  faith  of  the  Gods^ 
which  ineflfably  unites  all  the  genera  of  the  Gods,  of  daemons,  and  of 
happy  souls  to  the  good.  For  it  is  necessary  to  investigate  the  good  neither 
gnostically,  nor  imperfectly,  but  giving  ourselves  up  to  the  divine  light, 
and  closing  the  eyes  of  the  soul,  after  this  manner  to  become  established 
in  the  unknown  and  occult  unity  of  beings.  For  such  a  kind  of  faith  as 
this  is  more  ancient  than  the  gnostic  energy,  not  in  us  only,  but  with  the 
Gods  themselves,  and  according  to  this  all  the  Gods  are  united,  and 
about  one  centre  uniformly  collect  the  whole  of  their  powers  and  pro- 
gressions. 

If  however  it  be  requisite  to  give  a  particular  definition  of  this  faith, 
let  no  one  suppose  that  it  is  such  a  kind  of  faith  as  that  which  is  conver- 
sant with  the  wandering  about  sensibles.  For  this  falls  short  of  science, 
and  much  more  of  the  truth  of  beings.  But  the  faith  of  the  Gods  sur- 
passes all  knowledge,  and  according  to  the  highest  union  conjoins  secon« 
dary  with  first  natures.  Nor  again,  let  him  conceive  a  faith  of  a  similar 
species  with  the  celebrated  belief  in  common  conceptions ;  for  we  believe 
in  common  conceptions  prior  to  all  reasoning.  But  the  knowledge  of 
these  is  divisible,^  and  is  by  no  means  equivalent  to  divine  union  ;  and  the 
science  of  these  is  not  only  posterior  to  faith,  but  also  to  intellectual 
simplicity.  For  intellect  is  estabUshed  beyond  all  science,  both  the  first 
science,  and  that  which  is  posterior  to  it.  Neither,  therefore,  must  we 
say  that  the  energy  according  to  intellect  is  similar  to  such  a  faith  as 
this.    For  intellectual  energy  is  multiform,  and   is  separated  from  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


80  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I; 

objects  of  inteUection  through  difference ;  and  in  short,  it  is  intellectual 
motion  about  the  intelligible.  But  it  is  necessary  that  divine  faith  should 
be  uniform  and  quiet,  being  perfectly  established  in  the  port  of  goodness. 
For  neither  is  the  beautiful,  nor  wisdom,  nor  any  thing  else  among  beings, 
so  credible  and  stable  to  all  things,  and  so  exempt  from  all  ambiguity, 
divisible  apprehension  and  motion,  as  the  good.  For  through  this 
intellect  also  embraces  another  union  more  ancient  than  intellectual 
energy,  and  prior  to  energy.  And  soul  considers  the  variety  of  intellect 
and  the  splendour  of  forms  as  nothing  with  respect  to  that  transcendency 
of  the  good  by  which  it  surpasses  the  whole  of  things.  And  it  dismisses 
indeed  intellectual  perception,  running  back  to  its  own  hyparxis  ;  but  it 
always  pursues,  investigates,  and  aspires  after  the  good^  hastens  as  it  were 
to  embosom  it,  and  gives  itself  to  this  alone  among  all  things  without 
hesitation.  But  why  is  it  necessary  to  speak  of  the  soul  ?  For  these 
mortal  animals,  as  Diotima  somewhere  says,  despise  all  other  things,  and 
even  life  itself  and  being,  through  a  desire  of  the  nature  of  the  good;  and 
all  things  have  this  one  immoveable  and  ineffable  tendency  to  the  good; 
but  they  overlook,  consider  as  secondary,  and  despise  the  order  of  every 
thing  else.    This,  therefore,  is  the  one  secure  port  of  all  beings. 

This  also  is  especially  the  object  of  belief  to  all  beings.  And  through 
this  the  conjunction  and  union  with  it  is  denominated  faith  by  theologists, 
and  not  by  them  only,  but  by  Plato  likewise,  (if  I  may  speak  what 
appears  to  me  to  be  the  case)  the  alliance  of  this  faith  with  truth  and 
love  is  proclaimed  in  the  Laws.  The  multitude  therefore  are  ignorant, 
that  he  who  has  a  conception  of  these  things,  when  discoursing  about 
their  contraries,  infers  the  same  thing  with  respect  to  the  deviations  from 
this  triad.  Plato  then  clearly  asserts  in  the  Laws  that  the  lover  of  false- 
hood is  not  to  be  believed,  and  that  he  who  is  not  to  be  believed  is  void 
of  friendship.  Hence  it  is  necessary  that  the  lover  of  truth  should  be 
worthy  of  behef,  and  that  he  who  is  worthy  of  belief  should  be  well  adapted 
to  friendship.  From  these  things  therefore,  we  may  survey  divine  truth, 
faith  and  love,  and  comprehend  by  a  reasoning  process  their  stable  com- 
munion with  each  other.  If,  however,  you  are  wilUng,  prior  to  these 
things  we  will  recall  to  our  memory  that  Plato  denominates  that  virtue 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVI.  OF  PLATO.  Qi 

fidelity  which  coDciliates  those  that  disagree,  and  subverts  the  greatest  of 
wars,  I  mean  seditions  in  cities.  For  from  these  things  faith  appears 
t9  be  the  cause  of  union,  communion  and  quiet.  And  if  there  is  such  a 
power  as  this  in  us,  it  is  by  a  much  greater  priority  in  the  Gods  themr 
selves.  For  as  Plato  speaks  of  a  certain  divine  temperance^  justice  and 
science,  how  is  it  possible  that  faith  which  connectedly  comprehends  the 
whole  order  of  the  virtues  should  not  subsist  with  the  Gods  ?  In  short, 
there  are  these  three  things  which  replenish  divine  natures,  and  which 
are  ihe  sources  of  plenitude  to  all  the  superior  genera  of  beings,  vi^.  good«> 
ness,  wisdom  and  beauty.  And  again,  there  are  three  things  which 
collect  together  the  natures  that  are  filled,  being  secondary  indeed  to  the 
former,  but  pervading  to  all  the  divine  orders,  and  these  are  feith,  truth 
and  love.  But  all  things  are  saved  through  these,  and  are  conjoined  to 
their  primary  causes ;  some  things  indeed,  through  the  amatory  maniai 
others  through  divine  philosophy,  and  others  through  theurgic  power, 
which  is  more  excellent  than  all  human  wisdom,  and  which  comprehends 
prophetic  good,  the  purifying  powers  of  perfective  good,  and  in  short,  ^11 
such  things  as  are  the  effects  of  divine  possession.  Concerning  these 
things  therefore,  we  may  perhaps  again  speak  more  opportunel^\ 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


Again,  let  us,  if  you  are  willing^  from  other  dialogues  investigate  the 
common  dogmas  of  Plato  about  divine  natures.  Whence  therefore,  and 
what  dogmas  shall  we  assume,  while  we  proceed  in  our  search  according 
to  najture?  Are  you  willing  that  we  should  in  the  next  place  recall  to 
our  memory  what  is  written  in  thePhaedo.^  Socrates  therefore  says  in 
the  demonstrations  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  which  are  derived  from 
its  similitude  to  divinity,  that  the  essence  which  is  superior  to  the  soul, 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  L 


Digitized  by 


Google 


83  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  L 

(and  to  which  the  soul  is  naturally  simtkr,  and  being  similar  participates 
of  an  immortal  allotment)  is  divine  and  immortal,  intelligible  and  uniform^ 
indissoluble  and  possesses  an  invariable  sameness  of  subsistence;  but  that 
the  essence  which  is  inferior  to  the  soul,  is  entirely  the  contrary,  to  which 
also  it  pertains  to  be  corrupted  and  to  be  passive.  For  a  thing  of  this 
kind  is  sensible  and  multiform,  and  is  dissoluble  because  it  is  a  composite ; 
and  he  predicates  among  these  all  such  things  as  pertain  to  a  corporeal 
subsistence.  Let  us  therefore  direct  our  attention  to  these  common  dog- 
mas, and  examine  after  what  manner  each  of  them  pertains  to  the  Gods. 

In  the  first  place  then  what  is  that  which  we  look  to  when  we  speak 
of  that  which  is  said  to  be  divine  ?  From  what  has  been  jsaid  therefore,  it 
is  evident  that  every  God  subsists  according  to  the  highest  union  of 
beings.    For  to  us  ascending  from  bodies,  the  Gods  have  appeared  to  be 
superessential  unities,  the  generators,  perfectors  and  measurers  of  essences, 
and  who  bind  all  first  essences  to  themselves.    But  that  which  is  divine, 
is  not  only  hyparxis  and  the  one  in  each  order  of  being,  but  at  the  same 
time  is  that  which  participates  and  that  which  is  participated ;  of  which 
the  latter  is  a  God,  but  the  former  is  divine.    Whether  however,  prior  to 
the  participated  unities,  there  is  something  which  is  separate  and  partici- 
pated  will  be  evident  in  what  follows.     But  at  present  we  shall  define 
that  which  is  divine  to  be  a  thing  of  this  kind,  viz.  being  which  partici- 
pates of  the  one^  or  the  one  subsisting  contractedly  together  with  being. 
For  we  assume  all  things  in  the  Gods  except  the  one^  as  suspended  from 
them  and  secondary,  viz.  essence,  life  and  intellect.     For  the  Gods  do 
not  subsist  in,  but  prior  to  these,  and  they  produce  and  contain  these  in 
themselves,  but  are  not  defined  in  them.     But  it  is  necessary  not  to  be 
ignorant  that  these  are  in  reality  thus  distinguished  from  each  other.     In 
many  places,  however,  Plato  magnificently  celebrates  the  participants  of 
the  Gods  by  the  same  names,  and  denominates  them  Gods.     For  not  only 
the  Athenian  guest  in  the  Laws  calls  a  divine  soul  a  God,  but  also  Socrates 
in  the  Pheedrus.     For  he  says  "  that  all  the  horses  and  charioteers  of  the 
Gods  are  good  and  consist  of  things  good ;''  and  afterwards  still  more 
clearly,  "  and  this  is  the  life  of  the  Gods.''    But  this  is  not  yet  wonderful. 
For  is  it  not  admirable  that  he  should  denominate  those  beings  Gods  who 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVI.  OF  PLATO.  83 

are  always  conjaiiied  with  the  Gods,  aod  who  together  with  them  give 
coBipletioQ  to  one  series  ?  For  in  many  places  be  calls  dsemons  Gods^ 
though  they  are  essentially  posterior  to,  and  subsist  about  the  Gods.  For 
in  the  Pha^rus  and  Tim^eus,  and  in  other  dialogues,  you  will  find  him  ex- 
tending the  appellation  of  the  Gods  even  as  far  as  to  dssmons.  But  what 
is  still  more  paradoxical  than  these  things,  he  does  not  refuse  to  call  cer- 
tain men  Gods;  for  in  the  Sophkta  he  thus  denominates  the  Elean 
guest. 

From  all  that  has  been  said  therefore,  this  must  be  assumed,  that  with 
respect  to  a  God,  one  thing  h  simply  a  God,  another  according  to  union, 
another  according  to  participation,  another  according  to  contact,  and  an- 
other according  to  simiUtude.  For  of  super-essential  natures  indeed,  each 
is  priaaiaiily  a  God ;  of  intellectual  natures,  each  is  a  God  according  to 
union;  f^nd  of  divine  souls,  each  is  a  God  according  to  participation.  But 
divine  daemons  are  Gods  according  to  contact  with  the  Gods ;  and  the 
souk  of  men  are  allotted  this  appellation  through  similitude.  lEoLch  of 
tiiese  however  is,  as  we  have  said,  rather  divine  than  a  God.  Since  the 
Athenian  guest  calls  intdlect  itself  divine;  but  that  which  is  divine  is 
posterior  to  the  first  deity,  in  ihe  same  manner  as  that  which  is  united  is 
posterior  to  tke  om,  that  which  is  intellectual,  to  intellect,  and  that  which 
is  animated,  to  soul.  And  always  those  natures  that  are  more  uniform 
and  simple  have  the  precedency ;  but  the  series  of  beings  ends  in  the  one 
itself.  Let  this,  therefore,  be  the  fiefinition  and  distinction  of  that  which 
is  divine. 

In  the  next  place,  let  us  survey  the  immortal.  For  with  Plato  there  are 
many  orders  of  immortality,  pervading  from  on  high  as  fur  as  to  the  last 
of  things ;  and  the  last  echo,  as  it  were,  of  immortality,  is  in  those  visible 
natures  that  are  perpetual ;  which  the  Elean  guest,  in  his  discourse  about 
the  circulation  of  the  universe,  says,  are  allotted  from  the  father  a  reno- 
vated immortality.  For  every  body  is  allotted  a  being  and  a  life  depen- 
dent on  another  cause ;  but  is  not  itself  naturally  adapted  to  connects  or 
adorn,  or  preserve  itself.  The  immortality  of  partial  souls  is,  I  think, 
more  manifest  and  more  perfect  than  this ;  which  Plato  evinces  by  many 
demonstrations  in  the  Phsedo,  and  in  the  10th  book  of  the  Republic. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


84  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

But  I  mean  by  the  immortality  of  partial  souls,  that  which  has  a  more 
principal  subsistence,  as  containing  in  itself  the  cause  of  eternal  pefma- 
nency.  We  shall  not,  however,  err  if  prior  to  both  these  we  establish  the 
immortality  of  daemons.  For  the  genera  of  these  through  which  they 
subsist  are  incorruptible,  and  they  neither  verge  to  mortality,  nor  are 
filled  with  the  nature  of  things  which  are  generated  and  corrupted.  But 
I  infer  that  the  immortality  of  divine  souls  is  still  more  venerable  and  es- 
sentially more  transcendent  than  that  of  daemons ;  which  divine  souls  wfe 
say  are  primarily  self-motive,  and  are  the  fountains  and  principles  of  the 
life  divided  about  bodies,  and  through  which  bodies  obtain  a  renovated 
immortality.  If,  however,  prior  to  these  you  conceive  the  Gods  them* 
selves,  and  the  immortality  in  them,  and  how  in  the  Banquet  Diotima 
does  not  attribute  an  immortality  of  this  kind  even  to  daemons,  but  defines 
it  to  subsist  in  the  Gods  alone,  such  an  immortality  as  this  will  appear  to 
you  to  be  separate,  and  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things.  For  there  eter- 
nity subsists,  which  is  the  fountain  of  all  immortality^,  and  through  it  all 
things  live  and  possess  life,  some  things  indeed  a  perpetual  life,  but  others 
a  life  dispersed  into  non*being.  In  short,  therefore,  that  which  is  divine 
is  immortal  so  far  as  it  generates  and  comprehends  in  itself  a  perpetual 
life.  For  it  is  immortal,  not  as  participating  of  life,  but  as  the  supplier 
of  a  divine  life,  and  as  deifying  life  itself,  whether  you  are  willing  to  call 
such  a  life  intelligible,  or  by  any  other  name. 

In  the  next  place  let  us  direct  our  attention  to  the  intelligible.  It  is 
denominated,  therefore,  in  opposition  to  that  which  is  sensible  and  which 
is  apprehended  by  opinion  in  conjunction  with  sense.  For  the  intelligible 
is  first  unfolded  into  light  in  the  most  principal  causes.  For  soul  is  in- 
deed intelligible,  is  of  this  allotment,  is  exempt  from  sensibles,  and  obtains 
an  essence  separated  from  them.  Prior  to  soul  also  intellect  is  intelli- 
gible; for  we  rather  think  jt  fit  to  arrange  soul  in  the  middle,  than  to  con- 
numerate  it  with  the  first  essences.  That  likewise  is  denominated  intelli- 
gible, which  is  more  ancient  than  intellect,  which  replenishes  intelligence, 
and  is  itself  by  itself  perfective  of  it,  and  which  Timaeus  arranges  prior  to 
the  demiurgic  intellect  and  intellectual  energy,  in  the  order  of  a  paradigm. 
But  beyond  these  is  the  divine  intelligible,  which  is  defined  according  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVII.  OP  PLATO.  85 

union  itself,  and  a  divine  hyparxis.  For  this  is  intelligible  as  the  object 
of  desire  to  intellect,  as  perfecting  and  comprehending  intellect,  and  as 
the  plenitude  of  being.  In  one  way,  therefore,  we  must  denominate  the 
intelKgible  as  the  hyparxis  of  the  Gods ;  in  another  way  as  true  being 
and  the  first  essence ;  in  another  way  as  intellect  and  all  intellectual  life ; 
and  in  another  way  as  soul  and  the  psychical  order.  It  is  likewise  neces- 
sary not  to  fashion  the  different  natures  of  things  conformably  to  names. 
Such,  therefore,  is  the  order  of  this  triad;  so  that  what  is  divine  indeed  is 
unmingled  and  ranks  as  the  first ;  that  which  is  immortal  is  the  second ; 
and  that  which  is  intelligible  the  third.  For  the  first  of  these  is  deified 
being;  the  second  is  life  subsisting  according  to  the  immortality  of  the 
Gods;  and  the  third  is  intellect,  which  is  denominated  intelligible  in  con- 
sequence of  being  replete  with  union. 


CHAPTER    XXVIL 

After  this,  it  follows  in  the  next  place,  that  we  should  consider  the 
uniform,  the  indissoluble,  and  that  which  has  an  invariable  sameness  of 
Subsistence,  from  the  same  causes,  and  these  as  the  precursors  of,  and 
pervading  through  all  the  divine  orders.  For  the  uniform,  indeed,  has  the 
highest  subsistence,  is  present  with  the  divine  monad,  and  appears  to  be 
especially  adapted  to  that  which  is  primarily  being,*  and  in  which  also 
every  participate  genus  of  unities  ends.  For  the  one  is  prior  to  these,  as 
will  be  evident  as  we  proceed.  But  the  indissoluble  is  the  second.  For 
it  comprehends  and  binds  the  extremes  according  to  divine  union  ;  since 
the  dissoluble  is  such  as  it  is  through  the  want  of  connexion  and  of  a 
power  which  collects  multitude  into  one.  And  that  which  has  an  invari- 
able sameness  of  subsistence  is  eternal,  and  is  full  of  the  perpetuity  of  the 

'  For  TO  ov  it  is  necessary  to  read  to*  ovti. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


85  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  1. 

Gods;  from  which  also  the  participation  of  immortality  and  eternal  samo- 
ness  is  derived  to  other  things.  The  uniform,  therefore,  pertains  to  the 
same  thing  as  the  divine;  but  the  indissoluble  to  the  same  thing  as  the 
immortal ;  and  that  which  has  an  invariable  sameness  of  subsistence  we 
must  refer  to  the  intelligible. 

And  do  you  not  see  how  these  wre  severally  after  a  manner  co-adapted 
to  each  other  ?  For  the  first  of  tliese,  through  the  first  unity  which  is  par* 
tidpated  by  being  is,  as  it  is  fit  it  should  be,  uniform.  For  if  a  God  sub- 
sists according  to  the  <me^  that  which  is  divine  will  doubtless  be  uniform. 
But  that  which  through  one  cause  of  life  is  immortai,  is  also  similarly  in- 
dissoluble^  For  life  is  the  bond  of  dissoluble  natures;  which  also  Timseus 
indicating  to  us,  opposes  the  dissoluble  to  the  immortal:  ^  for  you  are  not 
inunortal,  says  the  demiurgus,  yet  you  shall  never  be  dissolved,  nor  be 
subject '  to  the  fatality  of  death.^^  Every  thing  mortal,  therefore,  is  dis- 
soluble ;  but  the  immortal  is  indissoluble.  That,  however,  which  has  a 
renovated  immortality  is  for  tl^e  same  reason  neither  indissoluble,  nor 
mortal.  For  being  in  the  middle  of  both  it  is  neither  of  the  extremes,  ac- 
cording to  each  opposition.  But  the  third  of  these  being  established  ac- 
<x)rding  to  the  plenitude  of  whole  intelligibles  subsists  at  once  and  is  in- 
variably th^  same.  For  the  intelligible  is  the  cause  of  sameness  and  of 
eternal  permanency;  and  intellect  through  this  is  entirely  eternal.  These 
triads,  therefore,  proceed  from  the  first  and  most  principal  causes,  in  the 
same  manner  as  we  demonstrated  of  the  before-mentioned  triads.  But 
these  things,  indeed,  we  shall  consider  hereafter. 

These  things,  therefore,  being  discussed,  let  us  direct  our  attention  to 
the  unbegotten  in  divine  natures,  and  unfold  what  we  assert  it  to  be.  For 
we  say  that  all  [true]  being  is  without  generation,  and  Socrates  demon- 
strates in  the  Phaedrus,  that  souls  are  unbegotten.  Prior  to  diese,  also, 
the  Gods  themselves  are  established  above  generations  and  a  subsistence 
according  to  time.  How,  therefore,  shall  we  define  the  unbegotten  when 
applied  to  a  divine  nature,  and  according  to  what  reason  ?  Is  it  because 
divinity  is  exempt  from  all  generation,  not  only  from  that  which  subsists 

'  For  ynwrw^e  read  rtof fo-Jt . 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVII.  OFP5LATO.  ^ 

in  the  parts  of  time»  mch  as  we  assert  the  generatioQ  of  material  DAtoics 
to  be,  iior  from  that  oolj  which  is  exteiided  into  the  whole  of  tioG^  suidi 
as  Timseus  demonstrates  the  generation  of  the  cekstktl  bodies  to  be,  but 
also  from  the  psychical  generation  ?  Since  Timaras  denominates  this  to 
be  unbegotten  according  to  time,  but  to  be  the  best  of  generated  natures^ 
And  in  short,  a  divine  nature  is  exempt  from  all  division  and  essentia! 
separation.  For  the  progression  of  the  Gods  is  always  according  to  a 
union  of  secondary  natures,  which  are  uniformly  established  in  the  natures 
prior  to  them,  the  things  producing  containing  in  themselves  the  things 
produced.  The  indivisible,  therefore,  the  unseparated  and  the  united  are 
in  reality  unbegotten.  So  that  if  certain  generations  of  the  Gods  are 
spoken  of  by  Plato  in  fabulous  figments,  as  in  the  fable  of  Diotima,  the 
generation  of  Venus  is  celebrated,  and  of  Love  at  the  birth  of  Venus,  it  i^ 
Becessary  not  to  be  ignorant  after  what  manner  things  of  this  kind  are  a:^ 
serted,  and  that  they  are  composed  for  the  sake  of  symbolical  indication  ; 
and  that  (ables  tor  the  sake  of  concealment  call  the  ine£&d>le  unfi^lding  into 
light  through  causes,  generatiau.  For  in  the  Orphic  writings,  indeed,  the 
first  cause  is  on  this  account  denominated  Time;  since  again,  for  anotbar 
reason,  it  is  thus  den^nninated,  in  order  that  a  subsistence  according  Uy 
cause  may  be  the  same  as  a  subsistence  according  to  time.  And  the  pro» 
gression  of  the  Gods  from  the  best  of  causes  is  properly  denominated  ge* 
neration  according  to  time.  To  Plato,  therefore,  mytbolc^i^ng,  it  is 
adapted  to  devise  things  of  this  kind  conformably  to  theologists;  but 
when  he  is  discoursing  dialectically,  and  investigating  and  unfolding 
divine  natures  intellectually  and  not  mystically,  it  is  then  adapted  to  him. 
to  celebrate  the  unbegotten  essence  of  the  Gods-  For  the  Gods  primarily 
establish  in  themselves  the  paradigm  of  non^generation.  But  aiTintellec- 
tual  nature  is  in  a  secondary  degree  unbegotten,^  and  after  this  the  psy- 
chical essence.  And  in  bodies  there  is  an  ultimate  resemblance  of  unbe-* 
gotten  power;  which  some  posterior  to  Plato  perceiving,  have  indefinitdy 
shown  that  the  whole  heaven  is  unbegotten.  The  Gods,  therefore,,  are 
unbegotten.  But  there  is  an  order  in  them  of  first,  middle^  and  last  pro- 
gressions, and  a  transcendency  and  subjection  of  powers.  There  are  also 
in  them  uniform  comprehensions  o^  causes  ;  but  multiform  progenies  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


88  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  I. 

tilings  caused.  And  all  things,  indeed,  are  consubsistent  in  each  other ; 
but  the  mode  of  subsistence  is  various.  For  some  things  as  replenishing 
subsist  prior  to  secondary  natures ;  but  others,  as  being  filled  aspire  after 
more  perfect  natures,  and  participating  of  their  power  become  generative 
of  things  posterior  to  themselves,  and  perfective  of  their  hyparxis. 


CHAPTER  XXVIIL 

LooKii^G  to  these  things,  therefore,  we  may  unfold  what  is  said  of  pa- 
ternal causes,  and  of  the  prolific  powers  of  mothers  in  fables.  For  every 
where,  we  may  suppose  that  the  cause  of  a  more  excellent  and  more  uni*- 
form  nature  is  paternal ;'  but  we  may  say  that  the  cause  of  a  more  sub- 
ordinate and  partial  nature  pre-exists  in  the  order  of  a  mother.  For  with 
the  Gods  a  father  is  analogous  to  the  monad,  and  the  cause  of  bound ; 
but  a  mother,  to  the  duad,  and  to  the  infinite  power  which  is  generative 
of  beings.  The  paternal  cause,  however,  is  with  Plato  uniform,  and  is  es- 
tablished in  a  more  elevated  order  than  the  natures  which  proceed  from 
it,  and  subsists  prior  to  its  progeny  in  the  allotment  of  the  desirable. 
Again,  the  maternal  cause  has  the  form  of  the  duad  ;  and  at  one  time 
presents  itself  to  the  view  in  fables  as  more  excellent  than  its  progeny, 
but  at  another  time  as  essentially  subordinate  to  it ;.  as  in  the  Banquet, 
Plato  calls  Poverty  the  mother  of  L6ve.  And  this  is  not  only  the  case  in 
fabulous  figments,  but  also  in  the  philosophic  theory  of  beings,  as  is  evi- 
dent in  the  Timaeus.  For  there  Plato  calls  being  the  father,  but  matter 
the  mother  and  nurse  of  generation.  The  powers,  therefore,  which  are 
prolific  and  perfective  of  secondary  natures,  and  the  suppliers  of  life  and 
causes  of  separation  are  mothers,  being  established  above  the  natures 
produced  by  them.     But  the  powers  which  receive  the  natures  that  pro- 

'  irorpmoy  is  omitted  in  the  original.    . 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIX,  OF  PLATO.  39 

ceed  into  light,  which  multiply  their  energies,  and  extend  even  the  subor- 
dinate allotment  of  the  progeny,  are  also  themselves  called'mothersr 
Again,  however,  thdgprogeny  of  such  like  causes,  at  one  time  indeed,  pro^ 
ceed  according  to  union  from  their  proper  principles,  and  are  filled  from 
both  the  paternal  and  maternal  cause ;  but  at  another  time  they  contain 
the  bond  of  them,  being  arranged  in  the  middle,  conveying  the  gifts  of 
the  fathers  to  the  maternal  bosoms,  and  converting  the  receptacles  of  them 
to  the  completions  of  primary  causes.  But  of  the  natures  which  subsist 
from  twofold  preexisting  principles,  some  are  assimilated  to  the  paternal 
cause  ;  and  such  like  genera  of  Gods  are  productive,  defensive,  and  com- 
prehensive.  For  to  produce,  to  contain,  and  to  defend,  pertain  to  the 
cause  of  bound.  But  others  are  assimilated  to  the  maternal  cause,  and 
are  prolific,  and  vivific,  and  the  suppliers  of  motion,  of  the  multiplication 
of  powers,  of  variety  and  progressions^  For  all  these  are  thp  progeny  of ' 
infinity  and  the  first  i^ultitude. 


CHAPTER  XXIX: 

Thus  much  therefore  may  suflice  concerning  the  unbegotten  hyparxis 
of  the  Gods.  It  now  remains,  I  think,  to  speak  of  divine  names.  For 
Socrates  in  the  Cratylus  thinks  fit  to  unfold  in  a  remarkable  degree  the 
rectitude  of  names  in  divine  natures.  And  Parmenides  indeed,  in  the 
first  hypothesis,  as  he  denies  of  the  one  every  thing  else  tiiat  is  known, 
and  all  knowledge,  so  likewise  he  denies  of  it  name  and  language.  But^ 
in  the  second  hypothesis,  besides  all  other  things  he  shows  that  this  one 
may  be  spoken  of  and  '  that  it  has  a  name.  In  short  therefore,  it  must 
be  admitted  that  tlie  first,  most  principal  and  truly  divine  names  are  es- 
tablished in  the  Gods  themselves.  But  it  must  be  said  that  the  second 
names,  which  are  the  imitations  of  the  first,  and  which  subsist  intellectu- 

'  M14  is  omitted  in  tht  originil. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  M 


Digitized  by 


Google 


90  ON  THE  THSOLOGY  OF  PLATO.  BOOK  I. 

ally,  are  of  a  ddemoniacal  allotment.  And  again,  we  may  say  that  those 
names  wmchare  the  third  from  the  truth,  which  are  logically  devised,  and 
which  receive  the  ultimate  resemblance  of  divine  n*ures,  are  unfolded 
by  scientific  men,  at  one  time  energizing  divinely,  and  at  another  intel- 
lectually, and  generating  moving  images  of  their  inward  spectacles.  For 
as  the  demiurgic  intellect  estabKshes  resemblances  about  matter  of  the 
first  forms  contained  in  himself,  and  produces  temporal  images  of  things 
eternal,  divisible  images  of  things  indivisible,  and  adumbrated  images  as 
it  were  of  true  beings, — after  the  same  manner  I  think  the  science  that  is 
with  us  representing  intellectual  production,  fabricates  resemblances  of 
other  things,  and  also  of  the  Gods  themselves,  representing  that  which  is 
void  of  composition  in  them,  through  composition ;  that  which  is  simple, 
through  variety  ;  and  that  Which  is  united,  through  multitude;  and  thus 
ihsbioqing  n&mes,  ultimately  exhibits  images  of  divine  natures.  For  it 
generates  every  name  as  if  it  were  a  statue  of  the  Gods.  And  as  the 
theurgic  art  through  certain  symbols  calls  forth  the  exuberant  and  unenvy- 
ing  goodness  of  the  Gods  into  the  illumination  of  artificial  statues,  thus 
also  the  intellectual  science  of  divine  concerns,  by  the  compositions  and 
divisions  of  sounds,  unfolds  the  occult  essence  of  the  Gods.  Very  pro- 
perly therefore,  does  Socrates  in  the  Philebus  say,  that  on  account  of  his 
reverence  of  the  Gods,  he  is  agitated  with  the  greatest  fear  respecting 
their  names.  For  it  is  necessary  to  venerate  even  the  ultimate  echos  of 
the  Gods,  and  venerating  these  to  become  established  in  the  first  para- 
digms of  them.  And  thus  much  concerning  divine  names,  which  at  pre- 
sent may  be  sufiScient  for  the  purpose  of  understanding  the  theology  of 
Plato.  For  we  shall  accurately  discuss  them  when  we  speak  of  partial 
powers. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK    II- 


CHAPTER  I. 


.  Thb  most  proper  beginning  however  of  the  theory  proposed  by  m  is 
that  from  which  we  may  be  able  to  discover  the  first  cause  "  of  all  beings. 
For  being  impelled  from  this  in  a  becoming  manner,  and  having  our  con- 
oeptions  purified  respecting  it^  we  shall  with  greater  facility  be  able  to  dis- 
tinguish other  things.  About  these  things  therefore  we  must  speak  from 
the  beginning  as  follows  :  It  is  necessary  that  all  beings,  and  all  the 
natures  of  beings  should  either  be  many  only,  there  being  no  one  in  them, 
neither  in  each,  nor  in  all  of  them  ;  or  that  they  should  be  one  only,  there 
hemg  no  multitude,  but  all  things  being  compelled  into  one  and  the  same 
power  of  existence ;  or  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  both  one  and 
many,  and  that  being  should  be  one  in  order  that  neither  multitude  itself 
by  itself  may  vanquish  beings,  nor  that  we  may  be  forced  to  bring  together 
into  the  same  thing  all  things  and  their  contraries  at  once.  These  things 
therefore  being  three,  which  of  them  shall  we  chuse  ?  And  to  which  of 
the  above  mentioned  assertions  shall  we  give  our  suffrage.  It  is  necessary 
therefore  severally  to  discuss  the  absurdities  which  attend  these  positions, 
and  thus  to  survey  after  what  manner  the  truth  subsists. 

'  For  ouo-Mv  it  u  iiecesMry  to  read  mrtciv. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


92  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 

If  then  beings  are  many,  and  in  such  a  manner  many,  as  we  have  men- 
tioned from  the  beginning,  so  that  the  one  is  not  any  where  to  be  found, 
many  absurdities  will  happen  to  be  the  result,  or  rather  all  the  nature  of 
beings  will  at  once  from  the  firsts  be  destroyed,  as  there  will  immediately 
be  nothing  which  is  capable  of  participating  the  one.  For  it  must  be 
admitted  that  every  being  is  either  one  certain  thing,,  or  nothing.  And 
that  indeed  which  is  a  certain  being,  is  also  one  ;  but  that  which  is  not 
even  one  being,  has  not  any  existence  whatever.  Hence,  if  many  things 
have  a  subsistence,  each  of  the  many  is.  something  or  a  certain  one..  But 
if  each  of  them  is  nothing,  or  not  even  one  thing,  neither  is  it  possible  for 
the  many  ta exist ;  for  the  many  are  many  so  far  as  each  individual  of  the 
multitude  exists.  If,  therefore,  the  many  alone  have  a  subsistence,  and 
the  one  in  no  respect  is,  rieither  will  the  many  exist.  For  things  which 
are  in  no  respect  one  have  not  any  existence  whatever.  But  if  the  one  is 
not,  by  a  much  greater  priority  neither  have  the  many  an  existence. 
For  it  necessarily  follows  that  none  of  the  things  from  which  the  many 
consist  will  have  a  subsistence. 

Farther  still,  if  the  many  alone  have  a  subsistence  (as  has  been  said)  all 
things  will  be  infinitely  infinite ;  and  if  you  receive  any  one  of  the  in* 
finites  whatever,  this  also  will  be  immediately  infinite.  And  with  respect 
to  the  tilings  from  which  this  consists  and  which  are  infinite,  each  of  these 
likewise  will  be  infinite.  For  let  something  of  the  many  be  assumed, 
which  we  say  is  not  one,  this  therefore  will  be  multitude  according  to  its 
own  nature,  since  it  belongs  to  beings,  but  is  not  nothing.  If  however  it 
is  multitude,  this  ako  will  consist  of  many  things,  and  will  be  many. 
And  if  you  assume  something  of  these  manys,  this  will  immediately  appear 
to  you  not  to  be  one,  but  many.  There  will  likewise  be  immediately  the 
same  reasoning  in  these,  and  in  a  similar  manner  each,  (because  we  falsely 
speak  of  each)  will  be  multitude  in  energy.  And  each,  as  I  may  say, 
will  be  infinite,  or  rather  will  be  infinitely  infinite.  For  there  is  nothing 
which  will  not  be  something  of  this  kind  ;  since  a  part  is  many,  and  in  a 
similar  manner  the  part  of  a  part;  and  this  to  infinity.  For  multitude 
proceeding  will  never  stop,  nor  infinity,  in  consequence  of  being  deprived 
of  the  nature  oUhe  one.  To  make  beings  however,  to  be  infinitely  infinite, 
is  impossible  both  with  respect  to  truth,  and  to  the  thing  proposed  by  us. 


►  Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


CHAP.  L  OF  PLATO.  93 

For  if  being  is  infinitely  infinite,  being  can  neither  be  known,  nor  disco- 
vered ;  since  the  infinite  is  entirely  incomprehensible  and  unknown.  If 
also- being  is  infinitely  infinite^  there  will  be  something  more  infinite  than 
the  infinite.  But  if  that  something  is  more  infinite,  this  will  be  less  infinite. 
That,  however,  which  is  less  infinite,  since  it  is  not  perfectly  infinite,  will 
evidently  be  finite,  so  far  as  it  falls  short  of  the  nature  of  the  infinite.  Jf, 
therefore,  there  is  something  which  is  itself  according  to  multitude  more 
infinite  than  that  which  is  infinite  in  multitude  there  will  be  something 
more  than  the  infinite,  and  the  infinite  will  be  less,  yet  not  according  to 
multitude.  This  however  is  impossible.  Hence  there  is  not  the  infinitely 
infinite; 

Again  therefore,  according  to  this  hypothesis,  the  same  things  will  be 
acconling  to  the  same,  similar  and  disimilar.  For  if  all  the  manys  are 
notonci  and  each  thing  according  to  all  things  is  not  one,  that  which  is 
not  one  will  evidently  suffer  the  same  passion  in  consequence  of  the  pri- 
Tation  of  the  one.  AH  thrngs*  therefore  being  deprived  of  the  one^  after 
the  same  manner,  they  will  on  this  account  subsist  similarly  with  respect 
to  each  other.  But  things  which  subsist  similarly,  so  far  as  they  thus  sub- 
sist, are  evidently  similar  to  each  other.  Hence  the  many  will  be  similar 
to  each  other,  so  far  as  they  are  deprived  of  the  one.  They  will  likewise 
acconling  to  this  privation  of  the  one  be  perfectly  dissimilar.  For  it  is 
necessary  that  things-  which  are  similar  should  suffer  the  same  passion  ; 
so  that  things  which  do  not  suffer  any  thing  that  is  the  same,  will  not  be 
similar.  But  things  which  suffer  any  thing  that  is  the  same,  suffer  also 
one  thing.  Hence  things  which  are  deprived  of  every  one,  will  not  suffer 
an}"  thing  that  is  the  same.  The  many  therefore  will  be  similar  and  dis- 
similar according  to  the  same.  But  this  is  impossible;  Hence  it  is  im- 
possible for  the  many  to  exist  which  are  in  no  respect  one. 

Moreover,  the  many  will  be  the  same  with  and  different  from  each  other 
according  to  the  same.  For  if  all  things  are  similarly  deprived  of  the 
one^  so  far  indeed  as  all  of  them  are  similarly  deprived  they  will  be  the 
same  according  to  this  privation;  since  things  which  subsist  after  the 
same  manner  according  to  habit  are  the  same,  and  also  things  which  are 
after  the  same  manner  deprived  according  to  privation.  Bu  t  so  fajr  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


94  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  11. 

short,  as  each  of  them  is  deprived  of  every  one,  so  far  the  many  will  be 
different  from  each  other.  For  if  the  one  in  the  many  is  the  same,  that 
which  is  in  no  respect  one,  will  in  no  respect  be  the  same.  The  many 
therefore  will  be  the  same  and  not  the  same  with  each  other.  But  if  they 
are  the  same  and  not  the  same  it  is  evident  that  they  are  different  from 
each  other.  For  that  which  is  the  same  and  not  the  same,  so  far  as  it  is 
not  the  same,  is  not  the  same,  by  nothing  else  than  the  different.  Farther 
still  therefore,  these  many  will  be  moveable  and  immoveable,  if  the  one 
is  not.  For  if  each  of  them  is  not  one,  they  will  be  immoveable  accord- 
ing to  the  privation  of  the  one.  For  if  that  which  is  not  one  should  be 
changed,  each  of  them  would  have  the  one ;  since  privations  being  changed, 
entirely  lead  into  habits  the  things  that  are  changed.  It  is  necessary 
however  that  what  is  not  one  should  remain  immoveable  according  to 
the  privation  of  the  one,  though  this  very  thing  is  itself  impossible,  viz. 
that  the  many  should  stand  stilL  For  every  thing  which  stands  still  is  in 
something  which  is  the  same,  viz.  it  is  either  in  the  same  form,  or  in  the 
same  place.  But  every  thing  virhich  is  in  the  same,  is  in  one  thing  which 
is  the  same.  For  the  same  in  which  it  is,  is  one  thing.  Every  thing 
therefore  which  stands  still  is  in  one  thing.  The  many,  however,  do 
not  participate  of  the  one.  But  it  is  perfectly  impossible  that  things 
which  do  not  participate  of  the  one,  should  be  in  one  certain  thing.  And 
things  which  are  not  in  one  thing  cannot  stand  still,  since  things  which 
stand  still  are  entirely  in  one  and  the  same  thing.  It  is  impossible  there- 
fore, that  the  many  should  stand  still,  and  remain  immoveable.  It  has 
been  demonstrated  however,  that  the  many  must  necessarily  stand  im- 
moveable. The  same  things  therefore,  and  the  same  passion,  (I  mean 
the  privation  of  the  habit  of  the  oni,)  are  moveable  and  immoveable. 
For  things  immoveable,  and  things  which  stand  still,  so  far  as  they  are 
unstable,  so  far  they  must  necessarily  appear  to  be  moveable. 

Moreover,  there  is  no  number  of  beings  if  the  one  in  no  respect  is ;  but 
all  things  and  each  thing  will  be  not  one.  i^or  the  particle  of  number, 
the  monad,  is  one,  and  every  number  itself  is  one.  For  if  there  are  five 
monads,  there  is  also  the  pentad  ;  and  if  three  monads,  the  triad.  But 
the  triad  itself  is  a  certain  unity,  and  so  is  the  pentad.  So  that  if  there 
is  no  one,  there  will  neither  be  any  part,  nor  the  whole  of  numbers.    For 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  1.  OF  PLATO.  p5 

how  can  there  be  any  number  the  one  not  existing?  "For  the  one  is  the 
principle  of  numbers.  But  the  principle  not  existing,  neither  is  it  pos- 
sible that  the  things  which  proceed  from  this  principle  should  exist. 
Hence  the  one  not  existing,  neither  will  there  be  any  number. 

Again,  therefore,  neither  will  there  be  any  knowledge  of  beings  if  the 
one  is  not.  For  it  will  not  be  possible  either  to  speak  or  think  of  any 
being.  For  each  thing  itself,  and  every  thing  of  which  we  can  speak,  and 
in  which  we  impress  the  nature  of  the  one^  will  have  no  existence,  because 
neither  does  the  one  exist.  Hence  neither  will  there  be  any  discourse  nor 
any  knowledge.  For  discourse  is  one  thing  consisting  of  many  things, 
if  it  is  perfect.  And  knowledge  then  exists,  when  that  which  knows  be- 
comes one  with  that  which  is  known.  But  union  not  existing,  there  will 
at  the  same  time  be  no  knowledge  of  things,  and  it  will  be  impossible  to 
speak  about  things  which  we  know.  To  which  we  may  add,  that  the  in- 
explicable in  the  several  infinites,  will  necessarily  always  fly  from  the 
bound  of  knowledge.  For  immediately  each  apparent  infinite  which  he 
who  possesses  knowledge  desires  to  understand,  will  escape  the  gnostic 
power  hastening  to  come  into  contact  with,  and  adhere  to  it^  since  it  is 
incapable  either  of  contact  or  adhesion.  If,  therefore,  the  many  alone 
have  an  existence,  the  one  having  no  subsistence  whatever,  so  many  ab- 
surdities, and  a  still  greater  number  must  necessarily  happen  to  those  who 
adopt  such  an  hypothesis. 

But  if  the  one  which  is  the  one  itself  dlone  has  a  subsistence,  and  there 
is  nothing  else  (for  if  there  were  there  would  not  only  be  one  but  many 
things  ;  since  one  and  another  thing  are  more  than  one,  and  are  not  one 
thing  only)  if  this  be  the  case,  there  will  neither  be  among  all  things  either 
whole,  or  that  which  has  parts.  For  every  thing  which  has  parts  is  many, 
and  every  whole  has  parts.  But  the  one  is  in  no  respect  many.  Neither 
therefore  will  there  be  a  whole,  nor  that  which  has  parts.  Farther  still, 
neither  is  it  possible  that  there  should  be  a  beginning,Lor  end  of  any  tiling. 
For  that  which  has  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and  an  end,  is  divisible.  But  the 
one  is  not  divisible,  because  neither  has  it  any  parts.  Hence,  neither  has  it  a 
beginning,  nor  a  middle,nor  an  end.  Again,  if  the  one  alone  has  a  subsist- 
ence, no  being  will  have  figure.  For  every  thing  which  has  figure  is  either 
rectilinear  or  circular,  or  mixt  from  these.    But  if  indeed  it  is  rectilinear, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


g6  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IL 

it  will  have  for  its  parts,  the  middle,  and  the  extremes^  If  it  is  circular, 
there  will  be  one  thing  m  it  as  a  middle,  but  other  things  as  extremes,  to 
which  the  middle  extends.  And  if  it  is  mixed  from  the  right  and  circular 
line,  it  will  consist  of  many  things,  and  will  not  be  one. 

Moreover,  neither  will  any  being  be  in  itself,  nor  in  another  thing.  For 
that  which  is  in  another  thing  is  different  from  that  in  which  it  is.  But 
the  one  alone  existing  and  nothing  else  (for  it  will  by  no  means  be  in 
another  thing)  there  will  be  no  being  which  is  in  another  thing.  But 
that  which  is  in  itself  will  at  the  same  time  comprehend  and  be  compre- 
hended ;  and  in  this^  to  comprehend  will  not  be  the  same  thing  as  to  be 
comprehended ;  nor  will  there  be  the  same  *  definition  of  both.  There 
will  therefore  be  two  thiijgs,  and  no  longer  the  one  alone.  Again,  neither 
will  any  being  be  moved.  For  being  moved  indeed,  it  must  necessarily 
be  changed.  But  being  changed  it  must  be  in  another  thing.  If  the  one 
however  alone  has  an  existence,  it  is  not  possible  for  any  thing  to  appear 
to  be  in  something  else.  Hence  it  is  not  possible  for  any^  being  to  be 
changed.  But  every  thing  which  stands  still  is  necessarily  in  the  same 
thing.  And  that  which  is  in  the  same  is  in  a  certain  same  thing.  The 
one  however  is  in  no  same  thing.  For  that  which  is  in  a  certain  thing, 
is  either  in  itself,  or  in  something  else.  But  it  has  been  demonstrated, 
that  It  is  neitlier  in  itself^  nor  in  another.  Hence  neither  is  it  in  a  certain 
same  thing.     Neither  therefore  does  any  being  stand  stilL 

Moreover,  it  is  impossible  for  any  thing  to  be  the  same  with,  or  different 
from  any  thing.  For  if  there  is  nothing  besides  the  one  itself,  there  is  not 
any  thing  which  will  be  either  the  same  with,  or  different  from  another 
thing.  For  there  will  not  be  any  other  being.  And  the  one  itself  will 
not  be  different  from  itself ;  for  it  would  be  many  and  not  one.  Nor  will 
it'be  the  same  with  itself.  For  this  thing  which  is  same  is  in  another, 
and  same  is  not  the  one  itself.  For  the  one  is  simply  one,  because  it  is 
not  many.  But  that  which  is  same  is  the  san^e  with  another  thing. 
Again,  neither  is  it  possible  for  any  thirtg  to  be  similar  or  dissimilar  to  any 
thing.     For  every  thing  similar  suffers  a  certain  same  passion ;  but  every 


'  For  ovTo^  it  is  neceiiaiy  to  read  at^ro^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  1.  OF  PLATO. 


97 


thing  dissimrlm*  a  certain  different  passion.  The  one^  howeverrcannot  ^af« 
fer  any  thing,  nor  can  this  be  the  case  with  any  thing  else  besi^Ies  the  one ; 
«ince  nothing  eise^has  any  existence  whatever,  if  the  one  alone  has  a  sub- 
nstence. 

FarthOT  still,  in  addition  to  these  things  we  say  that  neither  is  it  possible 
for  any  thing  to  be  touched,  nor  to  be  separate,  if  there  is  nothing  else 
besides  the  one.   For  liow  can  things  which  have  no  existence  be  separate^ 
or  come  into  contact  with  any  thing?    But  neither  can  the  one  either  be 
separate  from  itself  or  touch  itself.     For  it  would  thus  be  passive  to  the 
being  touched,  and  the  being  separate.     But  the  one  suffers  no  other  thing 
besides  itself.    It  is  likewise  requisite  that  no  one  thing  should  either  be 
equal  or  unequal  to  any  thing.    For  that  which  is  equal  to  another  thing, 
is  said  to  be  so  with  reference  to  another  thing.    And  the  like  may  be 
6aid  of  that  which  is  unequaL     Another  thing,  however,  has  no  existence, 
if  the  one  alone  has  a  subsistence.     But  neither  can  the  one  be  equal  or 
unequal  tof  itself.     For  if  unequal,  there  will  be  one  thing  in  it  as  greater, 
but  another  as  less ;  so  that  it  will  be  two  things  and  not  one«    And  if 
the  one  is  equal  to  itself,  the  one  will  measure  itself.    This  however  is  im* 
possible;    for  the  one  will  measure  and  be  measured  by  itself,  so  that  it 
will  not  be  the  one  itself.    Neither  therefore  will  there  be  any  equality 
or  inequality  in  beings.    If  however  these  things  are  impossible,  neither 
can  any  being  come  into  contact  with  another,  and  be  separate,  nor  be 
similar  or  dissimilar,  nor  be  same  or  different,  nor  again,  stand  still,  or  be 
moved,  or  in  short  be  in  any  tl^^ng,  or  have  figure,  or  be  a  whole,  or  have 
parts,  if  the  one  alone  has  a  subsistence  which  is  void  of  multitude,  and 
is  without  all  these  things^     Neither  however,  is  it  possible  for  the  many 
alone  to  have  a  subsistence,  as  was  before  demonstrated.    And  hence  it 
is  necessary  that  every  being  should  be  both  many  and  one. 

If  this  however  is  the  case,  either  the  many  must  participate  of  the  one^ 
or  the  one  of  the  many^  or  both  must  participate  of  each  other,  or  neither 
of  each  other;  hut  the  man^  indeed  must  be  separate,  and  the  one  must^ 
also  be  separate,  in  order  that  the  many  and  the  one  may  subsist,  as  reason 
evinces.  If,  therefore,  neither  the  one  participates  of  the  many^  nor  the 
many  of  theone^  the  same  absurdities  will  ensue  as  we  brought  together  in 
Troc.  Vol.  I.  N 


Digitized  by 


Google 


98  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  H. 

the  hypoth^is  of  the  many  alone  having  a  subsistence.  For  again  there 
will  be  the  many  separate  from  the  one.  For  if  the  one  subsists  by  itself, 
and  the  many  do  not  in  any  respect  participate  of  the  one^  the  manyyiWX  be 
infinitely  infinite,  they  will  be  similar  and  dissimilar,  same  and  different, 
moved  and  stable,  and  there  will  neither  be  any  number  nor  any  know- 
ledge of  the  many.  For  the  absence  of  the  one  compels  all  these  conse- 
quences to  be  apparent  in  the  many.  It  is  impossible  therefore,  that 
neither  the  many  should  participate  of  the  one^  nor  the  one  of  the  many. 

If  however,  the  one  participates  of  the  many^  and  the  many  of  the  one^ 
and  both  these  are  in  each  other,  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  another 
nature  besides  these,  which  is  neither  one  nor  many.  For  both  these  being 
mingled  in  each  other,  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  cause  of  their 
mixture  which  conjoins  multitude  to  the  one^  and  the  one  to  multitude^ 
For  it  is  necessary  that  every  thing  that  is  mingled,  should  have  a  cause  of 
the  mixture.  For  in  short,  if  the  one  and  multitude  participate  of  each 
other,  neither  the  one  is  the  cause  of  essence  to  multitude^  nor  multitude  to 
the  oney  but  a  certain  third  thing  is  the  cause  of  essence  to  both,  and 
tvhich  is  prior  to  these.  For  what  will  that  be  which  makes  this  to  be 
multitude,  and  that  to  be  one  ?  And  what  is  the  cause  of  this  communica- 
tion and  association  with  each  other,  the  one  so  far  as  it  is  one  never  having 
any  communication  with  the  many  f  For  the  many  so  far  as  many,  and 
the  one  so  far  as  one  are  different  from  each  other.  And  so  far  as  neither 
is  from  neither,  they  have  no  sympathy  with  each  other.  What  therefore 
is  it  which  collects  these  into  one,  since  they  fly  from  and  are  unmingled 
with  each  other?  For  being  thus  discordant  with  each  other,  they  cannot 
desire  each  other,  or  if  they  did  their  congress  must  be  fortuitous.  For 
if  this  should  happen  to  be  the  case,  there  was  a  time  when  these  were 
separate  from  each  other,  since  now  also  they  subsist  together  casually. 
,  It  is  however  impossible  for  the  many  to  subsist  separate  from  the  one. 
The  mixture  therefore  is  not  casual.  But  neither  is  the  mixture  from  the 
many^  if  nether  Mr  one  is  the  cause  of  the  many^  nor  the  many  of  the  one. 
What  therefore  is  this  more  excellent  thing  [which  is  the  cause  of  the 
mixture  ?]  For  it  is  either  one,  or  not  one.  But  if  indeed,  it  is  the  one 
itself  y  we  must  again  inquire  coficerning  this,  whether  it  participates  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  I.  OF  PLATO.  gg 

multitude  or  of  nothing.  For  if  this  participates^  it  ia  evident  that  some 
other  thing  prior  to  this,  will  for  the  same  reason  present  itself  to  the  view^ 
and  this  will  be  the  case  to  infinity.  But  if  a  thing  of  this  kind  is  entirely 
void  of  multitude,  again  that  which  was  asserted  at  first  will  not  be  true^ 
viz.  that  the  many  do  not  participate  of  the  oncy  nor  the  one  of  the  many. 
I  mean  however  that  which  is  the  most  principal  and  primarily  one.  But 
there  is  indeed  a  certain  one  in  the  many,' and  there  is  also  the  imparticipa- 
ble  one,  and  whfch  is  simply  one,  and  nothing  else.  If  however  that  which 
is  prior  to  both,  is  not  *  owe,  it  is  necessary  that  this  not  one  should  be 
more  excellent  than  the  one.  All  things  however  are,  and  are  gene- 
rated what  they  are,  through  the  one.  And  together  with  the  one  indeed 
every  being  is  preserved  ;  but  separate  from  the  one  proceeds  to  the  cor- 
ruption of  itself.  The  mixture  also  of  the  one  and  multitude^  which  the 
non^^one  affords  to  beings,  is  communion  and  union.  The  one  *  therefore^ 
and  that  which  is  no^  one^ '  are  the  cause  of  nothing  else  to  beings  than 
of  their  being  one.  If  however  the  one  is  the  cause  of  a  thing  of  this  kind, 
that  which  is  not  one  will  not  be  the  cause  of  that  which  is  more  excellent 
£than  union.]  But  it  is  every  where  necessary  that  what  is  more  excel- 
lent should  be  the  cause  to  beings  of  another  more  excellent  thing,  accor* 
ding  to  its  own  power.  For  thus  it  will  be  more  excellent  as  being  more 
good,  and  as  the  cause  from  its  own  nature  of  a  greater  and  more  excel- 
lent good  to  those  things  to  which  a  less  good  is  the  cause  of  less  good- 
ness. From  these  things  therefore  it  is  necessary,  that  the  many  should 
participate  of  the  one,  that  the  one  should  be  unmingled  with  multitude^ 
and  that  nothing  should  be  better  than  thf  one^  but  that  this  should  also  be 
the  cause  of  being  to  the  many.  For  every  thing  wiiich  is  deprived  of 
the  one^  flies  immediately  into  nothing,  and  to  its  own  corruption.  But  that 
which  is  not  many,  is  not  at  one  and  the  same  time  not  many  and  nothing. 
For  to  the  one  that  which  is  nothing,  or  not  one,  is  opposed,  and  lo  the 
tfiany  that  which  is  not  many  is  opposed.    If,  therefore,  ^^  one  and  the 

'  Ovx  V^  omitted  in  the  original. 
*  Instead  of  to  ov  it  is  necessary  to  read  ro  fv. 

>'  The  fv  in  the  original  which  immediately  preaedes  ou%  cv  seems  19  be  superfluous,  and 
}$  therefore  omit(e4  in  ibt  traoslatbn. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


100  ^N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  U. 

many  are  not  the  same^  the  not  being  many  wUl  not  be  the  same  wkk 
Qotbing.  From  thus  considering  the  affair  therefore,  it  appears  that  the 
(mc  is  beyond  mulutudei  and  i»  the  cause  of  being  to  the  mofitf* 


CHAPTER  11. 

It  is  necessary  howerer^  that  discussing  the  same  subject  after  another 
manner,  we  should  again  see  if  we  can  m  a  certain  respect  follow  what 
has  been  said,  and  refer  it  to  the  same  end.  It  is  necessary  therefore,  that 
there  should  either  be  one  principle,  or  many  principles  ;  or  rather^  we 
should  begin  from  hence. '  And  if  there  are  many  principles,  they  must 
either  possess  sympathy  with  each  other,  or  they  must  be  divulsed  from 
each  other,  and  they. must  be  either  finite  or  infinite.  But  if  there  is  one 
principle,  this  must  dther  be  not  essence,,  or  essence.  And  if  it  is  essence, 
this  must  either  be  corporeal  or  incorporeal.  And  if  ineorporeal,  it  musfr 
either  be  separate  from,  or  inseparable  from  bodies.  And  if  separate,  it 
roust  either  be  moveable  or  immoveable.  But  if  it  is  not  essence,  it  must 
either  be  inferior  to  all  essence,  or  participated  by  essence,  or  impartiei  pable. 
If  therefore  there  are  many  principles,  and  which  have  no  sympathy  with 
each  other,  no  being  will  originate  from  them  [conjointly,]  nor  will  they  be 
common  to  all  things,  but  each  will  produce  by  itself.  For  what  commu- 
nication can  there  be  between  things  which  anj  naturally  foreign,  or  what 
co-operation  betMreen  things  which  are  entirely  of  a  different  kind  ?  In 
addition  also  to  these  things,  there  will  be  the  many  which  do  not  partici- 
pate of  the  one.  For  if  there  is  a  certain  one  common  in  all  of  them,  they 
will  not  be  perfectly  separated  essentially  from  each  other.  If  therefore 
they  are  different,  and  there  is  nothing  which  is  the  same  about  them,  they 
are  alone  many  and  by  no  means  one^  But  if  there  are  many  principles^ 
and  which  possess^  sympathy  with  each  other,  they  will  have  someUiing 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  !!•  OFPLATCh  .  101^ 

comiDODy  which  leads  all  oi  them  to  sympathy^  and  sibiilarly  unfolds  all 
of  them  to  the  view.  For  we  call  those  things  sympathetic,  which  happen 
to  be  passive  to  the  same  thing.  But  similars  are  entirely  similar  from 
participating  one  form  and  one  nature.  If  however  this  be  the  case,  it 
is  necessary  that  that  all  [or  universal]  which  is  every  where,  and  in  all 
the  principles,  should  be.  of  a  more  principal  nature  than  the  many.  This 
therefore  gives  them  the  power  to  generate  sympathy  with  each  other,  and 
affords  tliem  communion. according  to  nature. 

Again,  if  there  are  indeed  infinite  principles^  either  the  things  whicK 
proceed  irom  them  are  infinite,,  and  there  will  thus  be  the  infini^te  twice, 
or  they  are  finite,  and  thus  all  the  principles  will  not  be  principles.  Foe 
things  finite  in  number,  will  entirely  proceed  from  finite  principles*  llie 
principles  therefore  are  in  vain  infinite..  To  which  may  be  added,  that  in* 
finity  makes  both  the  principles  to  be  unknown,  and  the  things  which 
proceed  ftom  them.  For  the  principles*  being  unknown,  it  is  necessary^ 
that  the  tilings  which  proceed  from  them*  should  be  unknown ;  since  we 
then  think  that  we  know  any  thing  when  we  know  the  causes  and  the  first 
principles  of  it.  But  if  the  principles  are  finite,  it  is  evident  that  there 
will  be  a  certaia  number  of  them  :  for  we  say  that  number  is  a  definite 
multitude.  If  however,  there  is  a  number  of  the  principles,,  it  is  necessary 
that  there  should  be  a  cause  of  the  whole  number  of  themi  For  every 
number  is  from  one  ;  and  this,  viz^  the  one  is  the  principle  of  numbers^ 
This  therefore  will  be  the  principle  of  principles,  and  the  cause  of  finite 
multitude,  since  number  itself  is  one,  and  the  end  in  the  many  is  one,  and 
it  hounds  the  many  by  that  which  is  one.  But  the  principle  being  one^ 
and  this  being  essence,  it  is  necessary  if  this  is  admitted  to  be  either  cor^- 
poreal  or  incorporeal,  that  it  must  be  acknowledgs^d  ta  be  the  principle  of 
other  things. 

If  therefore,  body  is  the  cause  of  the  generation  of  beings,,  it  is  neces^ 
sary  indeed^  that  it  should  be  divisible  and  have  parts.  For  every  body 
IS  in  its  own  nature  divisible  ;  since  every  magnitude  is  a  certain  whole 
and  that  which  is  a  whole  consists  of  parts.  These  parts  therefore^  (but 
I  mean  each  of  them)  must  either  severally  participate  a  certain  one,  or 
not  participate  it.    I£  therefore  they  do  not:  participate  it,  they  will  be: 


Digitized  by 


Google 


402  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  11, 

maiiy  adone,  and  by  no  means  one.  Hence,  neither  will  that  which  con- 
sists from  them  be  a  whole.  For  there  beifig  no  one,  that  which  consists 
of  all  of  them  will  not  be  one.  But  if  each  of  the  parts  participates  of 
something  of  this  kind,  and  there  is  something  which  is  the  same  in  all 
of  them,  a  thing  of  this  kind  must  necessarily  be  incorporeal,  and  impar- 
tible according  to  its  own  nature.  For  if  this  also  is  itself  corporeal^  it  is 
either  wholly  in  each  of  the  parts,  or  not  wholly.  If  therefore,  it  is  in-^ 
deed  wholly  in  each,  it  will  itself  be  separated  from  itself.  For  the  parts 
in  which  it  is  are  separate  from  each  other.  But  if  it  is  not  wholly  in 
each  of  \he  parts,  this  also  will  be  divisible,  and  will  have  parts  after  the 
same  manner  as  the^above  mentioned  parts  ;  and  there  will  again  be  the 
same  inquiry  concerning  these,  viz.  whether  in  these  also  there  is  something 
common,  or  nothing;  since  if  there  is  nothing  common,  we  shall  place 
the  many  separate  from  the  one. 

Let  us  however  consider  the  whole ;  for  every  body  is  a  whole,  and  has 
parts.  What  therefore  will  that  be  which  is  connective  of  the  parts,  since 
they  are  many  ?  For  it  is  necessary  to  say  either  that  the  whole  is 
tmific  of  the  parts,  or  the  parts  of  the  whole,  or  that  some  third  thing 
prior  to  both,  which  is  neither  a  whole,  nor  has  any  part,  connects  and 
unites  the  whole  with  its  parts,  and  the  parts  with  the  whole.  But  if  the 
whole  indeed  is  connective  of  the  parts,  the  whole  will  be  incorporeal  and 
impartible.  For  if  it  is  a  body,  this  also  will  be  partible,  and  will  b^  in- 
digent of  a  nature  which  is  capable  of  connecting  the  parts;  and  this 
will  be  the  case  to  infinity.  But  if  the  parts  are  c6nnective  of  the  whole, 
how  can  the  many  be  connective  of  the  one  ;  and  things  divided,  of  that 
which  consists  from  them?  For  on  the  contrary,  it  is  necessary  tliat  the 
one  should  have  the  power  of  uniting  the  many^  and  not  the  many  of  uni-? 
ting  the  one.  And  if  that  which  connects  both,  is  neither  a  whole  nor 
has  parts,  it  will  be  perfectly  impartible.  But  being  impartible,  itis  also 
necessarily  without  interval.  For  every  thing  which  has  interval  has 
parts,  and  is  divisible.  But  being  witibout  interval  it  is  incorporeal ; 
for  every  body  possesses  interval.    . 

Farther'still,  it  is  necessary  that  the  principle  should  be  perpetual ;  for 
every  being  is  perpetual  or  corruptible.  Hence  it  must  be  admitted  that  th^ 
principlet:of  Jbejipgs  is  perpetual  or  corruptible.  But  if  we  should  grant;  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  n.  OF  PLATO.  103 

this  may  be  corrupted,  there  will  be  no  being/incorruptible.  For  the  princi- 
ple being  destroyed,  it  will  neither  be  itself  generated  from  any  thing,  not 
will  another  thing  be  generated  from  it.  For  it  can  neither  be  able  to  ge^ 
nerate  itself  (since  it  is  not,  if  it  is  not  perpetual)  nor  can  another 
thing  be  able  to  generate  it,  if  it  is  the  principle  of  all  things.  But  if  it 
is  incorruptible,  it  will  have  the  power  of  not  being  corrupted,  and  this 
power  will  be  infinite,  in  order  that  it  may  exist  to  infinity  through  the 
whole  of  time.  For  every  finite  power  of  existence  pertains  naturally  to 
that  which  is  Corruptible.  But  an  infinite  power  pertains  to  perpetual 
natures,  the  existence  of  which  continues  to  infinity.  This  infinite  there- 
fore, I  mean  the  infinite  according  to  power,  is  either  impartible  or  partible* 
But  if  it  is  partible  indeed,  there  will  be  the  infinite  in  a  finite  body.  For 
the  principle  is  finite  ;  since  if  it  t^ere  infinite,  there  will  be  nothing  else 
besides  itself.  But  if  it  is  impartible,  the  power  of  infinitely  existing 
will  be  incorporeal.  And  the  principle  of  beings  is  incorporeal,'  so  far 
as  it  is  this  power  through  which  the  subject  of  it  always  is.  That  it  is 
impossible  therefore^  the  principle  of  beings  can  be  corporeal  is  from  these 
things  evident. 

If  however  it  is  incorporeal,  it  must  either  be  separate,  or  inseparable 
from  bodies.  But  if  inseparable  indeed,  it  will  have  all  its  energies  in 
bodies,  and  subsisting  about  them.  For  that  is  inseparable  from  body 
which  is  not  any  where  naturally  adapted  to  energize  except  in  and  with 
bodies.  But  if  the  principle  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  it  is  evidently  ne-^ 
cessary  that  none  of  the  things  which  subsist  according  to  it  should  be 
more  powerful,  or  possess  greater  authority  than  the  principle  of  all  beings. 
If  however,  nothing  is  more  excellent  in  bodies  than  the  power  which 
subsists  in  and  energizes  about  bodies,  and  a  corporeal  essence,  there  will 
not  any  where  be  intellect  and  the  power  which  energizes  according  to  in^* 
tellect.  For  every  such  like  motion  [i*  e.  energy]  proceeds  from  a  power, 
which  is  entirely  in  its  energies  independent  of  body.  But  it  neither  was, 
nor  is  lawful  for  generated  natures  to  surpass  the  power  of  their  causes. 
For  every  thing  which  is  in  the  things  begotten  is  from  primary  natures^ 

*  The  wonU  mow^iMros  mti  are  omitted  ia  the  original. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


t04  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  fiOOTt  M. 

and  the  latter  are  the  lords  of  the  essence  of  the  former.  If  therefore, 
the  principle  of  beings  is  able  to  generate  intellect  and  wisdom,  how  is  it 
possible  it  should  not  generate  it,  oii  account  of  and  in  itself  ?  For 
one  of  .two  things  is  necessary,  either  that  intellectual  perception  per- 
tains in  no  respect  to  beings,  or  that  it  is  inferior  to  them ;  and  that  if 
it  exists  it  acts  in  bodies  only.  These  things  however,  it  is  impossible 
to  assert.  But  if  that  which  is  the  first  of  beings,  and  which  is  the  pria* 
ciple  of  all  things  is  separate  from  bodies,  it  is  perfectly  necessary  to  ad* 
mit  that  it  is  either  immoveable  or  moved.  And  if  indeed  it  is  moved, 
there  will  be  something  dse  prior  to  it,  about  which  it  is  moved.  For 
every  thing  which  is  moved,  is  naturally  adapted  to  be  moved  about  some- 
thing else  which  is  permanent.  And  farther  still,  besides  this,  it  is  moved 
through  desire  of  another  thing.  For  it  is  necessary  indeed  that  it  should 
be  moved  in  consequence  of  desiring  a  certain  thing ;  because  motion 
itself  by  itself  b  indefinite.  But  the  end  of  it  is  that  for  the  sake  of  which 
it  subsists.  It  desires  however,  either  something  else,  or  itself.  But  every 
thing  which  desires  itself  is  immoveable.  For  why  should  any  thing  that 
is  present  with  itself  want  to  be  in  another  thing?  For  of  things  which 
are  moved,  the  motion  of  that  is  less  4o  which  the  good  is  nearer,  but  the 
motion  is  greater  of  that  to  which  the  good  is  more  remote.  But  that 
which  possesses  good  in  itself  and  for  the  sake  of  which  it  subsists,  will 
be  immoveable  and  stable ;  since  being  always  in  itself,  it  is  in  good. 
That  however  which  is  in  itself  is  in  same;  for  each  thing  is  the  same 
with  itself.  But  of  that  which  is  in  itself  we  say  indeed  that  it  stands 
still  and  is  immoveable;  while  that  which  is  not  immoveable,  is  not  in 
itself  but  in  another^  is  moved  towards  another  thing,  and  is  perfectly  in* 
digent  of  good.  .  LF  therefore  the  principle  of  beings  is  moved,  but  every 
thing  which  is  moved  is  moved  through  the  want  of  good,  and  towards 
another  thing  which  is  the  object  of  desire  to  it,  there  will  be  something 
else  which  is  desirable  to  the  principle  of  beings  besides  itself,  and  about 
which  possessing  a  sameness  of  subsistence,  we  must  say  it  is  moved. 
This  however  is  ieipossible.  For  the  principle  is  that  for  the  sake  of  which 
^1  things  subsist,  which  all  things  desire,  and  which  is  indigent  of  nothing. 
For  if  it  were  in  want  of  something,  it  would  be  entirely  subordinate  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  II.  OF  PLATO.  jo5 

that  of  which  it  is  iq  want,  and  to  which  its  energy  is  directed  as  the  ob- 
ject  of  desire.  But  if  the  principle  is  immoveable  (for  this  is  what  re- 
mains,)  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  be  one  incorporeal  essence,  possessing 
an  eternal  sameness  of  subsistence.  After  what  manner,  however,  does  it 
possess  the  one  ?  And  how  is  it  one  essence  I  For  if  essence  and  the  one 
are  the  same,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  principle  of  beings  is  essence. 
But  if  essence  is  different  from  the  one^  it  must  be  granted  that  to  be  the 
one  is  not  the  same  thing  as  to  be  essence.  And  if,  indeed,  essence  is 
better  than  the  one,  according  to  this  it  must  be  said  to  be  with  the  prin- 
ciple. But  if  the  one  is  better  than  essence  and  beyond  it,  th^  one  is  also 
the  principle  of  essence.  And  if  they  are  co*ordinate  to  each  other,  the 
many  will  be  prior  to  the  one^  This,  however,  is  impossible  as  we  have 
before  demonstrated.  It  is  evident,  indeed,  that  essence  is  not  the  same 
as  the  one.  For  it  is  not  one  and  the  same  thing  to  say  one,  and  that  es- 
sence is  one ;  but  the  former  is  not  yet  a  sentence,  and  the  latter  is.  To 
which  may  be  added,  that  if  essence  and  the  one  are  the  same,  multitude 
will  be  the  same  as  that  which  has  no  existence^  and  which  is  not  essence. 
This,  however,  is  impossible.  For  in  essence  the  many  are  contained^ 
and  in  that  which  is  not  essence  is  the  one.  But  if  essence  and  the  one 
are  not  the  same,  they  will  not  be  co-ordinate  to  each  other ;  for  if  they 
were  co-ordinate  there  will  be  some  other  thing  prior  to  them,  if  it  is  ne^ 
cessary  that  all  things  should  subsist  from  one  principle.  And  if  one' of 
these  is  better  than  the  other,  either  the  one  is  prior  to  essence,  or  essence 
is  prior  to  the  one.  But  if  the  one  indeed  is  prior  to  essence,  this  and  not 
essence  is  the  principle  of  all  things.  For  it  is  necessary  that  nothing 
should  be  better  than  the  principle.  And  if  essence  is  prior  to  the  one^ 
the  one  will  be  passive  to  essence,  and  not  essence  to  the  one.  But  iSthe 
one  is  passive  to  essence,  it  is  necessary  that  the  one  and  essence  should  be 
every  thing,  and  that  all  such  things  as  are  one  should  be  essence,  but  not 
that  all  such  things  as  are  essence  should  be  one.  There  will,  therefore, 
be  a  certain  essence  deprived  of  the  one.    If,  however,  this  be  the  case,  it 

'  For  essence  and  the  one  being  two  things  will  participate  of  the  manjf,  i.  e.  of  the  first  manjr, 
ox  two. 

Froc.  Vot.  I.  0 


Digitized  by 


Google 


IQQ  ON  THE  THEOIjOGY  BOOK  II. 

wffl  be  nothing.    For  that  which^s  deprived  of  the  me  is  nothing.  Hence 
the  one  is  prior  to  essence. 

But  if  that  which  is  first  is  something  which^  is  not  essence,  it  is  absurd 
to  assert  that  it  is  subordinate  to  essence.   For  the  principle  is  that  which 
has  the  greatest  power  and  the  most  absolute  authority,  and  is  most  suiSi* 
cient  to  itself^  and  is  not  that  which  is  most  ignoble,  and  indigent  of  the 
many.    And,  in  short,  it  is  necessary  that  no  secondary  nature  should  be 
better  than  the  principle ;  for  it  is  requisite  that  beings  should  not  be 
goremed  badly.     But  if,  indeed,  the  principle  has  an  order  subordinate  to 
the  things  which  proceed  from  it,  and  the  things  proceeding  from  it  are 
better  than  it,  all  things  will  be  badly  confounded,  nor  will  the  principle 
according  to  nature  be  any  thing  else  than  something  which  is  not  the 
most  excellent  of  things,  nor  will  things  which  proceed  from  the  principW 
|K>ssess  from  it  a  power  of  ruling  over  their  principle.    The  principle  of 
beings,  therefore,  will  indeed  be  fortuitous,  and  also  the  beings  which  arc 
its  progeny.     But  this  is  impossible.     For  things  which  are  fortuitous  (if 
to  have  a  fortuitous  subsistence  is  this,  not  to  exist  according  to  intellect, 
nor  with  a  view  to  a  definite  end)  are  disorderly,  infinite,  and  indefinite, 
and  are  all  of  them  things  which  have  a  less  frequency  of  subsistence.  But 
the  principle  is  invariably  principle,  and  other  things  proceed  from  it-    If 
however,  that  which  is  not  essence  is  better  than  all  essence,  it  will  either 
be  participated  by  it,  or  it  will  be  entirely  iraparticipable.     If,  however, 
^sence  participates  of  the  principle,  of  what  will  it  be  the  principle  ?  And 
how  will  it  be  the  principle  of  all  beings  ?    For  it  is  necessary  that  the 
principle  of  beings  should  be  no  one  of  beings ;  since  if  it  were  any  one 
of  them,  it  is  necessarily  not  the  principle  of  all  beings.     But  every  thing 
which  is  participated  by  another  thing  is  said  to  be  that  by  which  it  is 
participated,  and  in  which  it  primarily  is.    The  principle,  however,  is  se- 
parate, and  belongs  in  a  greater  degree  to  itself  than  to  other  things.     Be- 
sides, every  thing  which  is  participated  proceeds  from  another  more  ex- 
cellent cause;  since  that  which  is  imparticipable  is  better  than  that  which 
is  participable.    It  is  not,  however,  possible  to  conceive  any  thing  better 
than  that  which  is^  most  excellent,  and  which  we  call  the  principle.    For 
it  is  not  lawful  to  asswRrt  that  things  secondary  to  the  principle,  and  which 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  111.  OF  PLATO,     v  107 

proceed  from  it,  are  in  any  respect  better  than  their  principle.  The  cause 
therefore  of  all  beings  is  above  all  essence,  is  separate  from  every  essence, 
and  is  neither  essence,  nor  has  essence  as  an  addition  to  its  nature.  For 
such  an  addition  as  this  is  a  diminution  of  simplicity,  and  of  that  which  is 
one. 


CHAPTER  III. 


See,  therefore,  the  third  argument  after  these,  leading  us  to  the  same 
conclusion  with  the  former  arguments.  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  cause 
of  all  beings  should  be  that  of  which  all  beings  participate,  to  which  they 
refer  the  subsistence  of  themselves,  and  which  separates  itself  from  nothing 
that  in  any  respect  whatever  is  said  to  have  an  existence.  For  this  alone 
is  the  object  of  desire  to  beings,  which  primarily,  or  in  some  other  way,  is 
itself  the  cause  of  their  subsistence.  And  it  is  necessary  that  every  thing 
which  is  produced  with  reference  to,  and  on  account  of  it,  should  have  a 
certain  habitude  with  relation  to  it,  and  through  this  also,  a  similitude  to 
it.  For  every  habitude  of  one  thing  towards  another,  is  predicated  in  a 
two-fold  respect,  either  from  both  participating  of  one  thing,  which  affords 
to  the  participants  a  communion  with  each  other ;  or  from  one  of  them 
participating  of  the  other;  of  which,  indeed,  the  one  as  being  more  excel* 
lent,  imparts  something  to  that  which  is  subordinate  to  itself;  but  the 
other,  as  being  inferior,  is  assimilated  to  the  more  excellent  nature,  so  far 
as  it  participates  of  it.  Hence  it  is  necessary,  if  all  sensible  natures  pos- 
sess a  habitude  to  that  which  is  first,  aspire  afler,  and  subsist  about  it, 
either  that  there  should  be  a  certain  third  thing  the  cause  of  the  habitude, 
or  that  the  principle  should  impart  to  the  natures  posterior  to  itself,  a 
tendency  to  itself,  and  that  desire,  through  which  every  thing  is  preserved, 
and  exists.  Nothing  else,  however,  is  more  excellent  than  that  which  is 
first    Hence,  the  habitude  of  beings,  their  existence,  and  their  tendency 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOS  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  H. 

to  the  first,  are  derived  from  thence.  And  all  things  participate  of  tlie 
principle  of  themselves,  if  it  is  necessary  that  this  which  is  participated, 
should  from  thence  become  apparent  in  all  beings,  since  it  is  tlie  principle 
of  all  things,  and  deserts  no  being  whatever.  What,  therefore,  will  this 
nature  be,  which  is  every  where,  and  in  all  beings  ?  Is  it  life  and  motion  ? 
But  there  are  indeed  many  things  which  are  deprived  of  these.  Is,  there- 
fore, permanency  every  where,  and  in  all  things  ?  But  neither  is  this  true* 
For  motion,  so  far  as  it  is  motion,  will  not  participate  of  permanency.  Is 
much-honoured  intellect,  therefore,  so  far  as  it  is  intellect,  participated  by 
all  beings."^  But  this  also  is  impossible.  For  all  beings  would  have  inteU 
lectual  perception,  and  no  being  would  be  deprived  of  intellect. 

Shall  we  say,  therefore,  that  being  itself  and  essence  are  participated  by 
all  things  that  in  any  respect  whatever  have  a  subsistence  ?  But  how  is 
this  possible  ?  For  that  which  is  in  generation,  or  passing  into  existence, 
is  said  to  be,  and  is  destitute  of  essence.  Nor  must  we  wonder,  if  it  also^ 
since  it  ranks  among  beings,  should  now  participate  of  essence.  For  so 
far  as  it  is  in  generation,  it  is  not;  but  it  ends  in  existence  and  essence  xthen 
it  is  now  actually  generated,  and  is  no  longer  rising  into  existence.  All 
things,  therefore,  that  have  in  any  respect  whatever  a  subsistence,  do  not 
participate  of  essence.  What  then  will  that  be  which  is  every  where  and 
by  all  things  participated  ?  Let  us  consider  every  being,  and  see  what 
that  is  to  which  all  beings  are  passive,  apd  what  it  is  which  is  common  in 
all  of  them,  as  in  essence,  sameness,  difference,  permanency,  and  motion. 
Can  we  say,  therefore,  that  each  of  these  is  any  thing  else  than  one  thing, 
and  not  only  separately,  but  this  is  also  the  case  with  the  things  which 
subsist  from  them ;  and  in  short,  it  is  not  possible  in  a  certain  respect  to 
speak  otherwise  of  all  things,  than  this,  that  all  things,  and  each  thing  is 
one.  For  if  any  thing  should  be  deprived  of  the  one,  though  you  should 
speak  of  parts,  or  of  beings,  immediately,  that  which  becomes  destitute  of 
the  one,  will  be  altogether  nothing.  Or  with  what  intention  do  we  say 
that  a  thing  which  is  not  is  perfectly  nothing,  [or  not  even  one  thing]  un- 
less the  one  is  the  last  thing  which  deserts  beings  ?  This  it  is,  therefore, 
to  become  that  which  in  no  respect  is,  and  to  be  perfectly  deprived  of  the 
one.    For  it  is  possible  for  that  which  is  not  moved  to  be,  and  for  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  III.  OF  PLATO.  109 

ifhich  has  no  being  to  have  an  hyparxis ;  but  that  which  is  not  even  one 
thing,  and  which  is  destitute  of  the  one  itself^  will  be  entirely  nothing. 
Hence  the  one  is* present  with  all  beings;  and  though  you  should  speak  of 
multitude  itself,  it  is  necessary  that  tliis  also  should  participate  of  the  one; 
for  if  it  does  not  become  one  thing,  it  is  not  possible  for  it  to  subsist. 
And  if  even  you  divide  the  whole  to  infinity,  immediately  nothing  else 
than  one  occurs.  For  either  that  which  is  divided  does  not  subsist,  or  be- 
coming to  be,  or  subsisting  something  else,  it  will  be  immediately  one/ 
The  one^  therefore,  which  is  every' where  apparent,  and  is  in  all  beings, 
and  which  deserts  no  being  whatever,  is  either  derived  from  the  one  which 
is  simply  one,  or  from  that  which  is  more  excellent  than  the  one.  For  it 
is  not  possible  for  the  one  to  be  otherwise  passive,  [i.  e.  to  be  consubsistent 
with  something  else]  than  from  the  first  one,  to  which  the  one  is  no  longer 
present,  but  which  is  the  one  itself^  or  nothing  else  thati  one. 

Again,  therefore,  from  another  principle  we  may  arrive  at  the  same  con- 
clusion, by  speaking  as  follows :  It  is  necessary  either  that  the  causes  of 
beings  and  things  caused  should  proceed  to  infinity,  and  that  there  should 
be  nothing  fii^st  or  last  in  beings  ;  or  that  there  should  be  n/o  first,  but  that 
there  should  be  the  last  of  things,  infinity  existing  in  one  part  only.  Or 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  necessary  that  beings  should  proceed  to  infinity  from 
a  definite  principle,  or  that  there  should  be  a  certain  first  and  last,  and  a 
boundary  of  beings  each  way.  And  if  there  are  boundaries  of  beings, 
things  either  proceed  from  each  other,  and  the  generation  of  beings  is  in  a 
circle ;  or  if  they  are  not  from  each  other,  either  one  of  them  is  from  an- 
other, or  the  first  indeed  is  one,  but  the  last  not  one,  or  the  contrary,  or 
both  are  one,  or  each  is  not  one.  If,  therefore,  first  things,  and  the  causes 
of  beings  are  infinite,  each  thing  will  consist  of  infinites.  For  that  which 
proceeds  from  a  certain  principle,  must  necessarily  participate  of  that 
principle  from  which  it  proceeds.  But  that  which  derives  its  subsistence 
from  many  causes,  will  be  in  its  own  nature  multiform,  as  participating  of 
many  powers.  And  that  which  is  produced  from  infinites  prior  to  itself, 
will  have  infinite  peculiarities  derived  from  the  principles,  and  adapted  to 

'  FcMT  oy  it  is  necessary  to  read  ev. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


110  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  H. 

itself.  Every  being,  therefore,  being  infinite,  and  consisting  of  infinites, 
will  render  all  things  infinitely  infinite,  and  there  will  neither  be  a  know- 
ledge of  any  being,  nor  any  evolution  of  powers.  For  the  power  of  the 
infinite  is  perfectly  unknown,  and  incomprehensible,  by  those  natures  to 
whom  it  is  infinite. 

But  if  things  are  infinite  in  a  descending  progression,  whether  is  each 
of  them  infinite  always  proceeding  most  downward,  in  the  same  manner 
as  we  say  all  things  do,  or  is  each  whole  indeed  finite,  but  the  beings 
which  are  produced  from  these  are  infinite.^  For  if  every  being  according 
to  the  beginning  of  itself  is  definite,  but  according  to  its  end  is  infinite, 
there  will  neither  be  in  parts  nor  in  wholes,  a  conversion  of  beings  to  their 
proper  principle,  nor  will  that  which  is  second  in  order  ever  have  a  sub- 
sistence so  as  to  be  assimilated  to  the  extremity  of  a  pre-existent  order; 
though  as  we  frequently  say,  the  sunoimits  of  inferiors  are  conjoined  with 
the  boundaries  of  superiors.  For  where  there  is  no  last,  by  what  contriv- 
ance can  such  a  similitude  of  progression  as  this,  and  such  a  mutual  cohe- 
rence of  beings  be  left,  according  to  which  secondary  things  are  always 
conjoined  to  the  natures  prior  to  them  ?  But  if  all  things  alone  ha^'e  an 
infinity  of  this  kind,  each  being  bounded  by  that  which  is  posterior  to  it- 
self, wholes  will  be  subordinate  to  parts,  and  the  parts  of  beings  will  Be 
naturally  more  perfect  [than  wholes.]  For  wholes,  indeed,  will  be  without 
conversion  to  the  principle  prior  to  themselves ;  but  parts  will  be  con- 
verted to  it  after  their  progression.  By  how  much  the  more,  however, 
every  being  hastens  to  conjunction  with  that  which  is  more  perfect  than 
itself,  by  so  much  the  more  must  it  necessarily  excel,  as  it  appears  to  me. 
And  if  this  whole  proceeding  to  infinity  is  not  convolved  to  the  summit  of 
itself,  and  circularly  converted  and  perfected  according  to  such  a  conver- 
sion [it  will  not  desire  its  proper  good.]  If,  however,  we  admit  that  there 
is  an  infinity  both  ways  these  things  must  necessarily  happen. 

In  addition  to  these-  things,  also,  there  will  be  no  common  object  of 
desire  to  all  beings,. nor  any  union  nor  sympathy  of  them.  For  things 
which  are  perfectly  infinite  have  not  that  which  is  first  in  them  ;  but  not 
having  a  first,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  say  what  is  the  common  end  of 
beings,  and  why  some  things  are  more  excellent,  but  others  are  allotted  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  m.  OFPLATa  m 

subordinate  nature.  For  we  call  one  thing  better  and  another  less  excel* 
lent,  from  proximity  to  that  which  is  best,  just  as  we  define  the  more  and 
the  less  hot  from  communion  with  that  which  is  hot  in  the  first  degree. 
And  in  short,  we  form  a  judgment  of  the  more  and  the  less  from  a  refer* 
ence  to  that  which  is  a  maximum.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  the 
boundary  in  beings  should  be  that  which  is  first  and  that  which  is  last. 

But  if,  indeed,  these  are  from  each  other,  the  same  thing  will  be  oIde!r 
and  younger,  cause  and  at  the  same  time  the  thing  caused,  and  each  thing 
will  be  first  and  last.  For  it  makes  no  difference,  whether  these  are  from 
each  other,  or  the  things  which  subsist  between  these.  For  the  extremes 
being  indifferent,  how  is  it  possible  that  a  mutation  according  to  essence 
should  intervene  ?  But  if  the  one  is  from  the  other,  whether  is  the  first 
derived  from  the  last,  as  some  say,  who  generate  things  more  excellent 
from  things  subordinate,  and  things  more  perfect  from  such  as  are  more 
imperfect.^  In  this  case,  however,  must  not  that  which  is  allotted  the 
power  of  generating  and  producing  the  perfect,  by  a  much  greater  priority 
perfect  and  adorn  itself  by  its  present  power  ?  And  how  is  it  possibk^ 
that  leaving  itself  to  be  of  an  inferior  allotment  it  should  definitely  assign 
a  more  excellent  order  to  another  thing?  For  eyery  thing  aspires  after  its 
proper  perfection,  and  simply  desires  good ;  though  not  every  thing  is 
able  to  participate  of  a  thing  of  this  kind.  If,  tlierefore,  it  has  the  power 
of  producing  this  most  perfect  thing,  that  which  is  last  will  energize  on 
account  of  itself  prior  to  other  things,  and  the  whole  of  good,  and  all  per- 
fection, will  be  first  established  in  itself. 

But  if  that  which  is  last  is  produced  from  that  which  is  first,  and  the 
most  imperfect  from  that  which  is  most  perfect,  whether,  is  each  of  them 
one,  or  is  this  one,  but  that  not  one  ?  If,  however,  that  which  is  first,  or 
that  which  is  last,  is  not  one,  neither  of  them  will  be  first  or  last.  For,  as 
there  will  be  multitiide  in  each,  each  of  them  will  have  the  better  and  the 
worse  ;  and  neither  will  that  which  is  best  be  unmingled  with  that  which 
is  inferior  to  it,  nor  that  which  is  the  most  c^bscure  of  all  things  according 
to  being,  have  so  great  a  subjection  entirely  deprived  of  a  more  perfect 
nature;  but  there  will  be  something  more  extreme  than  that  which  is  last, 
and  something  more  perfect  than  that  which  is  first.    For  every  where. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


112  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  11. 

that  which  is  best  if  it  receives  another  addition  through  that  which  is  in- 
ferior will  be  more  perfect  than  that  which  does  not  abide  in  the  best, 
[through  not  receiving  this  very  addition.]  Ifj  therefore,  we  rightly  assert 
these  things,  the  one  is  the  principle  of  ail  things,  and  the  last  of  beings  is 
one.  For  it  is  necessary,  I  think,  that  the  end  of  the  progression  of  beings 
should  be  assimilated  to  the  principle,  and  that  as  far  as  to  this,  the  power 
of  the  first  should  proceed. 

Summarily,  therefore,  recapitulating  what  we  have  said,  it  is  necessary 
either  that  the  first  principle  should  be  one,  or  that  there  should  be  alone 
many  *  first  principles,  or  one  containing  multitude  in  itself,  or  many  par- 
ticipating of  one.  But  if  there  are  many  first  principles  only,  there  will 
not  be  one  thing  from  them.  For  what  will  make  one  and  a  whole,  if 
there  are  many  principles,  and  there  is  nothing  which  produces  one  ?  For 
it  is  certainly  necessary  that  things  posterior  to  the  principles  should  be 
assimilated  to  them.  Either,  therefore,  there  will  not  be  the  one  in  any 
being,  or  it  will  not  be  from  these  principles ;  so  that  each  of  the  things 
which  in  any  respect  whatever  have  a  subsistence  will  be  divided  multi- 
tude alone.  And  again  each  of  the  parts  of  any  being  will  be  a  thing  of 
this  kind,  and  we  shall  in  no  way  whatever  stop,  dividing  into  minute 
parts  essence  and  existence.  For  all  things  will  be  many,  and  the  one 
yrHl  be  no  where  in  the  universality  of  things,  nor  will  either  wholes  or 
parts  be  apparent- 

^ut  if  it  is  necessary,  indeed,  that  there  should  be  many  principles,  and 
that  they  should  participate  of  the  one^  the  one  will  be  co-ordinated  in  the 
many.  Again,  however,  it  is  necessary,  that  the  unco-ordinated  should 
every  where  be  more  ancient  than  the  co-ordinated,  and  the  exempt  than 
the  participated.  Yov  how  is  the  one  in  each  of  the  many  except  from 
one  principle  which  co-arranges  the  multitude,  and  converts  it  to  itself  ac- 
cording to  the  communion  of  the  one  f  Again,  if  the  first  one  were  multi- 
plied, the  one  will  be  passive ;  for  at  the  same  time  it  will  be  one  and  not 
one,  and  will  not  be  that  which  is  one  [only.]  It  is  necessary,  however, 
in  each  genus  of  things,  that  there  should  be  that  which  is  unmingled  with 

'  viz.  which  are  multitude  only  without  any  participation  of  the  one. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IV.  OF  PLATO.  113 

an  inferior  nature,  in  order  that  there  may  be  that  which  ia  mingled,  in 
the  iaame  manner  as  we  say  respecting  forms.  For  from  the  equal  itself, 
things  which  are  equal  in  these  sublunary  realms,  appear  indeed  as  equal, 
though  they  are  filled  with  a  contrary  nature ;  and  from  that  which  is 
primarily  being,  that  which  is  mingled  with  non-being  is  derived,  and 
which  presents  itself  to  the  view  as  being.  And  in  short  every  where  the 
simple  unmingled  subsistence  of  each  thing  precedes  those  things  which 
through  remission  are  mingled  with  the  privations  of  themselv^.  The  one 
therefore  is  by  itself  exempt  from  all  multitude ;  and  that  which  is  one, 
and  at  the  same  thne  not  one,  is  not  the  first  one,  but  is  suspended '  from 
that  which  is  primarily  one ;  through  the  principle,  indeed,  participating 
of  the  one^  but  through  the  diminution  arising  from  multitude,  now  mani« 
iestly  exhibiting  in  itself  the  cause  of  separation. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

That  ihe  one  therefore  is  the  principle  of  all  things,  and  the  first  cause, 
and  that  all  other  things  are  posterior  to  the  one^  is  I  think  evident  from 
what  has  been  said.  I  am  astonished  however  at  all  the  other  interpre- 
ters of  Plato,  who  admit  the  existence  of  the  intellectual  kingdom,  but  do 
not  venerate  the  ineffable  transcendency  of  the  one^  and  its  hyparxis 
which  surpasses  the.  whole  of  things.  I  particularly,  however,  wonder 
that  this  should  have  been  the  case  with  Origen,  who  was  a  partaker  of 
Ithe  same  erudition  with  Plotinus.  For  Origen  ends  in  intellect  and 
the  first  being,  but  omits  the  one  which  is  beyond  every  intell^t  and  every 
being.  And  if  indeed  he  omits  it,  as  something  which  is  better  than  all 
jknowledge,  language  and  intellectual  perception,  we  must  say  that  he  is 
neither  discordant  with  Plato,  nqr  witih  the  nature  of  things,     But  if  he 

*  For  i^nf^eu  it  U  necessary  to  read  i^fifyrrreu,    The  punctuation  also  of  the  text  in  this  place^ 

pu9t  be  altered  agreeably  to  the  translation. 

T>  __  -17^,    T  n 


Proa.  Vol.  I, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


114  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  If. 

omits  it  because  the  one  is  perfectly  unhyparctic,  and  without  any  sub* 
sistence,  and  because  intellect  is  the  best  of  things,  and  that  which  is 
primarily  being  is  the  same  as  that  which  is  primarily  one,  we  cannot  as* 
sent  to  him  in  asserting  these  things,  nor  will  Plato  admit  him,  and  con* 
numerate  him  with  his  familiars.  For  I  think  that  a  dogma  of  this  kind 
is  remote  from  the  philosophy  of  Plato,  and  is  full  of  Peripatetic  innova* 
tion.  If  you  are  willing,  however,  we  will  adduce  some  arguments  against 
this  dogma,  and  against  all  others  who  are  the  patrons  of  this  opinion,  and 
we  will  strenuously  contend  for  the  doctrine  of  Plato,  and  show  that  ac- 
cording to  him  the  first  cause  is  beyond  intellect,  and  is  exempt  from  all 
beings,  as  Plotinus  and  Porphyry,  and  all  those  who  have  received  the 
philosophy  of  these  men,  conceive  him  to  assert 

We  shall  begin,  therefore,  from  the  Republic ;  for  here  Socrates  clearly 
shows  that  the  good  is  established  above  being,  and  the  whole  intellectual 
order,  following  the  analogy  of  the  first  goodness  to  the  sun.  For  if,  as 
the  sovereign  sun  is  to  generation,  to  every  thing  visible,  and  to  all  visive 
natures  according  to  the  power  generative  of  light,  so  it  is  necessary  fke 
good  should  be  with  reference  to  intellect  and  intelligibles,  according  to  a 
cause  productive  of  truth,— ^if  this  be  the  case,  we  must  say  that  the  sun  is 
exempt  at  one  and  the  same  time  from  visive  and  visible  natures,  and 
ffiust  admit  that  the  good  transcends  the  natures  which  are  always  inteU 
lective,  and  also  those  which  are  eternally  intelligible.  It  is  better,  how- 
ever, to  hear  the  Platonic  words  themselves:  "  You  may  say  that  the  sun 
not  only  imparts  the  power  of  being  seen  to  visible  natures,  but  also  that 
he  is  the  cause  of  their  generation,  increase,  and  nutriment,  not  being  him* 
self  generation.  Certainly.  We  may  say,  therefore,  that  things  which  are 
known,  have  not  only  this  from  the  good  that  they  are  known,  but  like- 
wise that  their  being  and  essence  are  thence  derived,  whilst  the  good  itself 
is  not  essence,  but  beyond  essence,  transcending  it  both  in  dignity  and  in 
power."  Through  all  these  things,  therefore,  it  is  evident  how  the  good 
and  the  first  principle  are  defined  by  Plato  to  be  expanded  above  not  only 
the  intellectual,  but  also  the  intelligible  extent,  and  essence  itself,  accord- 
ing to  union,  in  the  same  manner  as  it  is  inferred  the  sun  surpasses  all 
Visible  natures,  and  perfects  and  generates  all  things  by  his  light.     How, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IV.  OF  PLATO.  ij^ 

tiierefore,  following  Plato,  can  we  admit  that  intellect  is  the  best  of  things, 
and  the  cause  of  all  things?  How  can  we  assert  that  being  itself  and 
essence  are  the  same  with  the  principle  which  is  the  leader  of  all  the  di- 
vine progressions  ?  For  essence  and  intellect  are  said  to  subsist  primarily 
from  the  goodj  to  have  their  hyparxis  about  the  good^  to  be  filled  with  the 
light  of  truth  proceeding  from  thence,  and  to  obtain  the  participation 
which  is  adapted  to  them  from  the  union  of  this  light,  which  is  more  di- 
vine than  intellect  itself  and  essence,  as  being  primarily  suspended  from 
the  goody  and  affording  in  beings  a  similitude  to  that  which  is  first.  For 
the  light  which  is  emitted  from  the  sun  causes  every  thing  visible  to  be 
solar-form.  And  the  participation  of  the  light  of  truth  renders  that  which 
is  intelligible  boniform  and  divine.  Intellect,  therefore,  is  a  god  through 
a  li^t  which  is  more  ancient  than  intellectual  light  and  intellect  itself, 
and  that  which  is  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  participates 
of  a  divine  hyparxis  through  a  plenitude  of  this  light  being  appropriately 
imparted  to  it/  And  in  short,  every  divine  nature  is  that  which  it  is  said 
to  be,  on  account  of  this  light,  and  is  through  it  united  to  the  cause  of  all 
beings.  By  no  means,  therefore,  is  the  first  good  to  be  considered  as  the 
same  with  intellect,  nor  must  it  be  adniitted  that  the  intelligible  is  more 
ancient  than  all  the  hyparxis  of  the  whole  of  things,  since  it  is  even  sub- 
ordinate to  the  light  proceeding  from  the  good,  and  being  perfected  by 
this  light,  is  conjoined  according  to  its  own  order  with  the  good  itself.  For 
we  must  not  say  that  the  intelligible  is  united  to  the  first  after  the  same 
manner  as  the  light  [of  truth ;]  but  the  latter  through  continuity  with  the 
good  is  established  in  it  without  a  medium ;  while  the  former,  through  this 
light,  participates  of  a  vicinity  to  the  good ;  since  in  sensibles  also,  the 
sdar  light  is  primarily  connascent  with  the  circulation  of  tbesuuj  ascends 
as  hx  as  to  the  centre  of  the  whole  sphere,  and  subsists  on  all  sides  about 
it.  But  all  sensible  natures  through  this  obtain  a  similitude  to  the  sun, 
each  of  them  according  to  its  own  nature  being  filled  with  solar-form  illu- 
mination.   These  things,  therefore,  will  be  sufiicient  to  recall  into  tho 

*  For  euno  TO  tv  it  is  necessary  to  read  cuno  ro  ov. 

*  This  sentence  is  very  er^roneous  in  the  original,  as  will  be  eTi4ent  from  comparing  it  with  the 
^|)p}re  trauslationt 


Digitized  by 


Google 


110  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IL 

inemory  of  those  who  love  the  contemplation  of  truth,  the  conceptions  of 
Plato  on  this  subject,  and  to  evince  that  the  order  of  intellect  is  secondary 
to  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the  one. 

If,  however,  it  is  requisite  to  evince  the  same  thing  through  many  testi- 
monies, let  US  survey  what  the  Elean  guest  in  the  Sophista  determines 
concerning  these  things.  He  says,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  that  the  mul- 
titude of  all  beings,  whether  they  are  contraries  or  not,  shoiild  be  sus- 
pended from  the  one  being,  [i.  e.  from  being  characterized  by  the  one;] 
but  that  the  one  being  itself  should  be  suspended  from  the  one.  For  when 
we  call  the  hot  or  the  cold,  or  permanency  or  motion,  being,  we  do  not 
denominate  each  of  these  as  the  same  with  being  itself.  For  if  perma- 
nency were  being  itself,  motion  would  not  be  being ;  or,  if  motion  were 
such  like  being,  permanency  would  not  participate  of  the  appellation  of 
being.  But  it  is  evident  that  being  accedes  to  permanency,  to  motion, 
and  to  every  multitude  of  beings  from  one  thing  which  is  primarily  being.. 
This  very  thing,  therefore,  which  is  the  cause  of  essence  to  all  things,  and 
which  is  participated  by  all  other  things,  is  a  participant  of  this  one,  and 
on  this  account,  as  it  is  being  alone,  so  also  it  is  primarily  being.'  It  is, 
however,  being  itself  indeed,  and  is  not  allotted  to  be,  from  participation ; 
but  it  is  one  according  to  participation,  and  on  this  account  it  is  passive  to 
the  one.  But  it  is  being*  primarily.  If,  therefore,  Plato  gives  to  the  one 
a  subsistence  beyond  being,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  which  is  first  in 
wholes  is  supposed  by  him  to  transcend  beings,  how  is  it  possible  that 
being  should  not  he  posterior  to  the  one^  since  it  participates  of  it,  and  on 
this  account  is  denominated  one  ? 

Moreover,  Socrates  in  the  Philebus  clearly  demonstrates  the  same  thing 
to  those  who  are  able  to  know  wholes  from  parts,  viz.  that  intellect  has 
not  the  same  order  as  the  first  cause  of  all.  Investigating,  therefore,  the 
good  of  the  human  soul  and  its  end,  of  which  participating  in  every  re- 
spect suflficiently  it  will  reap  the  fruits  of  a  felicity  adapted  to  its  nature, 
he  in  the  first  place  removes  pleasure  from  an  end  of  this  kind,  and  after 
this  intellect,  because  neither  is  this  replete  with  all  the  elements  of  the 

*  For  tv  it  is  necessary  to  read  oy. 

^  Here  also  ov  must  be  substituted  for  en 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  IV.  OF  PLATO.  117 

good.  If,  therefore,  the  intellect  which  is  in  us  is  an  image  of  the  first  in- 
tellect, and  the  good  of  the  whole  of  our  life  is  not  to  be  defined  accord- 
ing to  this  alone,  is  it  not  necessary  that  in  wholes  also,  the  cause  of  good 
must  be  established  above  intellectual  perfection  ?  For  if  that  which  is 
primarily  good  subsisted  according  to  total  intellect,  in  us  also  and  all 
other  [intellectual  natures,]  self-sufficiency  and  appropriate  good  would 
be  present  through  the  participation  of  intellect.  Our  intellect,  indeed,  is 
disjoined  from  the  goody  and  is  indigent,  and  on  this  account  requires 
pleasure  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  human  perfection.  But  a  diviije 
intellect  always  participates  of  the  goody  and  on  this  account  is  divine. 
For  it  is  boniform  through  the  participation  of  good ;  but  divine,  as 
being  suspended  from  the  first  deity.  It  is  the  same  reasoning,  therefore, 
which  infers  that  the  good  is  exempt  from  the  first  intellect,  and  which 
defines  fdicity  to  consist  not  in  intelligence  only,  but  in  the  all-perfect 
presence  of  the  good.  For  the  intellectual  form  of  energy  is  itself  by  it^ 
self  defective  with  respect  to  blessedness.  And  why  is  it  requisite  to  be 
prolix  ?  For  Parmenides  teaches  us  most  clearly  the  diflFerence  of  the  one 
from  essence  and  being,  and  shows  that  the  one  is  exempt  from  all  other 
things  and  from  essence ;  for  this  he  evinces  of  the  one  at  the  end  of  the 
first  hypothesis.  But  how  is  it  possible  that  the  cause  of  essence,  and 
which  is  exempt  from  it  through  supreme  transcendency,  should  not  also 
be  beyond  the  intellectual  order?  For  intellect  is  essence.  But  if  in  in- 
tellect there  is  permanency  and  motion,  and  Parmenides  demonstrates 
that  the  one  transcends  both  these,  does  he  not  immediately  bring  us  to 
the  ineffable  cau^e  of  all  things,  which  is  prior  to  every  intellect?  -And  if 
every  intellect  is  converted  to  itself,  and  is  in  itself,  but  the  one  is  demon- 
strated to  be  neither  in  itself,  nor  in  another,  how  can  we  any  longer  con- 
sider intellect  as  the  same  with  the  first  cause  of  all  ?  In  what  respect, 
also,  will  the  one  which  is  prior  to  being  differ  from  the  one  being,  which 
is  the  subject  of  the  second  hypothesis,  if  intellect  is  the  best  of  things, 
and  the  first  principle  of  all  ?  For  the  one  being  participates  of  the  one  ; 
but  that  which  participates  is  secondary  to  that  which  is  participated* 
That  the  one^  however,  is  according  to  Plato  more  ancient  than  intellect 
and  essence,  is  through  what  has  been  said  recalled  to  our  memory. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


119  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  U. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Iir  the  next  place,  if  the  one  is  neither  intelligible  nor  intellectual,  nor 
in  short  participates  of  the  power  of  being,  let  us  survey  what  will  be  the 
modes  of  leading  us  to  it,  and  through  what  intellectual  conceptions 
Plato  unfolds  as  far  as  he  is  able,  to  his  familiars,  the  ineffable  and  un<^ 
known  transcendency  of  the  first.    I  say  then,  that  at  one  time  he  unfolds 
it  through  analogy,  and  the  similitude  of  secondary  natures ;  but  at  an^ 
other  time  he  demonstrates  itg  exempt  transcendency,  and  its  separation 
from  the  whole  of  things,  through  negations.  For  in  the  Republic,  indeed, 
he  indicates  the  ineffable  peculiarity  and  hyparxis  of  the  goodj  through 
analogy  to  the  sun ;  but  in  the  Parmenides,  he  demonstrates  the  differ- 
ence of  the  one  with  respect  to  all  things  posterior  to  it  through  negations. 
But  he  appears  to  roe  through  one  of  these  modes  to  unfold  the  progres- 
sion from  the  first  cause  of  all  other  things,  and  prior  to  other  things,  of 
the  divine  orders.     For  on  this  account  the  first  cause  is  exempt  from  all 
the  natures  produced  by  it,  because  every  where  cause  is  established 
above  its  effects ;  and  on  this  account  the  first  is  nothing  of  all  things, 
because  all  things  proceed  from  him.  For  he  is  the  principle  of  all  things, 
both  of  beings,  and  at  the  same  time  of  non-beings.     But  again,  accord- 
ing to  the  other  of  these  modes,  he  adumbrates  the  conversion  to  the  first 
of  the  things  which  have  proceeded  from  it.    For  in  each  order  of  beings, 
through  similitude  to  it  there  is  a  monad  analogous  to  the  good^  which  has 
the  same  relation  to  the  whole  series  conjoined  with  it,  that  the  good  has 
to  all  the  orders  of  the  Gods.    The  cause,  however,  of  this  similitude  is 
entirely  the  conversion  of  the  whole  of  things  to  the  good.    These,  thercr 
fore,  proceed  from  thence  and  are  converted  to  it.    And  the  progression 
indeed  of  all  things  demonstrates  to  us  the  ascent  to  the  first  through  net 
gations ;  but  the  conversion  of  all  things  demonstrates  this  to  us  through 
analogies.    Let  not,  however,  any  one  considering  these  negations  to  be 
such  tilings  as  privations  despise  such  a  mode  of  discussion,  nof  defining 


Digitized  by 


Google 


GHAP.  V.  OF  PLATO.  li^ 

the  sameness  in  words  analogously,  and  words  in  habitudes,  endeavour  to 
calumniate  this  anagogic  progression  to  the  first  principle.  For  negations, 
as  it  appears  to  me,  extend  a  triple  peculiarity  in  things.  And  at  one 
time,  indeed,  being  more  primogenial  than  affirmations,  they  are  procrea- 
tive  and  perfective  of  the  generation  of  them.  But  at  another  time,  they 
are  allotted  an  order  co-ordinate  to  affirmations,  and  negation  is  then  in 
no  respect  more  venerable  than  affirmation.  And  again,  at  another  time, 
they  are  allotted  an  order  subordinate  to  affirmations,  and  are  nothing  else 
than  the  privations  of  them.  For  with  respect  to  non-being  itself,  with 
which  there  is  also  a  negation  of  beings,  at  one  time  considering  it  as  be- 
yond being,  we  say  that  it  is  the  cause  and  the  supplier  of  beings ;  but  at 
another  time  we  evince  that  it  is  equivalent  to  being ;  just  as  I  think,  the 
Elean  guest  demonstrates  [in  the  Sophista]  that  non-being  is  in  no  respect 
less,  if  it  be  lawful  so  to  speak,  than  being ;  and  at  another  time  we  leave 
it  as  a  privation  of,  and  indigent  of  being.  .For  indeed,  according  to  this 
mode,  we  call  every  generation,  and  matter  itself,  non-being. 

Analogies,  however,  are  assumed  for  the  purpose  alone  of  indicating  the 
Similitude  of  secondary  natures  to  the  first  principle.  And  neither  any 
reason,  nor  habitude,  nor  communion  of  this  principle  with  things  pos* 
terior  to  it,  becomes  apparent  from  these.  For  its  exempt  nature  is  not 
of  such  a  kind  as  is  beheld  in  the  second  and  third  orders  of  beings ;  but 
the  good  transcends  the  whole  of  things  in  a  much  greater  degree  than 
intellect  surpasses  the  natures  posterior  to  itself,  whether  it  be  the  demi- 
urgic intellect,  or  the  intellect  of  the  whole  world,  or  some  other  intellect 
from  among  the  number  of  those  that  are  called  divine.  Every  intellect 
however,  and  every  god,  is  allotted  a  transcendency  with  respect  to  subor- 
dinate natures,  and  those  things  of  which  it  is  the  cause,  inferior  to  that 
which  the  first  principle  has  to  every  being  ;  for  this  principle  similarly 
transcends  all  things,  and  not  some  in  a  greater,  but  others  in  a  less  de* 
gree;  since  thus  we  should  introduce  a  greater  and  less  habitude  of  it  to 
secondary  natures.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to  preserve  it  without  habi- 
tude to  all  things,  and  similarly  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things.  But 
of  other  natures,  some  are  indeed  nearer,  and  others  are  more  remote 
from  it.     For  each  thing  proceeds  from   it,  since  it  produces  all  things 


Digitized  by 


Google 


IJIO  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK.  If. 

according  to  one  cause.  And  different  things  are  indeed  converted  to  it 
in  a  different  manner,  this  principle  in  the  mean  time,  receiving  no  habi* 
tude  or  communion  with  things  posterior  to  itself. 


CHAPTER  VL 


The  mode  of  demonstration,  therefore,  pertaining  to  the  one  is,  as 
we  have  said,  twofold.  For  again,  Plato  delivers  to  us  twofold  names 
of  the  ineffable  cause.  In  the  Republic  indeed  he  calls  it  the  gaod^  and 
demonstrates  it  to  be  the  fountain  of  the  truth  which  unites  intellect 
and  intelli^ibles.  But  in  the  Parmenides,  he  denominates  such  a  prin- 
ciple as  this  the  one^  and  shows  that  it  gives  subsistence  to  the  divine 
unities.  Again  therefore,  of  these  names,  the  one  is  the  image  of  the 
progression  of  the  whole  of  things,  but  the  other  of  their  conversion, 
Tor  because  indeed  all  things  derive  their  subsistence  and  proceed  from 
the  first  principle,  on  this  account  referring  the  one  to  it,  we  demonstrate 
that  it  is  the  cause  of  all  multitude  and  every  progression.  For  whence 
is  multitude  unfolded  into  light  except  from  the  one?  But  because 
again  the  progressions  from  it  are  naturally  converted  to  it,  and  de-p 
sire  its  ineffable  and  incomprehensible  hyparxis,  we  denominate  it  the 
good.  For  what  else  is  that  which  converts  all  things,  and  which  is  ex« 
tended  to  all  beings  as  the  object  of  desire,  but  the  good  ?  For  all  other 
things  subsist  distributedly,  and  are  to  some  beings  honourable,  but  to 
others  not.*  And  every  thing  which  in  any  respect  whatever  is  said  to 
have  a  subsistence  aspires  after  some  things^  and  avoids  others.  But  the 
good  is  the  common  object  of  desire  to  all  beings,  and  all  things  accord- 
ing to  their  nature  verge  and  are  extended  to  this.  The  tendency  however 
of  desiring  natures  is  every  where  to  the  appropriate  object  of  desire. 
The  good  therefore  converts,  but  the  one  gives  subsistence  to  all  secondary 
natures.    Let  not,  however,  any  one  suppose  that  the  ineffable  can  on  ttu^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Chap.  vi.  of  plato.  i^X 

account  be  named,  or  that  the  cause  of  all  union  is  doubkid.  For  bem 
indeed  we  transfer  to  it  names,  looking  to  that  which  is  posterior  to  it,  and 
to  the  progressions  from,  or  the  circular  conversions  to  it.  Because,  in- 
deed, multitude  subsists  from  it,  we  ascribe  to  it  the  appellation  of  the 
one ;  but  because  all  things  even  as  far  as  to  things  that  have  the  most 
obscure  existence,  are  converted  to  it,  we  denominate  it  the  good. 

We  endeavour  therefore  to  know  the  unknown  nature  of  the  first  prin- 
ciple, through  the  things  which  proceed  from,  and  are  converted  to  it ; 
and  we  also  attempt  through  the  same  things  to  give  a  name  to  that  which 
is  ineffable.  This  principle,  however,  is  neither  known  by  beings,  nor  is 
effable  by  any  one  of  all  things ;  but  being  exempt  from  all  knowledge, 
and  all  language,  and  subsisting  as  incomprehensible,  it  produces  from 
itself  according  to  one  cause  all  knowledge,  every  thing  that  is  known, 
all  words,  and  whatever  can  be  comprehended  by  speech.  But  its 
unical  nature,  and  which  transcends  all  division,  shines  forth  to  the  i^iew 
dyadically  in  the  natures  posterior  to  it,  or  rather  triadically.  For 
all  things  abide  in,  proceed  from,  and  are  converted  to  the  one.  For  at 
one  and  the  same  time,  they  are  united  to  it,  are  in  subjection  to  its  union 
which  is  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things,  and  desire  the  participation  of 
it.  And  union  indeed  imparts  a  stable  transcendency  to  all  secondary 
natures,  and  which  subsists  in  unproceeding  conjunction  with  the  cause 
of  them.  But  subjection  defines  the  progression  of  beings,  and  their  se* 
paration  from  the  imparticipable  and  first  unity.  And  desire  perfects  the 
conversion  of  the  subsisting  natures,  and  their  circular  tendency  to  the 
inefiable.  First  natures  therefore,  being  always  entirely  united,  [to  the 
ineffable]  some  more  remotely,  but  others  more  proximately,  and  receiv- 
ing through  this  union  their  hyparxis,  and  their  portion  of  good,  we  en* 
deavour  to  manifest  through  names  the  progression  and  conversion  of  the 
whole  of  things.  But  with  respect  to  their  stable  comprehension,  if  it 
be  lawful  so  to  speak,  in  the  first,  and  their  union  with  the  it^effable,  this 
as  being  incomprehensible,  and  not  to  be  apprehended  by  knowledge, 
those  who  were  wise  in  divine  concerns  were  unable  to  indicate  it  by 
words.  But  as  the  ineffable  is  primarily  concealed  in  inaccessible  places, 
and  is  exempt  from  all  beings,  thus  also  the  union  of  all  things  with  it  is  oc- 
Troc.  Vol.  I.  Q 


Digitized  by 


Google 


132  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  H. 

cult)  ineffable,  and  unknown  to  all  beings.  For  erery  being  is  united  to  it, 
neither  by  intellectual  injection,  [or  projection]  nor  the  energy  of  essence ; 
since  things  whidi  are  destitute  of  knowledge  are  united  to  the  first,  and 
things  deprived  of  all  energy,  participate  according  to  their  order  of  a 
conjunction  with  it.  That  which  is  unknown  therefore  in  beings  according 
to  their  union  with  the  first,  we  neither  endeavour  to  know,  nor  to  bmt 
nifest  by  names,  but  being  more  able  to  look  to  their  progression  and 
conversion,  we  ascribe  indeed  to  the  first  two  names,  which  we  derive  as 
resemblances  from  secondary  natures.  We  also  define  two  modes  of 
ascent  to  the  first,  conjoining  that  mode  which  is  through  analogy  with 
the  appellation  of  the  goodj  but  that  which  is  through  n^ations  with  the 
appellation  of  the  one  ;  which  Plato  also  indicating,  in  the  Republic  in- 
deed calls  the  first  the  goadj  and  at  the  same  time  makes  a  regression  to  it 
through  analogy  ;  but  in  the  Parmenides  establishing  it  as  the  one  it$elf^  he 
unfolds  the  transcendency  of  it  which  is  exempt  from  beings,  through 
negative  conclusions.  According  to  both  these  modes  therefi>re,  the  first 
principle  transcends  both  gnostic  powers,  and  the  parts  of  speech  ;  but 
all  other  things  afford  us  the  cause  of  knowledge  and  of  appellatioti. 
And  the  first  principle  indeed  unically  gives  subsistence  to  all  the  unions 
and  liyparxes  of  secondary  natures ;  but  the  things  posterior  to  this 
cause  participate  of  it  in  a  divided  manner*  These  also,  as  we  have  before 
observed, become  multiplied  by  abiding,  proceeding  and  returning ;  but  the 
one  is  at  once  perfiectly  exempt  from  all  the  prolific  progressions,  conver- 
tive  powers,  and  uniform  hypostases  in  beings.  What  the  modes  there- 
fore are  of  the  doctrine  about  the  first,  and  through  what  names  Plato  en- 
deavours to  indicate  it,  and  whence  the  naifies  and  the  modes  of  this  indica- 
tion which  is  unknown  to  all  things  are  derived,  is,  I  think,  through  what 
has  been  said  sufficiently  manifest. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CRAP.  Vn.  OrTLAT0>  123 


CHAPTER  VII. 

It,  however,  it  be  tequisite  to  survey  each  of  the  dogmas  about  it 
which  are  scattered  in  the  writings  of  Plato,  and  to  reduce  them  to  one 
science  of  theology,  let  us  consider,  if  you  are  willing,  prior  to  other 
things,  what  Socrates  demonstrates  in  the  6th  book  of  the  Republic, 
conformably  to  the  before  mentioned  mode,  and  how  through  analogy 
he  teaches  us  the  wonderful  transcendency  of  the  good  with  respect  to 
all  beings,  and  the  summits  of  the  whole  of  things.     In  the  first  place 
therefore,  he  distinguishes  beings  from  each  other,  and  estabhshing  some 
of  them  to  be  intelligibles,  but  others  sensibles,  he  defines  science  by  the 
knowledge  of  beings.     But  he  conjoins  sense  with  sensibles,  and  giving  a 
twofold  division  to  all  things,  he  places  one  exempt  monad  over  intelli- 
^ble  multitude,  and  a  second  monad  over  sensible  multitude,  according 
to  a  similitude  to  the  former  monad.    Of  these  monads  also,  he  shows^ 
that  the  one  is  generative  of  intelligible  light,  but  the  other  of  sensible 
light.     And  he  evinces  that  by  the  intelligible  light  indeed,  all  intelligibles 
are  deiform,  and  boniform,  according  to  participation  from  the  first  God  ; 
but  that  by  the  sensible  light,  according  to  the  perfection  derived  from  the 
sun,  all  sensible  natures  are  solarform,  and  similar  to  their  one  monad.  In 
addition  also  to  what  has  been  said,  he  suspends  the  second  monad  from 
that  which  reigns  in  the  intelligible.     And  thus  he  extends  all  things,  both 
the  first  and  the  last  of  beings^  I  mean  intelligibles  and  sensibles,  to  the 
good.     Such  a  mode  of  reduction  to  the  first  as  this,  appears  to  me  to 
be  most  excellent,  and  especially  adapted  to  theology  ;  viz.  to  congregate 
all  the  Gods  in  the  world  into  one  union »  and  suspend  them  from  their 
proximate  monad  ;  but  to  refer  the  supermundane  Gods  to  the  intelleo* 
tual  kingdom ;  to  suspend  the  intellectual  Gods  from  intelligible  union  ; 
and  to  refer  the  intelligible  Gods  themselves,  and  all  beings  through  these, 
to  that  which  is  first.     For  as  the  monad  of  mundane  natures  is  super- 
mundane, as  the  monad  of  supermundane  ftatures  is  intellectual,  and  of 
intellectual  natures  intelligible,  thus  also  it  is  necessary  that  first  intelli* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


124  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK^IL 

gibles  should  be  suspended  from  the  monad  which  is  above  intelligibles 
and  perfected  by  it,  and  being  filled  with  deity,  should  illuminate  secon- 
dary natures  with  intelligible  light.  But  it  is  necessary  that  intellectual 
natures  which  derive  the  enjoyment  of  their  being  from  intelligibles,  but 
of  good  and  a  unifonn  hyparxis  from  the  first  cause,  should  connect  su- 
permundane natures  by  intellectual  light.  And  that  the  genera  of  the 
Gods  prior  to  the  world,  through  receiving  a  pure  intellect  from  the  in- 
tellectual Gods,  but  intelligible  light  from  the  intelligible  Gods,  and  a 
unical  light  from  the  father  of  the  whole  of  things,  should  send  into  this 
apparent  world  the  illumination  of  the  light  which  they  possess.  On  this 
account,  the  sun  being  the  summit  of  mundane  natures,  and  proceeding 
from  the  etherial  profundities,  imparts  to  visible  natures  supernatural 
perfection,  and  causes  these  as  much  as  possible  to  be  similar  to  the  su*^ 
percelestial  worlds.  These  things  therefore  we  shall  afterwards  more 
abundantly  discuss. 

Tlie  present  discourse,  however,  suspends  all  things  after  the  above 
mentioned  manner  from  the  goody  and  the  first  unity.-  For  if  indeed  the 
sun  connects  every  thing  sensible,  but  the  good  produces  and  perfects 
every  thing  intelligible,  and  of  these,  the  second  monad  [i.  e.  the  -sun] 
is  denominated  the  offspring  of  the  good^  and  on  this  account  causes 
ihat  which  is  sensible  to  be  splendid,  and  adorns  and  fills  it  with  good, 
because  it  imitates  the  primogeuial  cause  of  itself, — if  this  be  the  cf^se, 
all  things  will  thus  participate  of  the  good^  and  will  be  extended  to  this 
one  principle,  intelligibles  indeed,  and  the  most  divine  of  beings  without 
a  medium,  but  sensibles  through  their  monad  [the  sun.] 

Again  therefore,  and  after  another  manner,  Plato  narrates  to  us  in  this 
extract  from  the  Republic  the  analysis  to  the  first  principle.  For  he  sus- 
pends all  the  multitudes  in  the  world  from  the  intelligible  monads,  as  for 
instance,  all  beautiful  things  from  the  beautiful  itself,  all  good  things  from 
the  goody  and  all  equal  things  from  the  equal  itself.  And  again,  he  con- 
siders some  things  as  intelligibles,  but  others  as  sensibles  ;  but  the  sum- . 
mits  of  them  are  uniformly  established  in  intelligibles.  Again,  from  these 
intelligible  forms  he  trunks  fit  to  ascend  still  higher,  and  venerating  in  a 
greater <legree  the  goodness  which  is  beyond  intelligibles,  he  apprehends 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.Vn.  OF  PLATO.  125 

that  all  intelligibles,  and  the  monads  which  they  contain,  subsist  and  are 
perfected  through  it.  For  as  we  refer  the  sensible  multitude  to  a  monad 
uncoordinated  with  sensibles,  and  we  think  that  through  this  monad  the 
multitude  of  sensibles  derives  its  subsistence,  so  it  is  necessary  to  refer  the 
intelligible  multitude  to  another  cause  which  is  not  connumerated  with  in^ 
telligibles,  and  from  which  they  are  allotted  their  essence  and  their  divine 
hyparxis* 

Let  not,  however,  any  one  fancy  that  Plato  admits  there  is  the  same 
order  of  the  good  in  intelligible  forms,  as  there  is  prior  to  intelligibles* 
But  the  good  indeed,  which  is  coordinated  with  the  beautiful,  must  be 
considered  as  essential,  and  as  one  of  the  forms  which  are  in  intelUgibles. 
Fof  the  first  good,  which  by  conjoining  the  article  with  the  noun  we 
are  accustomed  to  call  rayeAop  or  the  good^  is  admitted  to  be  something 
Btiperessential,  and  more  excellent  than  all  beings  both  in  dignity  and 
power ;  since  Socrates  also,  when  discussing  the  beautiful  and  the  good, 
calls  the  one  the  beautiful  itself  and  the  other  the  good  itself,  and  thus 
says  he  we  must  denominate  all  the  things  which  we  then  very  properly 
considered  as  many.  Again,  particularly  considering  each  thing  as  being 
one,  we  denominate  each  thing  that  which  it  is,  and  thus  Socrates  leading 
us  from  sensible  things  that  are  beautiful  and  good,  and  in  short  from 
things  that  are  participated,  subsist  in  other  things,  and  are  multiplied, 
to  the  superessential  unities  of  intelligibles  and  the  first  essences,  from 
these  again,  he  transfers  us  to  the  exempt  cause  of  every  thing  beautiful 
and  good.  For  in  forms,  the  beautiful  itself  is  the  leader  of  many  beau- 
tiful things,  and  the  good  itself  of  many  goods,  and  each  form  alone  gives 
subsistence  to  things  similar  to  itself.  But  the  first  good  is  not  only  the 
cause  of  what  is  good,  but  similarly  of  things  beautiful,  as  Plato  else- 
where says  ;  and  "  all  things  are  for  its  sake,  and  it  is  the  cause  of  every 
thing  beautiful.'' 

For  again,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  said,  the  good  which  is  in 
forms  is  intelligible  and  known,  as  Socrates  himself  teaches ;  but  the 
good  prior  to  forms  is  beyond  beings,  and  is  established  above  all  know- 
ledge. And  the  former  is  the  source  of  essential  perfection ;  but  the 
latter  is  the  supplier  of  good  to  the  Gods  sq  far  as  they  are  God§,  and  is 


Digitize^d  by 


Google 


jgg  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 

g^emlive  of  goods  which  are  prior  to  essences.  We  must  not  therefore 
apprehend  that  when  Soorates  cails  the  first  principle  tke  goody  from  the 
name  of  idea,  that  he  directlj  calb  it  the  intelligible  goodness ;  but  though 
the  first  principle  is  superior  to  all  huiguageand  appellation,  we  permit 
Socrates  to  call  it  the  cause  of  every  thing  beautifiil  and  good,  transfer* 
ring  through  the  things  which  are  proximately  filled  by  it,  appellations 
to  it.  For  this  I  think  Socrates  indicating  asserts  in  all  that  he  says 
about  the  goody  that  it  is  beyond  knowledge  and  things  that  are  known, 
and  likewise  beyond  essence  and  being,  according  to  its  analogy  to  the 
sun.  And  after  a  certain  admirable  manner  he  presents  us  with  an  epi- 
tome of  the  negations  of  the  one  in  the  Parmenides.  For  the  assertion 
tiiat  ihe  good  is  neither  truth,  nor  essence,  nor  intellect,  nor  science,  at  one 
and  the  same  time  separates  it  from  the  superessential  unities,  and  every 
genus  of  the  Gods,  and  from  the  intellectual  and  intelligible  orders,  and 
from  every  psychical  subsistence.  But  these  are  the  first  things,  and 
through  the  first  hypothesis  of  the  Parmenides,  these  are  taken  away  from 
the  principle  of  the  whole  of  things. 

Moreover,  neither  when  he  celebrates  ihe  good  the  leader  of  the  divine 
orders,  as  the  most  splendid  of  being,  does  he  denominate  it  mo»t  splendid 
as  participating  of  light.  For  the  first  light  proceeds  from  it  to  intellig^- 
bles  and  intellect,  but  he  ^ves  it  this  appdlation  as  the  cause  of  the  li^t 
which  is  every  where  diffhsed,  and  as  the  fountain  of  every  intelligible,  o^ 
intellectual,  or  mundane  deity.  For  this  light  is  nothing  else  than  the 
participation  of  a  divine  hyparxis.  For  as  all  things  become  bonifonn 
through  participating  of  th^  goody  and  are  filled  with  the  illumination  pro- 
ceeding  from  thence,  thus  also  the  natures  which  are  primarily  beings  are 
deiform ;  and  as  it  is  said,  intelligible  and  intellectual  essences  become 
divine  through  the  participation  of  deity.  Looking  therefore  to  all  that 
has  been  said,  we  shall  preserve  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the  good 
with  reference  to  all  beings  and  the  divine  orders.  But  again,  in  each 
order  of  beings,  we  must  grant  that  there  is  a  monad  analogous  to  it,  not 
only  in  sensibles,  as  Plato  says  the  sun  is,  but  likewise  in  supermundane 
natures,  and  in  the  genera  of  Gods  arranged  from  the  good  prior  to  these. 
For  it  is  evident  that  the  natures  which  are  nearer  to  the  first  cause  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  VU.  OF  PLATO.  1^7 

whiek  participate  of  it  in  a  greater  degmtr  possess  a  graater  aitxubla^  to  it^ 
Aiid  as  tiKtt  is  tke  cause  of  all  beings,  so  these  establiah  monads  wbkkare 
the  teaders  of  more  partial  orders.  And  Pkto  indeed  arrangjes  the  muiiti* 
tudes  under  the  mooadfi  ;  but  extends  all  tiie  monads  to  the  exempt  prin- 
ciple of  the  wliK^  of  things^  and  establishes  them  uniformlj  about  it.  It 
is  necessary  therefore  that  the  theological  science  should  be  unfiled  cen- 
formably  to  the  divine  orders,  aod  that  our  conceptions  about  it  should 
be  transcendent,  and  unmin^ed  and  unconneeted  ^th  other  things.  And 
we  should  survey  indeed  all  secondary  natures,  subsisting  according  to 
and  perfected  about  it ;  but  we  should  establish  it  as  transcending  all  the 
monads  in  beings,  according  to  one  excess  of  sinij^ieitjr,  and  as  unically 
arranged  prior  to  the  whole  orders  \pf  Gods.]  For  as  the  Grods  themsdves 
enact  the  order  which  is  in  tbem,  thus  also  it  is  necessary  that  the  truth 
coneernsng  them,  the  precedaneous  causes  of  beings,  and  the  second  and 
third  progeny  of  these  should  be  definitely  distingui^ied. 

This,  therefore,  is^  the  one  truth  concerning  the  first  principle,  and  which 
possesses  one  reason  reniarkably  conformable  to  the  Ptatonic  hypothesis, 
via.  diat  this  principle  subsists  prior  to  the  whole  orders  in  the  Gods,  that 
it  gives  subsistence  to  the  boniform  essence  of  the  Gods,  that  it  is  the 
fountain  of  superessential  goodness,  and  that  all  things  posterior  to  it  being 
es^nded  towards  it,  are  filled  with  good,  after  an  ineffable  manner  are 
united  to  it,  and  subsist  uniformly  about  it«  For  its  unical  nature  is  not 
unprolific,  but  it  is  by  so  much  the  more  generative  of  other  things,  as  it 
pre-establishes  a  union  exempt  from  the  things  which  have  a  subsistence* 
Nor  does  its  fecundity  tend  to  multitude  and  division  ;  but  it  abides  with 
undefiled  purity  concealed  in  inaccessible  places.  For  in  the  natures  also 
which  are  posterior  to  it,  we  every  where  see  tiiat  what  is  perfect  desires 
to  generate,  and  that  what  is  full  hastens  to  impart  to  other  things  its 
plenitude.  In  a  much  greater  degree  therefore  it  is  necessary  that  the 
nature  which  contains  in  one  all  perfections,  and  which  is  not  a  certain 
good,  but  good  itself,  and  super-full,  (if  it  be  lawful  so  to  speak)  should 
be  generative  of  the  whole  of  things,  and  give  subsistence  to  them ;  pro- 
ducing all  things  by  being  exempt  from  all  things,  and  by  being  imparti- 
cipable,  similarly  generating  the  first  and  the  last  of  beings. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J2j5  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 

You  must  not,  however,  suppose  that  this  generation  and  progression 
is  epiitted  in  consequence  of  the  good  either  being  moved,  or  multiplied, 
or  possessing  a  generative  power,  or  energizing ;  since  all  these  are  secon- 
dary to  the  singleness  of  the  first.  For  whether  the  good  is  moved,  it  will 
not  be  the  good;  since  the  good  itself ^  and  which  is  nothing  else,  if  it  were 
moved  would  depart  from  goodness.  How,  therefore,  can  that  which  is 
the  source  of  goodness  to  beings,  produce  other  things  when  deprived  of 
good  ?  Or  whether  the  good  is  multiplied  through  imbecility,  there  will 
be  a  progression  of  the  whole  of  things  through  a  diminution,  but  not 
through  an  abundance  of  goodness.  For  that  which  in  generating  departs 
from  its  proper  transcendency,  hastens  to  adorn  inferior  natures,  not 
through  prolific  perfection,  but  through  a  diminution  and  want  of  its  owp 
power.  But  if  the  good  produces  all  things  by  employing  power,  there 
will  be  a  diminution  of  goodness  about  it.  For  it  will  be  two  things  and 
not  one,  viz.  it  will  be  good  and  power.  And  if  indeed  it  is  in  want  of 
power,  that  which  is  primarily  good  will  be  indigent.  But  if  to  be  the 
good  itself  is  sufficient  to  the  perfection  of  the  things  produced,  and  to 
the  plenitude  of  all  things,  why  do  we  assume  power  as  an  addition.^  For 
additions  in  the  Gods  are  ablations  of  transcendent  unions.  Let  the  good 
therefore  alone  be  prior  to  power,  and  prior  to  energy.  For  all  eneVgy  is 
the  progeny  of  power.  Neither,  therefore,  does  the  good  energizing  give 
subsistence  to  all  things  through  energy,  nor  being  in  want  of  power  does 
it  fill  all  things  with  powers,  nor  being  multiplied  do  all  things  participate 
of  good,  nor  being  moved  do  all  beings'  enjoy  the  first  principle.  For 
the  good  precedes  all  powers,  and  all  energies,  and  every  multitude  and 
motion ;  since  each  of  these  is  referred  to  the  good  as  to  its  end.  The  good 
therefore  is  the  most  final  of  all  ends,  and  the  centre  of  all  diesirable  na^ 
tures.  All  desirable  natures,  indeed,  impart  an  end  to  secondary  beings^ 
but  that  which  pre-subsists  uncircumscribed  by  all  things  is  the  first 
gpod, 

*  For  ifoatru  xoforra,  I  read  irana  xol  err^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  VIH.  OF  PLATO.  129 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

After  these  things,  however,  let  us  direct  our  attention  to  the  concep- 
tions about  the  firsf  principle  in  the  epistle  [of  Plato]  to  Dionysius,  and 
survey  the  manner  in  which  he  considers  its  ineffable  and  immense  tran- 
scendency. But  perhaps  some  one  may  be  indignant  with  us  for  rashly 
drawing  to  our  own  hypotheses  the  assertions  of  Plato,  and  may  say  that 
the  three  kings  of  which  he  speaks  are  all  of  them  intellectual  Gods;  but 
that  Plato  does  not  think  fit  to  co-arrange  or  connumerate  the  good  with 
secondary  natures.  For  such  a  connumeration  ought  not  to  be  considered 
as  adapted  to  the  exempt  transcendency  oi the  good  with  respect  toother 
things,  nor  in  short,  must  it  be  said  that  the  good  contributes  as  the  first 
with  reference  to  another  second  or  third  cause  to  the  completion  of  a 
triad  in  conjunction  with  other  natures ;  but  that  it  in  a  greater  degree 
precedes  every  triad  and  every  number,  than  the  intelligible  precede  the 
intellectual  Gods.  How,  therefore,  can  we  connumerate  with  other  kin^ 
the  good  which  is  at  once  exempt  from  all  the  divine  numbers,  and  co- 
arrange  one  as  the  first  [king,]  another  as  the  second,  and  another  as  the 
third  ?  Some  one  may  also  adduce  many  other  things,  indicating  the 
transcendency  of  the  first  principle  with  respect  to  every  thing  divine. 
Such  a  one,  however,  in  thus  interpreting  the  words  of  Plato  will  remark- 
ably accord  with  us  who  assert  the  good  to  be  imparticipable,  to  transcend 
all  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  genera,  and  to  be  established  above  all 
the  divine  tnonads.  .    -      ^ 

That  Plato,  indeed,  admits  the  first  God  to  be  the  king  of  all  things,* 
and  says  that  all  things  are  for  his  sake,  and  that  he  is  the  cause  of  all 
beautiful  things,  does  not  I  think  require  much  proof  to  those  who  consi- 
der his  words  by  themselves  apart  from  their  own  conjectures,  by  intro- 
ducing which  they  violently  endeavour  to  accord  with  Plato.  But  that 
we  do  not  assert  these  things  connumerating  [the  first  GoH  with  secondary 
Froc.  Vol.  I.  R 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^30 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IK 


natures,]  Plato  bimself  manifests,  neither  calling  the  first  king  the  first,, 
bat  alone  the  king  of  all  things,  nor  asserting  that  sortie  things  are  about 
liim,  as  he  says  that  second  things  are  about  that  which  is  second,  and 
third  things  about  that  which  is  third,  but'  he  say5,  in  short,  that  all 
things  are  about  him.     And  to  the  other  kings,  indeed,  he  introduces, 
number  and  a  divided  kingdom ;  but  to  the  king  of  all  things  he  neither 
attributes  a  part  of  number,  nor  a  distribution  of  dominion  opposite  ta^ 
that  of  the  others-  Such  a  mode  of  words,  therefore,  neither  connumerates 
the  king  of  all  things  with  the  other  kings,  nor  co-arranges  him  as  the- 
leader  of  a  triad  with  the  second  ^nd  third  power.     For  of  a  triadic  divi- 
sion the  first  monad,  indeed,  is  the  leader  of  first  orders,  and  which  are 
co-ordinate  with  itself;  but  the  second  of  second ;  and  the  third  of  third' 
orders.    If,  however,  some  one  should  apprehend  that  the  first  monad  ia 
the  leader  of  all  things^  so  as  to  comprehend  at  once  both  second  and 
third  allotments ;  yet  the  cause  which  subsists  according  to  compreheai- 
siou  is  different  from  that  which  similarly  per\'ades  to  all  things.     And  to 
the  king  of  all  things,  indeed,  all  things  are  subject  according  to  one  rea- 
son and  one  order ;  but  to  the  first  of  the  triad,  things  first  are  subjected 
according  to  the  same  order ;  and  it  is  necessary  that  things  second  and 
third  should  be  subservient  according  to  their  communion  with  the  remain- 
ing kings.     Does  not,  therefore,  what  is  here  said  by  Plato  remarkably 
celebrate  the  exempt  nature  of  the  first  cause,  and  his  un-coordinatioa 
with  the  other  kingdoms  of  the  Gods  ?    Since  he  says  that  this  cause  si-^ 
milady  reigns  over  all  things^  that  all  things  subsist  about  him,  and  that 
for  bis  sake  essence  and  energy  are  inherent  in  all  things. 

If  also  Socrates  in  the  Republic  clearly  *  teaches  that  the  sun  reigns 
over  the  world  analogous  to  the  goody  let  no  one  dare  to  accuse  this  ana- 
logy as  connumerating  the  good  with  the  king  of  mundane  natures.  Fof 
tinleas^  together  with  the  simiUtude  of  secondary  causes  to  the  first 
principles,  we  think  fit  to  preserve  that  exempt  dominion  [of  the  first 


.  '  For  KM  here,  it  U  necessary  to  read  aXXai 
*  For  tro^w^,  it  is  necessavy  to  read  <ra^»^. 
'  In  the  original  ft^n  is  wanting  after  lu 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XmAV.  VIII.  6V  PLATO.  131 

c^use]  it  will  be  impossible  for  us  to  evince  that  the  super-roundane  kings 
have  their  allotment  analogous  to  the  first  cause,  who  subsists  prior  to  the 
whole  of  things  according  to  one  transcendency.  But  what  occasion  is 
there  to  be  prolix  ?  For  Plato  indeed  calls  the  first  God  king;  but  he 
does  not  think  fit  to  give  the  others  the  same  appellation,  not  only  in  the 
beginning  of  wliat  he  says  about  the  first,  but  shortly  after,  he  adds : 
"  About  the  king  himself  and  the  natures  of  which  I  have  spoken  there 
is  nothing  of  this  kind/'  The  first  God,  therefore,  alone  is  called  king. 
But  he  is  called  not  only  the  king  of  things  first,  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  second  of  things  second,  and  the  third  of  things  third,  but  as  the 
cause  at  once  of  all  being  and  all  beauty.  Hence  the  first  God  precedes 
the  other  causes  in  an  exempt  and  uniform  manner,  and  according  to  a 
transcendency  of  the  whole  of  things,  and  is  neither  celebrated  by  Plato 
as  co-ordinated  with  them,  nor  as  the  leader  of  a  triad. 

l^hat  these  things,  however,  are  asserted  by  Plato  about  the  first  God 
we  shall  learn  by  recurring  a  little  to  the  preceding  words,  which  are  a5 
follow  :  "  You  say,  that  I  have  not  sufficiently  demonstrated  to  you  the 
particulars  respecting  the  first  nature.  I  must  speak  to  you,  therefore,  in 
enigmas,  that  in  case  the  letter  should  be  intercepted,  either  by  land  or 
sea,  he  who  reads  it  may  not  understand  this  part  of  its  contents.  AH 
things  are  situated  about  the  king  of  all ;  and  all  things  are  for  his  sake ; 
and  he  is  the  cause  of  every  thing  beautiful.''  In  these  words,  therefore, 
Plato  proposing  to  purify  our  conceptions  about  the  first  principle  through 
enigmas,  celebrates  the  king  of  all  things,  and  refers  to^him  the  cause  of 
the  whole  of  things  beautiful  and  good.  Who,  therefore,  is  the  king  of 
all  things,  except  the  unical  God  who  is  exempt  from  all  things,  who  pro- 
duces all  things  from  himself,  and  is  the  leader  of  all  orders  according  to 
pne  cause  ?  Who  is  he  that  converts  all  ends  to  himself,  and  estabhshes 
them  about  himself?  For  if  you  call  him,  for  whose  sake  all  things  sub- 
sist, the  end  of  all  ends,  and  the  primogenial  cause,  you  will  not  deviate 
from  the  truth  concerning  him.  Who  is  he  that  is  the  cause  of  all  beauti- 
ful Jhinga,  shining  upon  them  with  divine  light,  and  who  encloses  that 
which  is  deformed  and  without  measure,  and  the  most  obscure  of  all 
things  in  the  extremity  of  the  universe? 


Digitized  by 


Google 


132  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  il. 

If  you  are  willing  also  from  the  words  of  Plato  that  follow  the  prece- 
ding, we  will  show  that  to  be  the  recipient  neither  of  language  nor  of 
knowledge  is  adapted  to  the  first  principle.     For  the  words  :  "  This  your 
inquiry  concerning  the  cause  of  all  beautiftil  things  is  as  of  a  nature  en- 
dued with  a  certain  quality/'  are  to  be  referred  to  this  principle.     For 
it  is  not  possible  to  apprehend  it  intellectually,  because  it  is  unknown,  nor 
to  unfold  it,  because  it  is  uncircumscribed ;  but  whatever  you  may  say 
of  it,  you  will  speak  as  of  a  certain  thing ;  and  you  will  speak  indeed 
about  it,  but  you  will  not  speak  it.  For  speaking  of  the  things  of  which  it  is 
the  cause,  we  are  unable  to  say,  or  to  apprehend  through  intelligence  what 
it  is.     Here  therefore,  the  addition  of  quality,  and  the  busy  energy  of  the 
soul,  remove  it  from  the  goodness  which  is  exempt  from  all  things,  by  the 
redundancy  of  its  conceptions  about  it.     This  likewise  draws  the  soul 
down  to  kindred,  connate,  and  multiform  intelligibles,  and  prevents  her 
from  receiving  that  which  is  characterized  by  unity,  and  is  occult  in  the 
participation  oi  the  good.     And  it  is  not  only  proper  that  the  human  soul 
should  be  purified  from  things   co-ordinate  with  itself  in  the  union  and 
communion  with  that  which  is  first,  and  that  for  this  purpose  it  should 
leave  all  the  multitude  of  itself  behind,  and  exciting  its  own  hyparxis, 
approach  with  closed  eyes,  as  it  is  said,  to  the  king  of  all  things,  and  par- 
ticipate of  his  light,  as  much  as  this  is  lawAil  for  it  to  accomplish  ;  but 
intellect  also,  which  is  prior  to  us,  and  all  divine  natures,  by  their  highest 
unions,  superessential  torches,  and  first  hyparxes  are  united  to  that  which 
is  first,  and  always  participate  of  its  exuberant  fulness ;  and  this  not  so 
far  as  they  are  that  which  they  are,  but  so  far  as  they  are  exempt  from 
things  allied  to  themselves,  and  converge  to  the  one  principle  of  all.     For 
the  cause  of  all  disseminated  in  all  things  impressions  of  his  own  all-per- 
fect transcendency,  and  through  these  establishes  all  things  about  himself, 
and  being  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things,  is  ineffably  present  to  all 
things.  Every  thing  therefore,  entering  into  the  ineffable  of  its  own  nature, 
.  finds  there  the  symbol  of  the  fdther  of  all.     All  things  too  naturally  vene- 
rate him,  and  are  united  to  him,  through  an  appropriate  mystic  impres- 
sion, divesting  themselves  of  their  own  nature,  and  hastening  to  become 
his  impression  alone,  and  to  participate  him  alone,  through  the  desire  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IX.  QF  PLATO.  133 

his  unknown  nature,  and  of  the  fountain  of  good.  Hence,  when  they 
have  run  upwards  as  far  as  to  this  cause,  they  become  tranquil,  and  are 
liberated  from  the  parturitions  and  the  desire  which  all  things  naturally 
possess  of  goodness  unknown,  ineffable,  imparticipable,  and  transcen- 
dently  full.  But  that  what  is  here  said  is  concerning  the  first  God,  and 
that  Plato  in  these  conceptions  leaves  him  uncoordinated  with  and  exempt 
from  the  other  causes,  has  been,  I  think,  sufficiently  evinced. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Let  us  in  the  next  place  consider  each  of  the  dogmas,  and  adapt  them 
to  our  conceptions  concerning  cause,  that  from  these  we  may  comprehend 
by  a  reasoning  process,  the  scope  of  the  whole  of  Plato's  theology.  Let 
then  one  truth  concerning  the  first  principle  be  especially  that  which 
celebrates  his  ineffable,  simple,  and  all-transcending  nature ;  which  esta- 
blishes all  things  about  him,  but  does  not  assert  that  he  generates  or  pro- 
duces any  thing,  or  that  he  presubsists  as  the  end  of  things  posterior  ta 
himself/  For  such  a  form  of  words  neither  adds  any  thing  to  the  unknown, 
who  is  exempt  from  all  things,  nor  multiplies  him  who  is  established  above 
all  union,  nor  refers  the  habitude  and  communion  of  things  secondary  to 
him  who  is  perfectly  imparticipable.  Nor  in  short,  does  it  annoimce  that 
it  teaches  any  thing  about  him,  or  concerning  his  nature,  but  about  the 
second  and  third  natures  which  subsist  after  him. 

Such  then  being  this  indication  of  the  first  God,  and  such  the  manner 
in  which  it  venerates  the  ineffable,  the  second  to  this  is  that  which  con- 
verts all  the  desires  of  things  to  him,  and  celebrates  him  as  the  object  of 
desire  to  and  common  end  of  all  things,  according  to  one  cause  which 
precedes  all  other  causes.  For  the  last  of  things  subsists  oqly  for  the 
sake  of  something  else,  but  the  first  is  that  only  for  the  sake  of  which  all 
other  things  subsist :  and  all  the  intermediate  natures  participate  of  these 


Digitized  by 


Google 


X3i  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  ;BOOK  H. 

two  peculiarities.  Hence  fhey  genuinely  adhere  to  the  natures  which 
surpass  them,  as  objects  of  desire,  but  impart  the  perfection  of  desires  to 
subordinate  beings. 

The  third  speculation  of  the  principle  of  things  is  far  inferior  to  the 
preceding,  considering  him  as  giving  isubsistence  to  all  beautiful  things* 
Tor  to  celebrate  him  as  Ihe  supplier  of  good,  and  as  end  preceding  the 
two  orders  of  things,  is  not  very  remote  from  the  narration  which  ^ays^ 
that  all  causes  are  posterior  to  him,  and  derive  their  subsistence  from  hira, 
as  well  those  which  are  paternal,  and  the  sources  of  good,  as  those  that 
are  the  suppliers  of  prolific  powers.     But  to  ascribe  to  him  a  producing 
and  generative  cause,  is  still  more  remote  from  the  all-perfect  union  of  the 
first.     For  as  it  cannot  be  known  or  discussed  by  language,  by  secondary 
natures,  it  must  not  be  said  that  it  is  the  cause,  or  that  it  is  generative  of 
beings,  but  we  should  celebrate  in  silence  this  ineffable  nature,  and  this 
perfectly  causeless  cause  which  is  prior  to  all  causes.     If,  however,  as  we 
'endeavour  to  ascribe  to  him  the  good  and  the  one^  we  in  like  manner  at- 
tribute to  him  catLse^  and  that  which  is  Jinal  or  patemaly  we  must  pardon 
tlie  parturition  of  the  soul  about  this  ineffable  principle,  aspirin;?  to  per- 
ceive him  with  the  eye  of  intellect^  and  to  speak  about  him  ;  but,  at  the 
same  time,  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the  one  which  is  immense,  must  be 
considered  as  surpassing  an  indication  of  this  kind.     From  these  things 
therefore,  we  may  receive  the  sacred  conceptions  of  Plato,  and  an  order ' 
adapted  to  things  themselves.    And  we  may  say  that  the  fiirst  part  of  this 
sentence  sufficiently  indicates  the  simplicity,*  transcendency,  and  in  short 
the  uncoordination  with  all  things  of  the  king  of  all.     For  the  assertion 
that  all  things  subsist  about  him,  unfolds  the  hyparxis  of  things  second, 
but  leaves  that  which  is  beyond  all  things  without  any  connexion  with 
things  posterior  to  it.     But  the  second  part  celebrates  the  cause  of  all 
the  Gods^  as  prearranged  in  the  order  of  end.     For  that  which  is  the 
highest  of  all  causes,  is  immediately  conjoined  with  that  which  is  prior  to 
cause ;  but  of  this  kind  is  the  final  cause,  and  that  for  the  sake  of  which 

»  For  irpc^tVf  it  is  necessaty  to  read  raf  iv. 
*  For  Tij^  a^AoT>jT»j  I  read  njv  awAMTjra. 
^  For  Tov  6eov,  it  is  necessary  to  read  tcov  imv. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  rx.  OF  PLATO.  i^S 

all  things  subsist.^  This  part  therefore  is  posterior  to  the  other,  and  is 
woven  together  with  the  order  of  things,  and  the  progression  of  the  Pla- 
tonic doctrine. 

Again,  the  third  part  asserts  him  to  be  productive  of  all  beautiful  things, 
and  thus  adds  to  him  a  spedes  of  cause  "  inferior  ta  the  final.  Whence 
also  Plotinus,  t  thin^,  does  not  hesitate  toeall  the  first  God  the  fountain 
of  the  beautiful.  It  is  necessary  therefore  to  attribute  that  which  is  best 
to  the  best  of  all  things,  that  he  may  be  the  cause  of  all,  and  in  reality 
prior  to  cause.  But  this  is  the  good.  This  too,  which  is  an  admirable 
circumstance,  may  be  Been  in  the  words  of  Plato,  that  the  first  of  these 
three  divine  dogmas,  neither  presumes  to  say  any  thing  about  the  goody 
and  this  ineffable  nature,  nor  does  it  permit  us  to  refer  any  species  of 
cause  to  it.  But  the  second  dogma  leaves  indeed  the  good  ineffable,  as  it 
is  fit  it  should,  but  from  the  habitude  of  things^  posterior  to  it,  enables  us 
to  collect  the  final  cause  :  for  it  does  not  refuse  to  call  it  that  for  the  sake 
of  which  all  things  subsist.  But  when  it  asserts  that  all  things  are  for  the 
sake  of  the  goody  it  excites  in  us  the  conception  of  the  communion  and 
co-ordination  oft  that  which  is  the  object  of  desire  with  the  desiring  na- 
tures. And  the  third  dogma  evinces  that  the  good  is  the  cause  of  all 
beautiful  things.  But  this  is  to  say  something  concerning  it,  and  to  add 
to  the  simplicity  of  the  first  cause,  and  not  to  abide  in  the  conceptions  of 
the  end,  but  to  conjoin  with  it  the  producing  principle  of  things  second* 
And  it  appears  to  me  thit  Plato  here  indicates  the  natures  which  are 
proximately  unfolded  into  light  after  the  first.  For  it  is  not  possible  to  say 
any  thing  concerning,  it  except  at  one  time  being  impelled  to  this  froin^ 
all  things,  and  at  another  from  the  best  of  things:  for  it  is  the  cause  of 
hyparxis  to  all  things,  and  unfolds  its  own  separate  union  through  the 
peculiarities  of  these.  We  ascribe  to  it  therefore  the  one  and  the  goody 
from  the  donation  which  pervades  to  all  things  from  it.  For  of  those 
things  of  which  all  participate,  we  say  there  is  no  other  cause  than  that 
which  is  established  prior  to  all  these.     But  the  about  which  (ro  Tipi  ©,)  th^ 

'  FiOr.0tirioy  it  is  necessary  to  read  Mvm. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


136  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  11. 

on  account  of  which  (ro  Si,  o  '),  and  the  from  which  (to  a^*ou,)  particularly 
subsist  in  the  intelligible  Gods:  and  from  these  they  are  ascribed  to  .the 
first  God.  For  whence  can  we  suppose  the  unical  Gods  derive  their  pe- 
culiarities^ except  from  that  which  is  prior  to  them  ?  To  this  summit  of 
intelligibles  therefore  the  term  about  is  adapted,  because  all  the  divine 
orders  occultly  proceed  about  this  summit  which  is  arranged  prior  to  them. 
But  the  term  on  account  of  which  pertains  to^the  middle  order  of  intelU- 
gibles  :  for  all  things  subsist  for  the  sake  of  eternity  and  an  hyparxis  per- 
fectly entire.  And  the  term  from  which  is  adapted  to  the  extremity  of 
intelligibles :  for  this  first  produces  all  things,  and  adorns  them  uniformly. 
These  things,  therefore,  we  shall  indeed  make  more  known  in  the  doctrine 
which  will  shortly  follow  concerning  the  intelligible  Gods. 


CHAPTER  X. 

In  the  next  place,  let  us  finish  the  discussion  concerning  the  first  God, 
with  the  theory  of  Parmenides,  and  unfold  the  mystic  conceptions  of  the 
first  hypothesis  as  far  as  pertains  to  the  present  purpose.  For  we  shaU 
refer  the  reader  for  the  most  perfect  interpretation  of  them  to  our  com- 
mentaries on  that  dialogue.  In  the  first  place  therefore,  it  is  requisite  to 
determine  this  concerning  the  first  hypothesis,  that  it  comprehends  as 
many  conclusions  negatively,  as  the  hypothesis  which  follows  it  does  af- 
firmatively. For  this  latter  demonstrates  all  the  orders  proceeding  from 
the  one ;  but  the  former  evinces  that  the  one  is  exempt  from  all  the  divine 
genera.  From  both  these  hypotheses  however,  it  is  obvious  to  every  one 
how  it  is  necessary  that  the  cause  of  the  whole  of  things  should  transcend 
his  productions.     For  because  the  one  is  the  cause  of  all  the  Gods,  he 

'  For  $1*  ou  it  is  necessary  to  read  St*  o ;  since  the  former  denotes  the  imirumentaly  but  the  latter 
the  ^ikrf  cause. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  X.  OF  PLATO.  f^q^ 

transcends  all  things.  And  because  he  is  exempt  from  theth  through 
transcendency,  on  this  account  he  gives  to  all  things  their  hypostases. 
For  through  being  expanded  above^all  things  he  causes  all  things  to  subsist. 
Since  in  the  second  and  third  orders  also  of  beings,  causes  which  are  en- 
tirely exempt  from  their  effects,  more  perfectly  generate  and  connect  their 
progeny  than  those  causes  do  which  are  coordinate  with  their  effects.  And 
the  one  by  ineffably  producing  all  the  divine  orders,  appears  to  be  unicalljr 
established  above  all.  For  in  the  productions  posterior  to  it,  cause  is  every 
where  different  from  the  things  caused.  And  on  this  account  nature 
indeed  being  incorporeal,  is  a  cause  which  transcends  bodies ;  but  soul 
being  perfectly  perpetual,  is  the  cause  of  things  generated ;  and  intellect 
being  immoveable  is  the  cause  of  every  thing  that  is  moved.  If,  therc-r 
fore,  according  to  each  progression  of  beings  effects  are  denied  of  their 
causes,  it  is  certainly  necessary  to  take  away  all  things  similarly  from  the 
cause  of  a\h 

In  the  second  place,  I  think  it  is  necessary  that  the  order  of  the  nega- 
tions  should  be  defined  by  those  who  receive  theology  according  to  the 
intention  of  Parraenides  ;  and  that  it  should  be  admitted  that  they  pro- 
ceed indeed  from  the  monads  which  subsist  primarily  in  the  divine  genera, 
and  that  Parmenides  takes  away  from  the  one  all  second  and  third  natures, 
according  to  an  order  adapted  to  each.  For  that  which  transcends  more 
principal  causes  must  in  a  much  greater  degree  subsist  prior  to  those  that 
are  subordinate.  Parmenides,  however,  does  not  begin  his  negations  from 
the  Gods  that  are  united  to  the  first :  for  this  genus  is  with  difficulty  dis^ 
tinguished  from  the  one  :  because  being  arranged  naturally  [immediateJy] 
after  it,  it  is  most  unical  and  occult,  and  transcendently  similar  to  its  pro- 
ducing cause.  Parmenides  therefore  beginning  where  prior  to  all  other 
things  division  and  multitude  are  apparent,  and  proceeding  regularly 
through  all  the  second  orders  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  again  returns 
to  the  beginning,  and  shows  how  the  one  differs  from  the  Gods  that  are 
most  similar  to  it,  and  which  primarily  participatQ^  of  it,  according  to  one 
ineffable  cause. 

In  the  third  place,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  said,  I  determine  con- 
cerning the  mode  of  negations,  that  they  are  not  privative  of  their  sub- 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  S 


Digitized  by 


Google 


158  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IT. 

jects,  but  generative  of  things  which  are  as  it  were  their  opposites.     For 
because  the  first  principle  is  not  many,  the  many  proceed  from  it,  and  be- 
cause it  is  not  a  whole,  wholeness  proceeds  from  it,  and  in  a  similar  man- 
ner  in  other  things.     And  in  thus  determining,  I  speak  conformably  to 
Plato,  who  thinks  it  proper  to  abide  in  negations,  and  to  add  nothing  to 
the  one.     For  whatever  you  add,  you  diminish  Me  onf,  and  afterwards 
evince  that  it  is  not  the  one^  but  that  which  is  passive  to  [or  participates] 
the  one.  For  it  is  thus  not  one  only,  but  in  addition  to  this  possesses  some- 
thing else  also  by  participation.    This  mode  therefore  of  negations  is 
exempt,  unical,  primary,  and  is  a  departure  from  the  whole  of  things,  in  an 
unknown  and  ineffable  transcendency  of  simplicity.     It  is  likewise  neces- 
sary, having  attributed  such  a  mode  as  this  to  the  first  God,  again  to 
exempt  him  from  the  negations  also.    For  neither  does  any  discourse,  nor 
any  name  belong  to  the  one^  says  Parmenides.  But  if  no  discourse  belongs 
to  it,  it  is  evident  that  neither  does  negation  pertain  to  it.     For  all  things 
are  secondary  to  the  one^  things  knowable  and  knowledge,  and  the  in- 
struments of  knowledge,  and  after  a  manner  that  which  is  impossible 
presents  itself  at  the  end  of  the  hypothesis.     For  if  nothing  whatever  can 
be  said  of  the  one^  neither  is  this  discussion  itself  adapted  to  the  one.  Nor 
is  it  at  all  wonderful   that  the  discourse  of  those  who  wish   to  know  the 
ineffable  by  words  should  terminate  in  that  which  is  impossible ;  since  all 
knowledge  when   conjoined  with  an  object  of  knowledge  which  does  not 
at  all  pertain  to  it  loses  its  power.     For  sense,  if  we  should  say  that  it  per- 
tained to  that  which  is  the  object  of  science  would  subvert  itself;  and 
tibis  would  be  the  case  with  science  and  every  kind   of  knowledge  if  we 
should  say  that  they  belonged  to  that  which  is  intelligible ;  so  that  lan- 
guage when  conversant  with  that  which  is  ineffable,  being  subverted  about 
itself,  has  no  cessation,  and  opposes  itself. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  PLATO. 


139 


CHAPTER  XI. 


Let  us  now  therefore,  if  ever,  abandon  multiform  knowledge,  exter- 
minate from  ourselves  all  the  variety  of  life,  and  in  perfect  quiet  approach 
near  to  the  cause  of  all  things.  For  this  purpose,  let  not  only  opinion 
and  phantasy  be  at  rest,  nor  the  passions  alone  which  impede  our  anago* 
gic  impulse  to  the  first,  be  at  peace ;  but  let  the  air  be  still,  and  the  uni- 
verse itself  be  still.  And  let  all  things  extend  us  with  a  tranquil  power  to 
communion  with  the  ineffable.  Let  us  also,  standing  there,  having  trans- 
cended the  intelligible  (if  we  contain  any  thing  of  this  kind,)  and  with 
nearly  closed  eyes  adoring  as  it  were  the  rising  sun,  since  it  is  not  lawful 
for  any  being  whatever  intently  to  behold  him — ^let  us  survey  the  sun 
whence  the  light  of  the  intelligible  Gods  proceeds,  emerging,  as  the  poets 
say,  from  the  bosom  of  the  ocean;  and  again  from  this  divine  tranquillity 
descending  into  intellect,  and  from  intellect,  employing  the  reasonings  of 
the  soul,  let  us  relate  to  ourselves  what  the  natures  are  from  which,  in  this 
progression,  we  shall  consider  the  first  God  as  exempt.  And  let  us  as  it 
were  celebrate  him,  not  as  establishing  the  earth  and  the  heavens,  nor  as 
giving  subsistence  to  souls,  and  the  generations  of  all  animals  ;  for  he 
produced  these  indeed,  but  among  the  last  of  things  ;  but,  prior  to  these, 
let  us  celebrate  him  as  unfolding  into  light  the  whole  intelligible  and  intel* 
lectual  genus  of  Gods,  together  with  all  the  supermundane  and  mundane 
divinities — ^as  the  God  of  all  Gods,  the  unity  of  all  unities,  and  beyond 
the  first  adyta,' — as  more  ineffable  than  all  silence,  and  more  unknown 
than  all  essence, — as  holy  among  the  holies,  and  concealed  in  the  intelligi- 
ble Gods,  And  again  after  these  things  descending  into  a  reasoning  pro- 
cess from  ^n  intellectual  hymn,  and  employing  the  irreprehensible  science 

'  For  e^otrm,  it  b  necessary  to  read  oSurcDy.  For  die  occult  and  invisible  order  of  Night  and 
Phanes  is  called  by  Orpheus  the  oA/hm.  So  that  by  the  Jlrst  adgta,  Produs  means  the  highest 
order  of  intelligtbles. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


140  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK   IL 

of  dialectic,  let  us,  following  the  contemplation  of  first  causes,  survey  the 
manner  in  which  the  first  God  is  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things.  And 
let^our  descent  be  as  far  as  to  this.  But  opinion  and  phantasy  and  sense, 
prevent  us  indeed  firom  partaking  of  the  presence  of  the  Gods,  and  draw 
us  down  from  Olympian  goods  to  earth-bom  motions,  Titannically  divide 
the  intellect  that  is  in  us,  and  divulse  us  from  an  establishment  in  wholes 
to  the  images  of  beings. 


CHAPTER    XII. 

What  therefore  will  be  the  first  conception  of  the  science  proceeding 
from  intellect,  and  unfolding  itself  into  light  ?  What  other  can  we  assert 
it  to  be  than  that  which  is  the  most  simple  and  the  most  known  of  all  the 
conceptions  contained  in  this  science?  What  therefore  is  this  ?  "  The  one^ 
says  Parmenides,ifitis  the  one  will  not  be  many/^  For  it  is  necessary  that 
the  many  should  participate  of  the  one ;  but  the  one  does  not  participate 
of  the  oney  but  is  the  one  itself.  Neither  is  that  which  is  primarily  one  par- 
ticipable.  For  it  would  not  be  purely  one  if  mingled  with  the  many,  nor 
that  which  is  one,  if  it  received  the  addition  of  that  which  is  subordinate. 
The  one  therefore  is  exempt  from  the  many.  The  many  however  subsist  pri- 
marily in  the  summit  of  the  first  intellectual  Gods,  and  in  the  intelligible 
place  of  survey y  as  we  are  taught  in  the  second  hypothesis.  The  one^  there- 
fore, entirely  transcends  an  order  of  this  kind,  and  is  the  cause  of  it.  For 
the  not  many 9  is  not  privation,  as  we  have  said,  but  the  cause  of  the  many. 
This,  therefore,  Parmenides  does  not  think  it  requisite  to  demonstrate,  but 
as  a  thing  most  manifest  to  every  one,  he  first  evinces  this,  through  the 
opposition  as  it  were  of  the  many  to  the  one.  But  employing  this  he  takes 
away  that  which  follows  ;  and  he  takes  away  that  which  is  posterior  to  this 
by  employing  the  conclusions  prior  to  it,  and  this  he  always  does,  after  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XII.  OF  PLATO.  I41 

same  manner.  And  at  one  time  indeed,  he  assumes  the  elements  of  the 
demonstrations  from  proximate  conclusions,  but  at  another  time  from 
those  that  are  more  remote.  For  after  this  intelligible  order  of  Gods,  as 
we  have  said,  he  gives  subsistence  to  that  order  which  connectedly  con* 
tains  and  bounds  the  extent  of  them,  from  their  exempt  cause.  But  this 
order  is  called  by  him  in  the  second  hypothesis  parts  and  a  whole.  These 
therefore  he  denies  of  the  one  employing  the  many  for  the  purpose  of 
distinguishing  the  subjects  and  the  one.  For,  as  he  says,  that  which  is 
a  whole  and  has  parts  is  many  ;  but  the  one  is  beyond  the  many.  If, 
therefore,  the  one  transcends  the  intelligible  simpHcity,  but  whole  and  that 
which  has  parts  proceed  from  it  in  order  to  become  the  bond  of  the  whole 
of  this  distribution,  is  it  not  necessary  that  the  one  should  neither  be  a 
whole,  nor  be  indigent  of  parts  ?  And  I  think  it  is  through  this  trans* 
cendency  that  the  one  presubsists  as  the  cause  of  this  order  of  Gods,  and 
that  it  produces  this  order,  but  in  an  exempt  manner. 

In  the  third  place  after  these,  we  may  survey  the  order  which  is  allotted 
the  boundary  of  the  intellectual  and  at  the  same  time  intelligible  Gods, 
proceeding  from  the  one^  and  may  behold  the  one  perfectly  expanded  above 
it.  For  this  order  indeed  subsists  from  the  second  genera,  and  from  the 
intellectual  wholeness  of  the  genera.  But  the  one^  as  has  been  demon- 
strated, is  exempt  according  to  cause  from  this  wholeness.  The  one  there- 
fore has  neither  beginning,  or  middle,  or  end,  nor  has  it  extremes,  nor  does 
it  participate  of  any  figure.  For  through  these  Gods,  the  before  men- 
tioned order  of  Gods  becomes  apparent.  Whether  therefore,  there  be  a 
perfective  summit,  or  what  is  celebrated  as  the  middle  centre  in  these 
Gods,  or  a  termination  converting  the  end  of  these  divinities  to  their  be* 
ginning,  the  one  is  similarly  beyond  every  triple  distribution.  For  the 
one  would  have  parts,  and  would  be  many,  if  it  participated  of  things  of 
this  kind.  But  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  one  unically  subsists 
prior  to  the  mariy,  and  to  wholeness  together  with  its  parts,  as  the  cause 
of  them.  And  you  see  how  Parmenides  indeed  exhibits  to  us  one  ^nega- 
tion of  the  highest  order,  but  two  negations  of  the  middle,  and  three  of 
the  last  order.     Besides  this  also,  he  shows  that  the  one  has  no  extremity* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


143  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  H 

But  the  infinite  is  a  thing  of  this  kind.    And  separately  from  this  he  like- 
wise shows  that  the  one  is  unreceptive  of  all  figures. 

Again  therefore,  after  these  triple  orders  we  must  direct  our  attention  to 
the  intellectual  Gods  subsisting  from  these^  and  receiving  a  tripartite  di- 
vision,  and  must  demonstrate  that  the  one  transcends  these  also.  For 
such  is  the  one^  says  Parmenides,  since  it  is  neither  in  itself,  nor  in  another. 
For  if  it  were  in  another,  it  would  be  on  all  sides  comprehended  by  that 
in  which  it  is,  and  would  every  where  touch  that  which  comprehends  it. 
But  in  this  case,  it  would  have  a  figure,  would  consist  of  parts,  and  on 
this  account  would  be  many  and  not  one.  And  if  it  were  ip  itself  it 
would  entirely  comprehend  itself  in  itself.  But  comprehending  and  at 
the  same  time  being  comprehended,  it  will  be  two,  and  will  be  no  longer 
primarily  one.  'The  discourse  therefore  proceeds  to  the  same  conclusion, 
and  evinces  that  the  one  will  not  be  one,  by  the  summit  of  the  intellectual 
order,  if  any  one  endeavours  to  mingle  it  with  other  things.  Hence  the  one 
being  perfectly  exempt  from  this  summit  also„  gives  subsistence  to  it,  this 
summit  at  one  and  the  same  time  participating  of  the  third  of  the  Gods 
placed  above  it,  but  being  produced  from  the  second  of  these  Gods,  and 
being  perfected  from  the  first,  and  entirely  established  in  it. 

Moreover,  the  one  likewise  generates  the  second  intellectual  order,  being 
unmingled  with  it.  For  the  one  neither  stands  still,  nor  is  moved.  It 
participates  therefore  of  neither  of  these ;  but  being  similarly  exempt 
from  both^  it  at  the  same  time  transcends  the  middle  orders  of  the  intel- 
lectual progression  of  the  Gods.  For  if  it  were  moved,  it  would  be 
moved  in  a  twofold  respect,  viz.  either  according  to  a  change  in  quality, 
or  local  motion.  But  it  is  not  possible  that  the  one  can  be  changed  in 
quality ;  for  being  thus  changed  it  will  be  not  one,  and  will  fall  off  from 
a  unical  hyparxis.  Nor  can  it  be  locally  moved.  For  it  is  impossible 
that  it  should  be  moved  in  a  circle,  because  it  would  have  parts,  viz*  middle 
and  extremes.  And  if  it  changed  one  place  for  another  it  would  be  par- 
tible. For  it  would  be  necessary  that  it  should  neither  be  wholly  in  that 
place  to  which  it  is  moved,  nor  in  that  whence  it  begins  to  be  moved. 
For  if  it  were  wholly  in  either  of  them,  it  would  be  immoveable,  in  con* 
sequence  of  partly  not  yet  being  moved,  and  partly  having  now  ceased 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIL  OF  PLATO.  143 

its  motion.  But  if  the  one  stands  still,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  it 
should  abide  in  the  same  thing.  But  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the- 
one  is  no  where.  Hence  it  is  neither  in  itself,  nor  in  another  thing.  In 
no  respect  therefore  is  the  one  moved,  or  does  it  stand  still,  which  things 
[viz.  motion  \and  permanency]  particularly  belong  to  the  middle  order  of 
intellectuals,  as  will  be  evident  from  the  second  hypothesis.  For  the  first 
God  produces  this  order  also,  being  exempt  from  it. 

In  the  third  place,  we  may  survey  through  what  next  follows,  the  last 
order  of  intellectuals,  proceeding  from  the  one^  and  subordinate  to  it.  For 
in  this  order  sameness  and  difference  subsist  unitedly.  But  at  the  same 
time  the  one  subsists  prior  to  both  these.  For  different  is  said  to  be  dif* 
ferent  both  from  itself  and  from  other  things.  And  in  a  similar  manner 
same  is  the  same  with  itself,  and  with  other  things.  But  the  one  is  not 
indeed  different  from  itself,  because  that  which  is  different  from  the  one 
will  be  not  one.  And  it  is  not  the  same  with  other  things,  lest  becoming 
the  same  with  them,  it  should  latently  pass  into  their  nature.  Moreover, 
neither  is  the  one  different  from  other  things.  For  it  would  be  at  the  same 
time  one,  and  would  have  as  an  addition  the  power  of  difference.  For 
so  far  as  it  is  different  it  will  not  be  one;  since  difference  is  not  the  one. 
Hence  being  one  and  different,  it  will  be  many  and  not  the  one.  Nor 
is  the  one  the  same  with  itself.  For  if  the  one  and  the  same  differ  only  in 
name,  the  many  will  not  be  in  consequence  of  participating  of  sameness 
with  each  other.  For  it  is  impossible  that  the  many  should  become  one 
by  participating  of  the  many.  But  if  the  one  and  sameness  are  essentially 
different,  that  which  is  primarily  one  does  not  participate  of  sameness, 
lest  by  receiving  sameness  in  addition  to  the  one^  it  should  become  a  pas- 
sive one,  and  not  that  which  is  primarily  one.  If  however  the  extremity 
of  intellectuals  is  characterized  by  this  tetrad,  it  is  evident  that  the  one  exist- 
ing beyond  this  also  supernally  unfolds  it  into  light,  and  places  over  die 
wholes  of  the  universe  a  tetradic  monad,  the  source  of  ornament  to  all 
secondary  natures.  For  from  henee  other  things  primarily  receive  a  com- 
munication with  the  one  which  are  also  indeed  produced  and  connectedly 
contained  by  the  one. 

But  after  the  intellectual  Gods,  the  inefiable  transcendency  of  the  one 


Digitized  by 


Google 


144  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 

arranges  the  extoit  of  the  supermundane  divinities,  the  one  in  the  mean 
time,  being  occultly  exempt  from  its  supermundane  progeny.  And  this 
extent  indeed  proximately  subsists  from  the  intellectual  Gods,  but  uni- 
formly receives  its  hyparxis  from  the  first  God.  This,  therefore,  Parmen- 
ides  produces  through  similitude  and  dissimilitude,  from  the  deity  which 
encloses  the  boundary  of  the  intellectual  monads.  For  the  similar  is  that 
which  is  passive  to  sameness,  in  [the  same  manner  as  dissimilitude  is 
that  which  is  passive  to  diflference.  Parmenides  therefore  demonstrates 
that  the  one  transcends  according  to  one  simplicity  such  a  peculiarity  of 
the  Gods  also  as  this.  For  that  which  is  established  above  the  power  of 
same  and  different,  in  a  much  greater  degree  transcends  the  genera  which 
are  allotted  a  subsistence  according  to  similitude  and  dissimilitude. 

What  therefore  remains  after  this  ?  Is  it  not  evident  that  it  is  the  muU 
titude  of  the  mundane  Gods  ?  But  this  also  is  twofold^  the  one  being 
celestial,  but  the  other  sublunary.  Of  these,  therefore,  the  genus  whidi 
revolves  in  the  heavens,  proceeds  together  with  the  equal,  the  greater  and 
the  less.  But  in  the  sublunary  genus  the  equal  is  allotted  a  difference  in 
multitude  from  the  celestial  equality,  but  the  unequal  is  again  divided  by 
the  power  of  the  more  and  the  less.  According  to  another  genus  there^ 
fore  of  the  divine  orders,  there  will  be  a  monad  and  a  duad,  but  above 
indeed,  they  are  allied  to  the  one  and  to  sameness,  and  beneath  to  multi* 
tude,  and  the  inteUectual  cause  of  difference.  Hence  the  one  transcends 
«11  these.  For  the  equal  indeed  every  where  consists  of  the  same  parts. 
By  what  contrivance  therefore  is  it  possible  that  the  i^ature  which  at  one 
and  the  same  time  is  exempt  from  sameness,  and  the  difference  which  is 
associated  with  it,  should  participate  of  equality  and  inequality  ? 

Besides  all  these  divide  orders  therefore  we  must  intellectually  survey 
the  genera  of  deified  souls,  and  which  are  distributed  about  the  Gods, 
For  in  each  of  the  divine  progressions  and  in  the  progressions  also  of  souIb, 
the  first  genus  presents  itself  to  the  view  connascent  with  the  Gods ;  since 
both  in  the  heavens,  and  in  the  sublunary  region  divine  sou]s  receive  the 
division  of  the  Gods  into  the  world,  as  the  Athenian  Guest  in  a  certain 
place  demonstrates.  The  psychical  extent  therefore,  is  characterized  by 
time,  and  by  a  life  according  to  time,     But  the  peculiarity  of  divine  squIs 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XII.  OF  PLATO.  145 

is  shown  by  Parmenides  to  consist  in  their  being  younger  and  at  the  same 
time  older  both  than  themselves  and  other  things.  For  revolving  always 
according  to  the  same  time,  and  conjoining  the  beginning  with  the  end,  as 
at  one  and  the  same  time  proceeding  to  the  end  of  the  whole  period  they 
become  younger,  but  as  at  the  same  time  circulating  to  the  beginning  of 
it,  they  become  older.  All  their  ages  however,  perpetually  preserve  the 
same  measures  of  time.  Again,  there  is  sameness  in  them  and  difference, 
the  former  indeed  preserving  equality,  but  the  latter  inequality,  according 
to  time.  The  one  therefore  subsists  prior  to  divine  souls,  and  generates 
these  also  together  with  the  Gods.  We  now  therefore  come  to  the  end  of 
the  whole  distribution  of  more  excellent  natures ;  and  the  cause  of  all 
intelligibles  at  once  unfolds  into  light  the  genera  that  follow  the  Gods, 
and  that  are  triply  divided  by  the  three  parts  of  time.  But  this  c^use  is 
demonstrated  by  the  intellectual  projections  of  Parmenides  to  be  also 
exempt  from  these.  For  that  which  is  beyond  all  time  and  the  life  which 
is  according  to  time,  can  by  no  contrivance  become  subservient  to  the 
more  partial  periods  of  time. 

That  which  is  the  first  of  all  things  therefore,  unfolds  into  light  all  the 
Gods,  divine  souls,  and  the  more  excellent  genera,  and  is  neither  compli- 
cated with  its  progeny,  nor  multiplied  about  them  ;  but  being  perfectly 
exempt  from  them  in  an  admirable  simplicity,  and  transcendency  of 
union,  it  imparts  to  all  things  indifferently  progression  and  at  the  same 
time  order  in  the  progression.  Parmenides  therefore  beginning  from  the 
intelligible  place  ^of  survey  of  the  first  intellectual  Gods,  proceeds  thus 
far,  according  to  the  measures  of  generation,  giving  subsistence  to  the 
genera  of  the  Gods,  and  to  the  natures  that  are  united  to  and  follow  the 
Gods/  and  perpetually  evinces  that  the  one  is  ineffably  exempt  from  all 
things.  But  again,  from  hence  he  returns  to  the  beginning,  and  imitating 
the  conversion  of  the  whole  of  things,  separates  the  one  from  the  highest, 
viz.  from  the  intelligible  Gods.  For  thus  especially  we  may  survey  the 
transcendency  of  the  one^  and  the  immense  difierence  of  its  union  from 
all  other  things,  if  we  not  only  demonstrate  that  it  is  established  above 

'  For  rm  0fc»y  it  is  necessary  to  read  roi;  (fo<;. 

Proc.  Vol.  i.  T 


Digitized  by 


Google 


146  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  II. 

tlie  second  or  third  progressions  in  the  divine  orders,  but  also  that  it  sub- 
sists prior  to  the  intelligible  unities  themselves,  and  this  in  a  manner  eon« 
fbrmable  to  the  simplicity  of  their  occult  nature,  and  not  through  a  variety 
of  If  ords,  but  through  intellectual  projection  alone.  For  intelligibles  are 
naturally  adapted  to  be.known  by  intellect.  This  therefore,  Parmenides 
also  evinces  in  reality,  relinquishing  logical  methods,  but  energizing  ac- 
cording to  intellect,  and  asserting  that  the  one  is  above  ess^ice,  and  being 
characterized  by  the  one.  For  this  assertion  was  not  collected  from  the 
jH'eceding  conclusions.  For  the  discourse  about  the  first  Gods  them- 
selves would  be  without  demonstration,  if  it  derived  its  credibility  from 
things  subordinate.  At  the  same  time  therefore,  Parmenides  contends 
that  all  knowledge,  and  all  the  instrun^ents  of  knowledge,  fall  short  of  the 
transcendency  of  the  one,  and  beautifully  end  in  the  inefiaUb  of  that 
Grod  who  is  beyond  all  things.  For  after  scientific  energies,  and  intellec- 
tual projections,  a  union  with  the  unknown  follows,  to  which  also  Par- 
menides referring  the  whde  of  his  discussion,  concludes  the  first  hypo- 
thesis, suspending  indeed  all  the  divine  genera  from  the  one,  but  evincing 
tiiat  the  one  is  unically  exempt  from  all  things,  subsisting  without  the 
participation  of  intelligibles  and  sensibles,  and  in  an  ineffable  manner 
giving  subsistence  to  the  j>articipated  monads.  Hence  also,  the  one  is 
said  to-be  beyond  that  one  which  is  conjoined  with  essence,  and  at  tlie 
same  time  to  be  bey<md  every  participated  multitude  of  unities. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK    III- 


CHAPTER  i. 

Such  therefore  is  the  theology  with  Plato  concerning  the  first  God,  as 
it  appears  to  me,  and  so  great  is  the  transcendency  which  it  is  allotted  v 
with  respect  to  all  other  discussions  of  divine  concerns ;  at  one  and  the 
same  time  venerably  preserving  the  ineffable  union  of  this  God  exempt 
from  the  whole  of  things,  uncircumscribed  by  all  gnostic  comprehensions, 
and  apart  fix)m  all  beings  ;  and  unfolding  the  anagogic  paths  to  him,  per- 
fecting that  parturient  desire  which  souls  always  possess  of  the  fattier,  and 
progenitor  of  all  things,  and  enkindling  that  torch  in  them,  by  which  they 
are  especially  conjoined  with  the  unknown  transcendency  of  the  one.  But 
after  this  imparti^ipable,  inefiable,  and  truly  superessential  cause,  which 
is  separated  from  all  essence,  power  and  energy,  the  discussion  of  the 
Gods  immediately  follows.     For  to  what  other  thing  prior  to  the  unities 
is  it  lawful  to  be  conjoined  with  the  one,  or  what  else  can  be  more  united 
to  the  unical  God  than  the  multitude  of  Grods  ?   Concerning  these  there- 
fore, we  shall  in  the  next  place  unfold  the  inartificial  theory  of  Plato,  in- 
voking the  Gods  themselves  to  enkindle  in  us  the  light  of  truth.     I  wish 
however  prior  to  entering  on  the  particulars  of  this  theory,  to  convince 
the  reader,  and  to  make  it  evident  to  him  through  demonstration,  that 
there  are  necessarily  as  many  orders  of  the  Gods,  as  the  Parmenides  of 
Plato  unfolds  to  us  in  the  second  hypothesis. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


148  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

This  therefore  is  I  think  prior  to  all  other  things  apparent  to  those  whose 
conceptions  are  not  perverted,  that  every  where,  but  especially  in  the 
divine  orders,  second  progressions,  are  completed  through  the  similitude 
of  these  to  their  proper  principles.  For  nature  and  intellect,  and  every 
generative  cause,  are  naturally  adapted  to  produce  and  conjoin  to  them- 
selves things  similar,  prior  to  such  as  as  are  dissimilar  to  themselves.  For 
if  it  is  necessary  that  the  progression  of  beings  should  be  continued,  and 
that  no  vacuum  should  intervene  either  in  incorpor<^al  natures,  or  in 
bodies,  it  is  necessary  that  every  thing  which  -proceeds  naturally  should 
proceed  through  similitude.  For  it  is  by  no  means  lawful  that  the  thing 
caused  should  be  the  same  with  its  cause ;  since  a  remission  and  deficiency 
of  the  union  of  the  producing  cause  generates  secondary  natures.  For 
again,  if  that  which  is  second  were  the  same  as  that  which  is  first,  each 
would  be  similarly  the  same,  and  one  would  not  be  cause,  but  the  other 
the  thing  caused.  If  however,  the  one  by  its  very  being,  or  essentially, 
has  an  exuberance  of  productive  power,  but  the  other  falls  short  of  the 
power  that  produced  it,  these  are  naturally  separated  from  each  other,  and 
the  generative  cause  precedes  in  excellence  the  thing  generated,  and  there 
is  not  a  sameness  of  things  which  so  greatly  differ.  But  if  that  which  is 
second  is  not  the  same  with  that  which  is  first,  if  indeed  it  is  different 
only,  they  will  not  be  conjoined  to  each  other,  nor  will  the  one  participate 
of  the  other.  For  contact  and  participation,  are  indeed  a  communion  of 
things  conjoined,  and  a  sympathy  of  participants  with  the  natures  they 
participate.  But  if  it  is  at  the  same  time  the  same  with  and  different 
from  that  which  is  first,  if  indeed  the  sameness  is  indigent,  and  vanquished 
by  the  power  which  is  contrary  to  it,  the  one  will  no  longer  be  the  leader 
of  the  progression  of  beings,  nor  will  every  generative  cause  subsist  prior 
to  things  of  a  secondary  nature,  in  the  order  of  the  good.  For  the  one 
is  not  the  cause  of  division,  but  of  friendship.  And  the  good  converts 
generated  natures  to  their  causes.  But  the  conversion  and  friendship  of 
things  secondary  to  such  as  are  primary  is  through  similitude,  but  not 
through  a  dissimilar  nature.  If  therefore  the  one  is  the  cause  of  the  whole 
of  things,  and  if  the  good  is  in  an  exempt  manner  desirable  to  all  things, 
it  will  every  where  give  subsistence  to  the  progeny  of  precedaneous  causes, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  1.  OF  PLATO.  149 

through  similitude^  in  order  that  progression  may  be  according  to  the  (me^ 
and  that  the  conversion  of  things  which  have  proceeded  may  be  to  iht 
good.    For  without  similitude  there  will  neither  be  the  conversidn  of  things 
to  their  proper  principles,  nor  the  generation  of  effects.     Let  this  there, 
fore  be  considered  as  a  thing  admitted  in  this  place- 
But  the  second  thing  besides  this,  and  which  is  demonstrated  through 
this,  is,  that  it  is  necessary  every  monad  should  produce  a  number  co-or- 
dinate to  itself,  nature  indeed  a  natural,  but  soul  a  psychical,  and  intellect 
an  intellectual  number.    For  if  every  thing  generative  generates  similars 
prior  to  dissimilars,  as  has  been  before  demonstrated,  every  cause  will 
certainly  deliver  its  own  form  and  peculiarity  to  its  own  progeny,  and 
before  it  gives  subsistence  to  far  distant  progressions,  and  things   which 
are  separated  from  its  nature,  it  will  produce  things  essentially  near  to  it, 
and  conjoined  with  it  through  similitude.     Every  mo^ad  therefore,  gives 
subsistence  to  a  multitude  indeed,  as  generating  that  which  is  second  to 
itself,  and  which  divides  the  powers  that  presubsist  occultly  in  itself.    For 
'those  things  which  are  uniformly  and  contractedly  in  the  monad,  present 
themselves  to  the  view  separately  in  the  progeny  of  the  monad.     And  this 
indeed  the  wholeness  of  nature  manifests,  since  it  contains  in  one  the 
reasons,  [i.  e,   productive  principles]  of  all  things  both  in  the  heavens 
and  in  the  sublunary  region  ;  but  distributes  the  powers  of  itself^to  the 
natures  which  are  divided  from  it  about  bodies.     For  the  nature  of  earth, 
of  fire,  and  of  the  moon,  possesses  from  the  wholeness  of  nature  its  pecu- 
liarity and  form,  and  energizes  together  with  this  wholeness,  and  con- 
tains its  own  allottment.     This  also  the  monad  of  the  mathematical  sci- 
ences and  of  numbers  manifests.     For  this  being  all  things  primarily,  and 
spermatically  producing  in  itself  the  forms  of  numbers,  distributes  dif- 
ferent powers  to  different  externally  proceeding  numbers.     For  it  is  not 
possible  that  what  is  generated,  should  at  once  receive  all  the  abundance 
of  its  generator.     And  it  is  necessary  that  the  prolific  power  of  every 
thing  that  pre-exists  in  the  cause '  itsdf  should  become  apparent.     The 
monad  therefore  gives  subsistence  to  a  multitude  about  itself,  and  to 

'  For  cuTHw  it  is  necetssury  to  read  eunet. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


150  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  HI, 

number  which  distributes  the  peculiarities  that  abide  coUectivdj  in  itself. 
Since  however,  as  was  before  observed,  the  similar  is  always  more  allied 
to  cause  than  the  dissimilar,  there  will  be  one  multitude  of  similars  to  th^ 
mcmad,  proceeding  from  the  monad  ;  and  another  of  dissimilars.  But 
again,  the  multitude  which  is  similar  to  the  monad  is  that  in  a  divided 
manner  which  the  monad  is  indivisibly.  For  if  the  monad  possesses  a 
peculiar  power  and  hyparxis,  there  will  be  the  same  form  of  hyparxis  in 
Uie  multitude  together  with  a  remission  with  reference  to  the  whole. 

After  this  however,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  in  the  third  place,  that 
of  progressions,  such  as  are  nearer  to  their  cause  are  indicative  of  a  greater 
multitude  of  things,  and  are  at  the  same  time  in  a  certain  respect  equal 
to  their  containing  causes  ;  but  that  such  as  are  more  remote  possess  a 
less  extended  power  of  signification  ;  and  on  account  of  the  diminution 
of  their  power,  change  and  diminish  at  the  same  time  the  amplitude  of 
production.     For  if,  of  progressions,  that  which  subsists  the  first  in  order 
is  more  similar  to  its  principle,  and  that  which  gives  subsistence  to  liie 
greatest  number  is  both  with  respect  to  essence  and  power  more  similar 
to  the  generating  principle  of  all  things,  it  is  necessary  that  of  secondary 
natures,  such  as  are  nearer  to  the  monad,  and  which  receive  dominion  after 
it,  should  give  a  greater  extent  to  their  productions ;  but  that  such  things 
as  are  more  separated  from  their  primary  monad  should  neither  pervade  in 
a  similar  manner  through  all  things,  nor  extend  their  efficacious  energies  to 
far  distant  progressions^    And  again,  as  similar  to  this,  it  is  necessary  that 
the  nature  which  gives  subsistence  to  the  greatest  number  of  effects,  should 
be  arranged  next  to  the  monad  its  principle  ;  and  that  the  nature  gene- 
rative of  a  more  numerous  progeny,  because  it  is  more  similar  to  the 
supplying  cause  of  all  things  than  that  which  is  generative  of  a  few,  must 
be  arranged  nearer  to  the  monad,  according  to  hyparxis.  For  if  it  is  more 
remote,  it  will  be  more  dissimilar  to  the  first  principle ;  but  if  it  is  more 
dissimilar,  it  will  neither  possess  a  power  comprehending  the  p>ower  of 
similar  natures,  nor  an  energy  abundantly  prolific.     For  an  abundant 
cause  is  allied  to  the  cause  of  all.     And  universally,  tha&  which  is  gene- 
rative of  a  more  abundant,  is  more  naturally  allied  to  its  principle  than 
that  which  is  productive  of  a  less  numerous  progeny.  For  the  production 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  I.  OF  PLATO.  151 

of  fewer  dffects  is  a  defect  of  power ;  but  a  defect  of  power  is  a  diminu*- 
tion  of  essence ;  and  a  dhninntion  of  essence  becomes  redundant  on  ac- 
count of  dissimilitude  to  its  cause,  and  a  departure  from  the  first  prin- 
ciple. 

Again  therefore,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  said,  we  shall  assert  this 
which  possesses  the  most  indubitable  truth,  that  prior  to  the  causes  which 
are  participate,  it  is  every  where  necessary  that  imparticipable  causes 
should  have  a  prior  subsistence  in  the  whole  of  things.  For  if  it  is  neces- 
sary that  a  cause  should  have  the  same  relation  to  its  progeny  as  the  one 
to  all  the  nature  of  beings,  and  that  it  should  naturally  possess  this  order 
towards  things  secondary ;  but  the  one  is  imparticipable,  being  sim.ilariy 
exempt  from  all  beings,  bs  unically  producing  all  things ; — if  this  be  the 
case,  it  is  requisite  that  every  other  cause  which  imitates  the  transcen* 
dency  of  the  one  with  respect  to  all  things,  should  be  exempt  from  the 
natures  which  are  in  secondary  ranks,  and  which  are  participated  by  them. 
And  again,  as  equivalent  to  this,  it  is  requisite  that  every  imparticipable 
and  primary  cause  should  estabhsh  monads  of  secondary  natures  similar 
to  itself,  prior  to  such  as  are  dissimilar.  I  say,  for  instance,  it  is  requisite 
that  one  soul  should  distribute  many  souls  to  different  natures  ;  and  one 
intellect  participated  intellects  to  many  souls.  For  thus  the  first  exempt 
genus  will  every  where  have  an  order  analogous  to  the  one.  And  secon- 
dary natures  which  participate  kindred  causes  will  be  analogous  to  these 
causes,  and  through  the  similitude  of  these  will  be  conjoioed  with  their 
imparticipable  principle.  H^ice  prior  to  the  forms  which  are  in  other 
things,  those  are  established  which  subsist  in  themselves ;  exempt  causes 
prior  to  such  as  are  co-ordinate ;  and  imparticipable  monads  prior  to  such 
as  are  participable.  And  consequently  (as  that  which  is  demonstrated  at 
the  same  time  with  this)  the  exempt  causes  are  generative  of  the  co-or- 
dinate, and  imparticipable  natures  extend  participable  monads  to  their 
progeny.  And  natures  which  subsist  from  themselves  produce  the  powers 
which  are  resident  in  other  things.  These  things  therefore  being  discussed, 
let  us  consider  fiow  each  of  the  divine  genera  subsists  through  analogy,' 
and  survey  following  Plato  himself,  what  are  the  first  and  most  total 

'  For  MfoXvp-iwi  it  U  necessary  to  read  wsO^^us. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


152  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

orders  of  the  Gods.     For  having  discovered  and  demonstrated  this,  we 
shall  perhaps  be  able  to  perceive  the  truth  concerning  these  several  orders. 

It  is  necessary  therefore,  from  the  before-mentioned  axiqms,  since  there 
is  one  unity  the  principle  of  the  whole  of  things,  and  from  which  every 
hyparxis  derives  its  subsistence,  that  this  unity  should  produce  from  itself, 
prior  to  all  other  things,  a  multitude  characterized  by  unity,  and  a  num- 
ber most  allied  to  its  cause.  For  if  every  other  cause  constitutes  a  pro- 
geny similar  to  itself  prior  to  that  which  is  dissimilar,  much  more  must 
the  one  unfold  into  light  after  this  manner  things  posterior  to  itself,  since 
it  is  beyond  similitude,  and  the  one  i^se/f  must  produce  according  to  union 
things  which  primarily  proced  from  it.  For  how  can  the  one  give  subsist- 
ence to  its  progeny  except  unically  ?  For  nature  generates  things  secon- 
dary to  itself  physically,  soul  psychically,  and  intellect  intellectually. 
The  one  therefore  is  the  cause  of  the  whole  of  things  according  to  union, 
and  the  progression  from  the  one  is  uniform.  But  if  that  which  prima- 
rily produces  all  things  is  the  one^  and  the  progression  from  it  is  unical,  it 
is  certainly  necessary  that  the  multitude  thence  produced  should  be  self- 
perfect  unities,  most  allied  to  their  producing  cause.  Farther  still,  if 
every  monad  constitutes  a  number  adapted  to  itself,  as  was  before  demon- 
strated, by  a  much  greater  priority  must  the  one  generate  a  number  of 
this  kind.  For  in  the  progression  of  things,  that  which  is  produced  is 
frequently  dissimilar  to  its  producing  cause,  through  the  dominion  of  dif- 
ference :  for  such  are  the  last  of  things,  and  which  are  far  distant  from 
their  proper  principles.  But  the  first  number,  and  which  is  connascent 
with  the  one^  is  uniform,  ineffable,  superessential,  and  perfectly  similar  to 
its  cause.  For  in  the  first  causes,  neither  does  difference  intervening 
separate  from  the  generator  the  things  begotten,  and  transfer  them  into 
another  order,  nor  does  the  motion  of  the  cause  effecting  a  remission  of 
power,  produce  into  dissimilitude  and  indefiniteness  the  generation  of  the 
whole  of  things  ;  but  the  cause  of  all  things  being  unically  raised  above 
all  motion  and  division,  has  established  about  itself  a  divine  number,  and 
has  united  it  toits  own  simplicity.  The  one  therefore  prior  to  beings  has 
^ven  subsistence  to  the  unities  of  beings. 

For  again,  according  to  another  mode  [of  considering  the  subject]  it  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  I.  OF  PLATO.  J53 

necessary  that  primary  beings  should  participate  of  the  first  cause  through 
their  proximate  unities.  For  secondary  things  are  severally  conjoined  to 
the  natures  prior  to  them  through  similars ;  bodies  indeed  to  the  soul  which 
ranks  as  a  whole,  through  the  several  souls  [which  they  participate] ;  but 
souls  to  universal  intellect  through  intellectual  monads ;  and  first  beings, 
through  unical  hyparxes  to  the  one.  For  being  is  in  its  own  nature  dis- 
similar to  the  one.  For  essence  and  that  which  is  in  want  of  union  ex* 
ternally  derived,  are  unadapled  to  be  conjoined  with  that  which  is  super- 
essential,  and  with  the  first  union,  and  are  far  distant  from  it.  But  the 
unities  of  beings,  since  they  derive  their  subsistence  from  the  imparticipa- 
ble  unity,  and  which  is  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things,  are  able  to  con- 
join beings  to  the  one^  and  to  convert  them  to  themselves. 

It  appears  therefore  to  me,  that  Parmenides  demonstrating  these  things 
through  the  second  hypothesis,  connects  the  one  with  being,  surveys  all 
things  about  the  one^  and  evinces  that  this  proceeding  nature,  and  which 
extends  its  progressions  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things  is  the  one.    For 
prior  to  true  beings  it  was  necessary  to  constitute  the  unities ;  since  it 
neither  was  nor  is  lawful,  says  Timaeus,  for  that  which  is  the  best  of 
things  to  effect  any  thing  else  than  that  which  is  most  beautiful.     But 
this  is  in  a  remarkable  degree  most  similar  to  that  which  is  best.    To  the 
one  however,  a  unical  multitude  is  most  similar ;  since  the  demiurgus  of 
the  universe  also  being  good,  constituted  all  things  similar  to  himself 
through  goodness  itself.     Much  more  therefore,  does  the  fountain  of  all 
good  produce  goodnesses  naturally  united  to  itself,  and  establish  them 
in  beings.  Hence  there  is  one  God,  and  many  Gods,  one  unityand  many 
unities  prior  to  beings,  and  one  goodness,  and  many  after  the  one  good- 
ness, through  which  the  demiurgic  intellect  is  good;  and  every  intellect  is 
divine,,  whether  it  be  an  intellectual  or  intelligible  intellect.     And  that 
which  is  primarily  superessential  is  the  one ;  and  there  are  many  superes- 
sentials  after  the  one.    Whether  therefore,  is  this  multitude  of  unities  im- 
participable  in  the  same  manner  as  the  one  itself ^  or  is  it  participated  by 
beings,  and  is  each  unity  of  beings  the  flower  as  it  were  of  a  certain 
being,  and  the  summit  and  center  of  it,  about  which  each  being '  subsists  ? 

'  For  t¥  it  is  necessary  to  read  ov* 

Proc.  VoL^I.  U 


Digitized  by 


Google 


154  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  111. 

But  if  these  unities  also  are  imparticipable,  in  what  do  they  differ  from 
the  one  ?  For  each  of  them  is  one,  and  primarily  subsists  from  the  one. 
Or  in  what  being  more  redundant  than  the  first  cause  were  they  consti- 
tuted by  it  ?  For  it  is  every  where  necessary  that  what  is  second  being 
subordinate  to  that  which  is  prior  to  itself,  should  fall  short  of  the  union 
of  its  producing '  cause,  and  by  the  addition  of  a  certain  thing  should 
have  a  diminution  of  the  monadic  simplicity  of  the  first.  What  addition 
therefore,  can  we  adduce,  or  what  redundancy  besides  the  oncj  if  each  of 
these  also  is  by  itself  one  ?  For  if  each  of  them  is  one  and  many,  we 
shall  appear  to  transfer  to  them  the  peculiarity  of  being.  But  if  each  is 
one  only,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  one  itself,  why  does  this  rank  as  the 
cause  which  is  exempt  from  all  things,  but  each  of  these  is  allotted  a 
secondary  dignity  ?  Neither  therefore  shall  we  preserve  the  transcendency 
of  the  first  with  reference  to  the  things  posterior  to  it,  nor  can  we  admit 
that  the  unities  proceeding  from  it  are  unconfused  either  with  respect  to 
themselves,  or  to  the  one  principle  of  them. 

But  neither  shall  we  be  persuaded  by  Parmenides  who  produces  the  one 
together  with  being,  and  demonstrates  that  there  are  as  many  parts  of  the 
one  as  there  are  of  being ;  that  each  being  *  also  participates  of  the  one^ 
but  that  the  one  is  every  where  consubsistent  with  being ;  and  in  short, 
who  asserts  that  the  one  of  the  second  hypothesis  participates  of  being, 
and  is  participated  by  being,  the  participation  in  each  not  being  the  same. 
For  the  one  indeed  participates  of  being,  as  not  being  primarily  one,  nor 
exempt  from  being,  but  as  illuminating  truly-existing  essence.  But  being 
participates  of  the  one^  as  that  which  is  connected  by  it,  and  filled  with 
divine  union,  and  converted  to  the  one  itself  v^hich  is  imparticipable.  For 
the  participated  monads  conjoin  beings  to  the  one  which  is  exempt  from 
the  whole  of  things,  in  the  same  manner  as  participated  intellects  conjoin 
souls  to  the  intellect  which  ranks  as  a  whole,  and  as  participated  souls 
conjoin  bodies  to  the  soul  which  ranks  as  a  whole.  For  it  is  not  possible 
that  the  dissimilar  genera  of  secondary  natures  should  be  united  without 

'  For  %aqwro^  it  appears  requisite  to  read  ira^«eyeyro(. 
*  Here  alsa  for  ty  it  is  necessary  to  read  ov. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP-  IL  OF  PLATO.  X55 

media  to  the  cause  which  b  exempt  from  multitude ;  but  it  is  necessary 
that  the  contact  should  be  effected  through  similars.  For  a  similar  mul* 
titude,  so  far  indeed  as  it  is  multitude^  communicates  with  the  dissimilar ; 
,but  so  far  as  it  is  similar  to  the  monad  prior  to  itself,  it  is  conjoined  with 
it.  Being  established  therefore,  in  the  middle  of  both,  it  is  united  to  the 
whole,  and  to  the  one  which  is  prior  to  multitude.  But  it  contains  in 
itself  remote  progressions,  and  which  are  of  themselves  dissimilar  to  the 
one.  Through  itself  also,  it  converts  all  things  to  that  one,  and  thus  all 
things  are  extended  to  the  first  cause  of  the  whole  of  things,  dissimilars 
indeed  through  similars,'  but  similars  through  themselves.  For  similitude 
itself  by  itsdf  conducts  and  binds  the  many  to  the  one^  and  converts 
secondary  natures  to  the  monads  prior  to  them.  For  the  very  being  of 
similars  so  far  as  they  are  similars  is  derived  irom  the  one.  Hence,  it  con« 
joins  multitude  to  that  from  which  it  is  allotted  its  progression.  And  on 
this  account  similitude  is  that  which  it  is,  causing  many  things  to  be  allied, 
to  possess  sympathy  with  themselves^  and  friendship  with  each  other  and 
the  one. 


CHAPTER  II. 

If  however  it  be  requisite,  not  only  by  employing  the  intellectual  pro- 
jections of  Parmenides  to  unfold  the  multitude  of  Gods  participated  by 
beings,  but  also  concisely  to  demonstrate  the  theory  of  Socrates  about 
these  particulars,  we  must  recollect  what  is  written  in  the  Republic,  where 
he  says  that  the  light  proceeding  from  the  good  is  unific  of  intellect  and 
of  beings.  For  through  these  things  the  good  is  demonstrated  to  be  ex- 
empt from  being  and  essence,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sun  is  exempt 
from  visible  natures.  But  this  light  being  in  intelligibles  illuminates 
them,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  solar-form  light  which  is  in  visible  na« 


'  For  avofioKov  it  is  necessary  to  read  o/xoieoy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


156  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  111. 

tares.  For  visible  natures  no  otherwise  become  apparent,  and  known 
to  the  sight,  than  through  the  light  which  is  ingenerated  in  them.  All 
intelligibles  therefore  become  boniform  through  the  participation  of 
light,  and  through  this  light,  every  true  "being  is  most  similar  to  the 
good.  If,  therefore,  it  makes  no  difference  to  speak  of  this  light,  or  of 
the  one  (for  this  light  conjoins  intelligibles,  and  causes  them  to  be  one, 
as  deriving  its  subsistence  from  the  one)  if  this  be  the  case,  the  deity 
proceeding  from  the  first  is  participate,  and  all  the  multitude  of  unities 
is  participable.  And  that  indeed  which  is  truly  superessential  is  the  one. 
But  each  of  the  other  Gods,  according  to  his  proper  hyparxis,  by  which 
he  is  a  superessential  God,  is  simitar  to  the  first ;  but  they  are  participated 
by  essence  and  being.  According  to  this  reasoning  therefore,  the  Gods 
appear  to  us  to  be  unities,  and  participable  unities,  binding  indeed  all 
beings  to  themselves,  but  conjoining  through  themselves  to  the  one  which 
similarly  transcends  all  things,  the  natures  posterior  to  themselves. 

Since  therefore  each  of  the  Gods  is  indeed  a  unity,  but  is  participated 
by  some  being,  whether  shall  we  say  that  the  same  being  participates  of 
each  of  the  unities  or  that  the  participants  of  some  of  the  unities  are 
more,  but  of  others  less  numerous  }  And  if  this  be  the  case  either  the  par- 
ticipants of  the  superior  unities  must  be  more,  but  of  the  inferior  must 
be  fewer  in  number,  or  vice  versa.  For  it  is  necessary  that  there  should 
be  an  order  of  the  unities,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  see  that  of  numbers 
some  are  nearer  to  their  principle,  but  othejs  more  remote  from  it.  And 
that  some  are  more  simple,  but  others  more  composite,  and  exceed  indeed 
in  quantity,  but  suffer  a  diminution  in  power.  But  it  is  well  that  we 
have  mentioned  numbers.  For  if  it  is  necessary  to  survey  the  order  of 
the  first  monads  with  respect  to  each  other,  and  their  progression  about 
beings,  from  these  as  images,  in  these  also  the  monads  which  are  nearer 
to  the  one  will  be  participated  by  things  which  are  more  simple  in  essence^ 
but  thos(i  which  are  more  remote  from  it,  will  be  participated  by  more 
composite  essences.  For  thus  the  participation  will  be  according  to  the 
analogous ;  first  monads  being  always  participated  by  the  first  beings,  but 
second  monads  by  secondary  beings.     For  again,  if  the  first  is  exempt 

'  oyrco;  is  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  n.  OP  PLATO.  15  7 

from  all  things,  and  is  imparticipable,  but  that  which  is  connascent  with 
the  most  simple  nature  and  the  one  is  more  similar  to  the  imparticipable 
than  that  which  is  connascent  with  a  more  various  and  multiform  nature, 
and  which  has  more  powers  suspended  from  it, — if  this  be  the  case,  it  is 
perfectly  obvious,  that  the  unities  which  are  nearer  to  the  one  are  neces* 
sarily  participated  by  the  first  and  most  simple  essences;  but  that  those 
which  are  more  remote  are  participated  by  more  composite  essences, 
which  are  less  in  power,  but  are  greater  in  number  and  multitude.  For 
in  short,  additions  in  these  unities  are  ablations  of  powers;  and  that 
which  is  nearer  to  the  one^  which  surpasses  the  whole  of  things  by  an 
admirable  simplicity,  is  more  uniform,  and  is  consubsistent  with  more 
total  orders.  And  it  happens  according  to  the  ratio  of  power,  that  the 
simplicity  of  the  first  unities  is  transcendent.  For  those  things  which  are 
the  causes  of  a  greater  number  of  effects,  imitate  as  much  as  possible  the 
cause  of  all  things,  but  those  which  are  the  causes  of  fewer  effects,  have 
an  essence  more  various  than  the  natures  that  are  prior  to  them/  For 
this  variety  distributes  into  minute  parts  and  diminishes  the  power  which 
abides  in  one.  Moreover,  in  participated  souls  also,  such  as  are  first  and 
most  divine  subsist  in  simple  and  perpetual  bodies.  Others  again  are 
connected  with  bodies  that  are  simple,  but  in  conjunction  with  these  with 
material  bodies  also.  And  others  are  connected  at  one  and  the  same 
time  with  simple,  material  and  composite  bodies.  For  the  celestial  souls 
indeed  rule  over  simple  bodies,  and  such  as  have  an  immaterial  and  im* 
mutable  subsistence.  But  the  souls  that  govern  the  wholes  of  the  elements, 
are  at  the  same  time  invested  with  etherial  garments,  and  at  the  same 
time  through  these  are  carried  in  the  wholes  of  the  elements,  which  as 
wholes  indeed  are  perpetual  and  simple,  but  as  material  receive  genera* 
tion  and  corruption,  and  composition  from  dissimilar  natures.  And  the 
souls  that  rank  in  the  third  order,  are  those  which  proximately  inspire 
with  life  their  luciform  *  vehicles,  but  also  attract  from  the  simple  ele* 

Instead  of  t«  ftt y  yap  irA«ioya)y  an^tt^  xat   roov   iravrcof   aiTiwv   Kara   i^v  ^vvafMV  tow  wpo   Mnw¥ 
iro«xiA«Tf ^«y  xara  -njy  owtriay  fOTiv,  it  is  necessary  to  read  ra  f«v  yap  TXfioy«y  mrtx,  xai  rm   xavrooif 
atriov  xara  Iwafutf  fUf/Louvratf  ra  tn  rwt  lAao-a-oycov  rtw  Tgo  awtoaf  voixiXartpa  xara  njv  ovatav  t^riv. 
*  For  avTOf iSwiy  it  is  requisite  to  read  «uyofiWiy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


158  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  HI. 

ment  material  vestsmeuts,  pour  into  these  a  secondary  life,  and  through 
these  communicate  with  composite  and  multiform  bodies,  and  sustain 
through  this  participation  another  third  hfe. 

If,  however,  you  are  willing  to  survey  the  intellectual  orders,  some  of 
these  are  arranged  in  the  souls  which  rank  as  wholes,  and  in  the  most 
divine  of  mundane  souls,  which  also  they  govern  in  a  becoming  manner. 
But  others  being  arranged  in  the  souls  of  the  more  excellent  genera,  are 
proximately  participated  by  the  rulers  that  are  in  them ;  and  are  parti- 
cipated secondarily  by  more  partial  essences*  But  again  they  arrange 
third  intellectual  orders  in  partial  souls.  And  according  as  the  power 
which  they  are  allotted  is  diminished,  in  such  proportion  is  partij:;ipation 
in  them  more  various,  and  far  more  composite  than  the  participation  of 
the  natures  that  are  prior  to  them.  If,  therefore,  this  is  the  mode  of  par- 
ticipation in  all  beings,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  of  the  Gods  also 
those  that  are  nearer  to  the  one^  should  be  carried  in  the  more  simple  parts 
of  being,  but  that  those  which  have  proceeded  to  a  greater  distance 
should  be  carried  in  the  more  composite  parts  of  being.  For  the  parti- 
cipations of  second  genera  are  divided  after  this  manner  according  to  a 
similitude  to  them. 

Again  therefore,  we  may  summarily  say,  that  after  the  one  principle 
of  the  whole  of  things,  the  Gods  present  themselves  to  our  view  as  self- 
perfect  monads,  participated  by  beings.'  How  many  orders  'therefore 
there  are  of  beings  we  shall  afterwards  unfold,  and  show  what  beings  are 
allotted  a  more  simple,  and  what  a  more  various  hyparxis.  Of  all.  beings 
then,  the  last  is  that  which  is  corporeal.  For  this  derives  its  being,  and  all 
its  perfection  from  another  more  ancient  cause,  and  is  neither  allotted  sim* 
plicity  nor  composition,  nor  perp)etuity,  nor  incorruptibility  from  its  own 
power.  For  no  body  is  either  self-subsistent,  or  self-begotten  ;  but  every 
thing  which  is  so  contracting  in  one,  cause,  and  that  which  proceeds  from 
cause,  is  incorporeal  and  impartible.  And  in  short,  that  which  is  the 
cause  of  hyparxis  to  itself,  imparts  also  to  itself  an  infinite  power  of  ex- 

'  In  the  origmal  here,  about  a  Une  and  a  half  i$  $o  defectivei  that  not  being  able  to  supply  the 
deficiency,  I  have  not  attempted  to  translate  it. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  II.  OF  PLATO-  i^ 

istence.  For  never  deserting  itself,  it  will  never  cease  to  be,  or  depart  from 
its  own  subsistence.  For  every  thing  that  is  corrupted,  is  corrupted  through 
being  separated  from  the  power  that  supplied  it  with  being.  But  that 
which  imparts  being  to  itself,  as  it  is  not  separated  from  itself,  is  allotted 
through  itself  a  perpetual  essence.  No  body  however,  since  it  is  not  the 
cause  of  perpetuity  to  itself,  will  be  perpetual.  For  every  thing  which  is 
perpetual  possesses  an  infinite  power.  But  body  being  finite  is  not  the 
cause  of  infinite  power.  For  infinite  power  is  incorporeal,  because  all  power 
is  incorporeal.  But  this  is  evident,  because  greater  powers  are  every 
where.  But  no  body  is  capable  of  being  wholly  every  where.  If  there- 
fore, no- body  imparts  to  itself  power,  whether  the  power  be  infinite  or 
finite,  but  that  which  is  self-subsistent  imparts  to  itself  the  power  of  being, 
and  of  existing  perpetually,  no  body  will  be  self-subsistent.  Whence 
therefore  is  being  imparted  to  bodies,  and  what  is  it  which  is  adapted 
proximately  to  supply  them  with  being?  Must  we  not  say  that  the  cause 
of  being  to  bodies  primarily  is  that  which  by  being  present  renders  the 
nature  of  body  more  perfect  than  its  kindred  bodies  [when  they  are  de- 
prived of  it  ?]  This  indeed  is  obvious  to  every  one.  For  it  is  the  province 
of  that  which  imparts  perfection  to  connect  also  the  essence  of  secondary^ 
natures,  since  perfection  itself  is  the  perfection  of  essence.  What  there^ 
fore  is  that  of  which  bodies  participating,  are  said  to  be  better  than  the 
bodies  which  do  not  participate  of  it  ?  Is  it  not  evident  that  it  is  soul  ? 
For  we  say  that  animated  bodies  are  more  perfect  than  such  as  are 
inanimate.  Soul  therefore  is  primarily  beyond  bodies  ;  and  it  must  be 
admitted  that  all  heaven  and  every  thing  corporeal  is  the  vehicle  of  soul. 
Hence,  these  two  orders  of  beings  present  theinselves  to  our  view ;  the  one 
indeed  being  corporeal,  but  the  other  which  is  above  this*,  psychical. 

With  respect  to  soul  itself  however,  whether  is  it  the  same  with  or  dif- 
ferent from  intellect  ?  For  as  the  body  which  participates  of  soul  is  per- 
fect, thus  also  the  soul  is  perfect  which  participates  of  intellect.  And 
of  the  soul  indeed,  which  is  able  to  live  according  to  reason,  all  things  do 
not  participate :  but  of  intellect  and  intellectual  illumination  rational 
souls  participate,  and  also  such  things  as  partake  of  any  kind  of  know- 
ledge.    And  soul  indeed  energizes  according  to  time ;  but  intellect  corn- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


160  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  HI. 

prehe&ds  in  eternity  both  its  essence,  and  at  the  same  time  its  stable  energy. 
And  not  every  soul  indeed  is  adiapted  to  preserve  immutably  and  without 
diminution  the  perfection  of  itself ;  but  every  intellect  is  always  perfect, 
and  possesses  a  never-failing  power  of  its  own  blessedness.  The  intellec- 
tual genus  therefore  is  essentially  beyond  the  psychical ;  since  the  former, 
neither  in  whole  nor  in  partial  intellects^  admits  the  entrance  of  the  na- 
ture of  evil ;  but  the  latter  being  undefiled  in  whole  souls,  departs  in 
partial  souls  from  its  own  proper  blessedness.  What  therefore  is  the  first  of 
beings?  Shall  we  say  intellect,  or  prior  to  this  the  extent  of  life?  For 
soul  indeed  is  self-vital,  supplying  itself  with  life ;  and  intellect  is  the  best 
and  most  perfect,  and  as  we  have  said,  an  eternal  life.  But  the  life  of 
intellect  is  indeed  in  a  certain  respect  intellectual,  and  is  mingled  from 
the  intellectual  and  vital  peculiarity.  It  is  necessary  however,  that  there 
should  be  life  itself.  Whether  therefore  is  life  or  intellect  the  more  ex- 
cellent thing  ?  But  if  gnostic  beings  only  participate  of  intellect,  but 
such  beings  as  are  destitute  of  knowledge  participate  of  life,  (for  we  say 
that  plants  live)  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  life  should  be  arranged 
above  intellect,  being  the  cause  of  a  greater  number  of  effects,  and  im- 
parting by  illumination  more  gifts  from  itself  than  intellect.  What  then  ? 
fc  life  the  first  of  beings  ?  And  is  to  live  the  same  thing  as  to  be  ?  But 
this  is  impossible.  For  if  life  is  that  which  is  primarily  being,  and  to  be 
vital  is  the  same  thing  as  to  have  being,  and  there  is  the  same  definition  of 
both  life  and  being,  every  thing  which  participates  of  life  would  also 
participate  of  being,  and  every  thing  which  participates  of  existence 
would  likewise  participate  of  life.  For  if  each  is  the  same  thing  all 
things  woyld  similarly  participate  of  being  and  life.  All  vital  natures 
indeed  have  essence  and  being ;  but  there  are  many  beings  that  are  des- 
titute of  life.  Being  therefore  subsists  prior  to  the  first  life.  For  that 
which  is  more  universal,  and  the  cause  of  a  greater  number  of  effects,  is 
nearer  to  the  ofie^  as  has  been  before  demonstrated.  Soul  therefore  is 
that  which  is  piimarily  established  above  bodies;  but  intellect  is  beyond 
soul  ;*  life  is  more  ancient  than  intellect ;  and  being  which  is  primarily 
being  is  established  above  all  these.     Every  thing  also  which  participates 

*  Instead  of  l^anis  here  it  is  necessary  to  read  inf^fig. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  11.  OF  PLATO.  l6l 

of  soul,  by  a  much  greater  priority  participates  of  intellect ;  but  not  every 
thing  which  enjoys  intellectual  efficiency,  is  also  adapted  to  participate  of 
soul.  For  of  soul  rational  animals  only  participate ;  since  we  say  that 
the  rational  soul  is  truly  soul.  For  Plato  in  the  Republic  says,  that  the 
work  of  soul  is  to  reason  and  survey  beings.  And  every  soul  [i.  e.  every 
rational  soul]  is  immortal,  as  it  is  written  in  the  Phsedrus  ;  the  irrational 
soul  being  mortal,  according  to  the  demiurgus  in  the  Timaeus.  And  in 
short,  it  is  in  many  places  evident  that  Plato  considers  the  rational  soul 
to  be  truly  soul,  but  others  to  be  the  images  of  souls,  so  far  as  these  also 
are  intellectual  and  vital,  and  together  with  whole  souls  produce  the  lives 
that  are  distributed  about  bodies.  Of  intellect  however,  we  not  only 
admit  that  rational  animals  participate,  but  also  such  other  animals  as 
possess  agnostic  power;  I  mean  such  as  possess  the  phantasy,  memory 
and  sense ;  since  Socrates  also  in  the  Philebus  refers  all  such  animals  to 
the  intellectual  series.  For  taking  away  intellect  from  the  life  which  is 
according  to  pleasure,  he  hkewise  takes  away  not  only  the  rational  life, 
but  every,  gnostic  power  of  the  irrational  life.  For  all  knowledge  is  the 
progeny  of  intellect,  in  the  same  manner  as  allreasonis  an  image  of  souL 

Moreover,  all  things  which  participate  of  intellect,  by  a  much  greater 
priority  participate  of  life,  some  things  indeed  more  obscurely,  but  others 
more  manifestly.  But  all  living  beings  do  not  participate  of  intellectual 
power,  since  plants  indeed  are  animals,  as  Timaeus  .says,  but  they  neither 
f^rticipate  of  sense,  or  phantasy ;  unless  some  one  should  say  that  they 
have  a  co-sensation  of  what  is  pleasing  and  painful.  And  in  short,  the 
orectic  powers  every  where  are  lives,  and  the  images  of  the  whole  of  life, 
and  the  last  productions  of  life  ;  but  they  are  of  themselves  destitute  of 
intellect  and  without  any  participation  of  the  gnostic  power.  Hence 
also,  they  are  of  themselves  indefinite,  and  deprived  of  all  knowledge. 

Again  therefore,  all  animals  indeed  receive  a  portion  of  being,  and 
different  animab  a  different  portion,  according  to  their  respective  natures; 
but  all  beings  are  not  similarly  able  to  participate  of  life ;  since  we  say 
that  quaUties  and  all  passions,  and  the  last  of  bodies,  receive  the  ultimate 
effective  energy  of  being,  but  we  do  not  also  say  that  they  participate  of 
life.  Being  therefore  is  more  ancient  than  life ;  life  than  intellect ;  anc' 
Proc.  Vol*  I.  X 


Digitized  by 


Google 


l^  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

iDtellect  thaa  soul.  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  causes  of  a  greater  number 
of  effects  being  more  ancient  and  according  to  order  more  principal, 
should  preside  over  causes  which  are  able  to  produce  and  adorn  fewer 
effects.  Very  properly  therefore,  does  Plato  in  the  Timaeus  give  subsist- 
ence to  soul  from  intellect,  as  being  secondary  to  it  according  to  its  own 
nature.  But  in  the  Laws  he  says  that  intellect  is  moved  similarly  to  a 
sphere  fashioned  by  a  wheel.'  For  that  which  is  moved,  is  moved  by 
piarticipating  of  life,  and  is  nothing  else  than  real  .life  about  motion.  And 
in  the  Sophista  he  exempts  being  from  all  the  total  genera  of  things,  and 
firpm  njiotion.  For  being,  says  he,  according  to  its  own  nature,  neither 
stands  still,  nor  is  moved.  But  that  which  neither  stands  still  nor  is  moved» 
is  beyond  eternal  life. 

These  four  causes  therefore  being  prior  to  a  corporeal  subsistence,  via. 
essence,  life,  intellect  and  soul,  soul  indeed  participates  of  all  the  causes 
prior  toitsdf,  being  allotted  reason  from  its  own  peculiarity,  but  intellect^ 
life  and  being,  from  more  ancient  causes.  Hence  it  gives  subsistence  to 
things  posterior  to  itself  in  a  fourfold  manner.  For  according  to  its  being 
indeed,  it  produces  all  things  as  far  as  to  bodies ;  according  to  its  life, 
all  things  which  are  said  to  live,  even  as  far  as  to  plants ;  according  to 
it9  intellect,  all  things  which  possess  a  gnostic  power,  even  as  far  as  to  the 
most  irrational  natures ;  and  according  to  its  reason,  the  first  of  the 
natures  that  are  able  to  participate  of  it.^  But  intellect  being  established 
beyond  soul,  and  existing  as  the  plenitude  of  life  and  being,  adorns  all 
things  in  a  threefold  manner,  imparting  indeed  by  illumination  the  power 
of  the  intellectual  peculiarity  to  all  gnostic  beings,  but  supplying  the 
participation  of  Ufe  to  a  still  greater  number,  and  of  being  to  all  those  ta 
whom  primary  being  imparts  itself.  But  life  being  arranged  above  intet 
lect,  presubsists  as  the  cause  of  the  same  things  in  a  twofold  respect,  vivi* 
fying  secondary  natures  indeed,  together  with  intellect,  and  filling  from 
itself  with  the  rivers  of  life,  such  things  as  are  naturally  adapted  to  live, 
but  together  with  being  supernally  producing  essence  in  all  things.  But 
being  itself  which  is  primarily  being  generates  all  things  by  its  very  exist- 

'  For  ivTovot^  it  is  necessary  to  read  tv  ropvots, 
*  For  fliwTOij  read  aunj^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP*  11.  OP  PLATO.  15s 

ence,  all  lires,  and  intellects  and  souls,  and  is  uniformljr  present  to  all 
things,  and  is  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things  according  to  one  cause 
which  gives  subsistence  to  all  things.  Hence  it  is  the  most  similar  of  all 
things  to  the  ont^  and  unites  the  comprehension  of  beings  in  itself  to  the 
first  principle  of  the  whole  of  things,  through  which  all  beings,  and  non* 
being,  wholes  and  parts,  forms  and  the  privations  of  forms  subsist,  which 
privations  do  not  necessarily  participate  of  being,  but  it  is  entirely  neces* 
sary  that  they  should  participate  of  the  one. 

These  things  as  it  appears  to  me  persuaded  the  Elean  guest  in  the  So* 
phista,  when  discussing  that  which  is  perfectly  being,  to  admit  that  not 
only  being  is  there,  but  also  life,  intellect  and  soul.  For  if  true  and  real 
being  is  venerable  and  honorable,  intellect  is  there  in  the  first  place,  says 
he.  For  it  is  not  lawful  for  that  which  is  of  itself  venerable  and  immate- 
rial to  be  without  inteBect.  But  if  intellect  is  in  that  which  is  perfectly 
being,  intellect  will  entirely  be  moved.  For  it  is  not  possible  for  intellect 
ever  to  subsist,  either  without  motion  or  pennanency.  But  if  intellect  is 
moved  and  stands  still,  there  are  in  being  both  life  and  motion.  Hence, 
from  what  hais  been  said,  three  things  become  apparent,  viz.  being,  hfe 
and  intellect  Moreover,  soul  also  in  the  next  place  is  discovered  through 
these  things.  For  it  is  necessary,  says  he,  that  life  and  intellect  which 
before  were  by  themselves,  should  also  be  in  soul.  For  every  soul  is  a 
plenitude  of  life  and  intellect,  participating  of  both,  which  the  Elean 
guest  indicating  adds,  "  Shall  we  say  that  both  these  are  inherent  in  it, 
but  yet  it  does  not  possess  these  in  soul  .^'  For  Xjo  possess^  as  some  one 
says  in  a  certain  place,^  is  secondary  to  existing.  And  soul  indeed  parti- 
cipates of  each  of  these  according  to  the  peculiarity  of  itself;  but  it 
mindes  the  rational  form  of  its  own  hyparxis,  with  the  intellectual  vivific 
power.  But  both  intellect  and  life  subsist  prior  to  soul,  the  former  as 
being  moved  and  standing  still  at  one  and  the  same  time,  and  the  latter  as 
being  motion  and  permanency.  These  four  monads  also,  soul,  intellect, 
life  and  being  arie  not  only  mentioned  by  Plato  here,  but  in  many  other 
places.  And  as  in  soul  all  things  subsist  according  to  participation,  so  in 
intellect  the  things  which  are  prior  to  it  subsist,  and  in  life  that  which  is 
prior  to  life.  For  we  say  that  life  exists,  or  has  a  being.  Or  how  could 
it  be  said  to  be  arranged  in  being  unless  it  participated  of  being  ?    We 


Digitized  by 


Google 


164  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  HI. 

likewise  %ay  that  intellect  is  and  lives.  For  it  is  moved,  and  is  a  portion 
of  being.  Hence  it  is  the  third  of  the  more  comprehensive  monads. 
Prior  however  to  beings  which  are  participated,  it  is  every  where  neces- 
sary that  imparticipable  causes  should  subsist,  as  was  before  demonstrated, 
conformably  to  the  similitude  of  beings  to  the  one.  Being  therefore  which 
is  primarily  being,  is  imparticipable  ;  but  life  first  participates  of  being, 
yet  IS  imparticipable,  being  exempt  from  intellect.  And  intellect  is  filled 
indeed  from  being  and  life;  but  is  imparticipable  in  souls,  and  in  the 
natures  posterior  to  itself.  Intellect  also  presides  over  soul,  imparting  to 
it  by  illumination  the  participation  of  life  and  being;  but  being  imparti* 
cipable  subsists  prior  to  bodies.  The  last  order  of  beings  therefore  is  that 
to  which  bodies  are  annexed ;  celestial  bodies  indeed  primarily,  but  sub- 
lunary bodies  with  the  addition  of  material  [vestments.]  This  therefore 
is  the  progression  of  beings,  through  life,  intellect  and  soul,  ending  in  a 
corporeal  nature. 

If,  however,  it  is  necessary  that  the  superessential  unities  of  the  Gods 
which  derive  their  subsistence  from  the  imparticipable  cause '  of  all  things 
should  be  participated,  some  of  them  indeed,  by  the  first  orders  in  beings, 
others  by  the  middle,  and  others  by  the  last  orders,  as  was  before  demon- 
strated, it  is  evident  that  some  of  them  deify  the  imparticipable  portion 
of  being,  but  that  others  illuminate  hfe,  others  intellect,  others  soul,  and 
others  bodies.  And  of  the  last  unities  indeed,  not  only  bodies  participate, 
but  likewise  soul,  intellect,  life  and  essence.  For  intellect  in  itself  is  a 
plenitude  of  life  and  being.  But  from  the  unities  which  are  above  this 
world  intellect  is  suspended,  and  the  psychical  power,  which  preexists  in 
intellect.  From  the  unities  above  these,  imparticipable  -  and  intellectual 
intellect  is  suspended.  From  those  that  are  beyond  these,  the  first  and  im- 
participable life  is  suspended.  And  from  the  highest  unities,  the  first  being 
itself,  and  which  is  the  most  divine  of  beings,  is  suspended.  Hence  Par- 
menides  beginning  from  the  one  being,  produces  from  thence  the  whole 
orders  of  the  Gods.  These  things  therefore  being  previously  determined  by 
us,  let  us  speak  concerning  the  divine  dialogues,  beginning  from  on  high, 
and  producing  from  the  one  the  whole  orders  of  the  Gods.     Let  us  also, 

'  For  amm  it  is  neceisary  to  read  amas* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  III.  OF  PLATO.  ig5 

following  Plato^  in  the  first  place  demonstrate  the  several  orders  from 
other  dialogues,  bj  arguments  which  cannot  be  confuted.  Afterwards, 
let  us  thus  conjoin  and  assimilate  the  conclusions  of  Parmenides,to  the 
divine  progressions,  adapting  the  first  conclusions  to  the  first,  but  the  last 
to  the  last  progressions. 


CHAPTER  IIL 

Ao^iK  therefore,  the  mystic  doctrine  concerning  tlie  one  must  be  re- 
sumed by  us,  in  order  that  proceeding  from  the  first  principle,  we  may 
celelH*ate  the  second  and  third  principles  of  the  whole  of  things.  Of  all 
beings  therefore,  and  of  the  Gods  that  produce  beings,  one  exempt  and 
imparticipable  cause  preexists, — a  cause  ine£&ble  indeed  by  all  language, 
and  unknown  by  all  knowledge  and  incomprehensible,  unfolding  all 
things  into  light  from  itself,  subsisting  ineffably  prior  to,  and  converting  all 
things  to  itself,  but  existing  as  the  best  end  of  all  things.  This  cause 
therefore,  which  is  truly  exempt  from  all  causes,  and  which  gives  subsist- 
ence unically  to  all  the  unities  of  divine  natures,  and  to  all  the  genera  of 
beings,  and  their  progressions,  Socrates  in  the  Republic  calls  the  good^ 
and  through  its  analogy  to  the  sun  reveals  its  admirable  and  unknown 
transcendency  with  respect  to  all  intelligibles.  But  again,  Parmenides 
denominates  it  the  one.  And  through  negations  demonstrates  the  exempt 
and  ineffable  hyparxis  of  this  one  which  is  the  cause  of  the  whole  of  things. 
But  the  discourse  in  the  epistle  to  Dionysius  proceeding  through  enigmas, 
celebrates  it  as  that  about  which  all  things  subsist,  and  as  the  cause  of  all 
beautiful  things.  In  the  Philebus  however,  Socrates  celebrates  it  as  that 
which  gives  subsistence  to  the  whole  of  things,  because  it  is  the  cause  of 
all  deity.  For  all  the  Gods  derive  their  existence  as  Gods  from  the  firet 
God.    Whether  therefore,  it  be  lawful   to  denominate  it  the  fountain 


Digitized  by 


Google 


jgg  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

4^  deity»  or  the  kingdam  of  beings,  or  the  unity  of  all  unities,  or  the  good* 
ness  which  is  generative  of  truth,  or  an  hyparxis  exempt  from  all  these 
things,  and  beyond  all  causes,  both  the  paternal  and  the  generative,  let 
it  be  honored  by  us  in  silence,  and  prior  to  silence  by  union,  and  of  the 
mystic  end  may  it  impart  by  illumination  a  portion  adapted  to  our  souls. 
But  let  us  survey  with  intellect  the  biformed  principles  proceeding  from 
and  posterior  to  it.     For  what  else  is  it  necessary  to  arrange  after  the 
union  of  the  whole  theory,  than  the  duad  of  principles  ?     What '  the  two 
principles  therefore  are  of  the  divine  orders  after  the  first  principle,  we 
shall  in  the  next  place  survey*    For  conformably  to  the  theology  of  our 
ancestors,  Plato  also  establishes  two  jprinciples  after  the  one.     In  the  Phi- 
lebus  therefore,  Socrates  says,  that  God  gives  subsistence  to  bound  and 
infinity,  and  through  these  mingling  all  beings,  has  produced  them,  the 
nature  of  beings,  according  to  Philolaus  subsisting  from  the  conne^^iou 
of  things  bounded,  and  things  infinite.     If,  therefore,  all  beings  subsist 
from  these,  it  is  evident  that  they  themselves  have  a  subsislenee  prior  to 
beings.     And  if  secondary  natures  participate  of  these  mingled  togeth^^ 
these  will  subsist  unmingled  prior  to  the  whole  of  things.     For  the  pro- 
gression of  the  divine  orders  originates,  not  from  things  coordinated  and 
which  exist  in  others,  but  from  things  exempt,  and  which  are  established 
in  themselves.     As  therefore  the  one  is  prior  to  things  united,  and  as  that 
which  is  passive  to  the  one,  has  a  second  order  after  the  imparticipable 
union,  thus  also  the  two  principles  of  beings^  prior  to  the  participation  of 
and  commixture  with  beings,  are  themselves  by  themselves  the  causes  of 
the  whole  of  things.     For  it  is  necessary  that  bound  should  be  prior  to 
things  bounded,  and  infinity  prior  to  infinites,  according  to  the  similitude 
to  the  one  of  things  which  proceed  from  it.     For  again,  if  we  should  pro* 
duce  beings  immediately  after  the  one^  we  shall  no  where  find  the  pecu« 
liarity  of  the  one  subsisting  purely.    For  neither  is  being  the  same  with 
the  one^  but  it  participates  of  the  one^  nor  in  reality  is  that  which  is  the 
first  ^Ae  one;  for,  as  has  been  frequently  said,  it  is  better  than  the  one. 
Where  therefore  is  that  which  is  most  properly  and  entirely  one  ?  Hence 

^    *  For  fivo^  it  is  necetaary  to  read  r%n$. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  Ill:  OF  PLATO.  i^ 

there  is  a  certain  one  prior  to  being,  which  gives  subsistence  to  being, 
and  is  primarily  the  cause  of  it ;  since  that  which  is  prior  to  it  is  beyond 
union,  and  is  a  cause  without  habitude  with  respect  to  all  things,  and 
imparticipable,  being  exempt  from  all  things.  If  however  this  one  is  the 
cause  of  being,  and  constitutes  it,  there  will  be  a  power  in  it  generative 
of  being.  For  every  thing  which  produces,  produces  according  to  its 
own  power,  which  is  allotted  a  subsistence  between  that  which  produces 
and  the  things  produced,  and  is  of  the  one  the  progression  and  as  it  were 
extension,  but  of  the  other  is  the  pre-arranged  generative  cause.  For 
being  which  is  produced  from  these^  and  which  is  not  the  one  itself^  but 
uniform,  possesses  its  progression  indeed  from  the  one^  through  the  power 
wliich  produces  and  unfolds  it  into  light  from  the  one;  but  its  occult 
union  from  the  hyparxis  of  the  one.  This  one  therefore  which  subsists 
prior  to  power,  and  first  presubsists  from  the  imparticipable  and  unknown 
cause  of  the  whole  of  things,  Socrates  in  the  Philebus  calls  bounds  but  he 
denomiqates  the  power  of  it  which  is  generative  of  being,  infinity.  But 
he  thus  speaks  in  that  dialogue,  "  God  we  said  has  exhibited  the  bound, 
and  also  the  infinite  of  beings.'' 

The  first  therefore  and  unical  God,  is  without  any  addition  denominated 
by  him  God ;  because  each  of  the  second  Gods  is  participated  by  being, 
and  has  being  suspended  from  its  nature*  But  the  first  indeed,  as  being 
exempt '  from  the  whole  of  beings,  is  God,  defined  according  to  the  in- 
eifable  itself,  the  unical  alone,  and  superessentiaL  But  the  bound  and 
the  infinite  of  beings,  unfold  into  light  that  unknown  and  imparticipable 
cause ;  bound  indeed,  being  the  cause  of  stable,  uniform,  and  connective 
deity  ;  but  the  infinite  being  the  cause  of  power  proceeding  to  all  things 
and  capable  of  being  multiplied,  and  in  short,  being  the  leader  of  every 
generative  distribution.  For  all  union  and  wholeness,  and  communion  of 
beings,  and  all  the  divine  measures,  are  suspended  *  from  the  first  bound. 
But  all  division,  prolific  production,  and  progression  into  multitude,  de- 
rive their  subsistence  from  this  most  principal  infinity.     Hence,  when  we 

'  For  ffft]pi)T««  k  is  necessary  to  read  i^i^pn^rai. 

*  Here  also  it  is  necessary  for  i^pvf^eu  to  read  ^pniTei$. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


168  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

say  that  each  of  the  divine  orders  abides '  and  at  the  same  time  proceeds, 
we  must  confess  that  it  stably  abides  indeed,  according  to  bound,  but 
proceeds  according  to  infinity,  and  that  at  one  and  the  same  time  it  has 
unity  and  multitude,  and  we  must  suspend  the  former  from  the  principle 
of  bound,  but  the  latter  from  that  of  infinity.  And  in  short,  of  all  the 
opposition  in  the  divine  genera,  we  must  refer  that  which  is  the  more 
excellent  to  bound,  but  that  which  is  subordinate  to  infinity.  For  from 
these  two  principles  all  things  have  their  progression  into  being,  even  as 
far  as  to  the  last  of  things.  For  eternity  itself  participates  at  once  of 
bound  and  infinity  ;  so  far  indeed,  as  it  is  the  intelligible  measure,  it  par« 
ticipates  of  bound  ;  but  so  far  as  it  is  the  cause  of  a  never-failing  power 
of  existing,  it  participates  of  infinity.  And  intellect,  so  far  indeed  as 
it  is  uniform,  and  whole,  and  so  far  as  it  is  connective  of  paradigmatical 
measures,  so  far  it  is  the  progeny  of  bound.  But  again,  so  far  as  it  pro- 
duces all  things  eternally,  and  subsists  conformably  to  the  whole  of  eter- 
nity, supplying  all  things  with  existence  at  once,  and  always  possessing  its 
own  power  undiminished,  so  far  it  is  the  progeny  of  infinity.  And  soul 
4Ddeed,  in  consequence  of  measuring  its  own  life,  by  restitutions  and  pe- 
riods, and  introducing  a  boundary  to  its  own  motions,  is  referred  to  the 
cause  of  bound ;  but  in  consequence  of  having  no  cessation  of  motions, 
but  making  the  end  of  one  period  the  beginning  of  the  whole  of  a  second 
vital  circulation,  it  is  referred  to  the  order  of  infinity.  The  whole  of  this 
heaven  also,  according  to  the  wholeness  of  itself,  its  connexion,  the  order 
of  its  periods,  and  the  measures  of  its  restitutions,  is  bounded.  But  ac- 
cording to  its  prolific  powers,  its  various  evolutions,  and  the  never-failing 
revolutions  of  its  orbs,  it  participates  of  infinity.  Moreover,  the  whole  of 
generation,  in  consequence  of  all  its  forms  being  bounded,  and  always 
permanent  after  the  same  manner,  and  in  consequence  of  its  own  circle 
which  imitates  the  celestial  circulation,  is  similar  to  bound.  But  again, 
in  consequence  of  the  variety  of  the  particulars  of  which  it  consists,  their 
unceasing  mutation,  and  the  intervention  of  the  more  and  the  less  in  the 
participations  of  forms,  it  is  the  image  of  infinity.  And  in  addition  to 
these  things,  every  natural  production,  according  to  its  form  indeed,  is 

'  jAmiv  is  omitted  in  the  ofiginal* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP,  IX.  OF  PLATO.  169 

similar  to  bouDd,  but  according  to  its  matter,  resembles  infinity.  For 
these  are  suspended  in  the  last  place  *  from  the  two  principles  posterior 
to  the  onCy  and  as  far  as  to  these  the  progression  of  their  productive  power 
extends.  Each  of  these  also  is  one,  but  form  is  the  measure  and  boun- 
dary of  matter,  and  is  in  a  greater  degree  one.  Matter  however  is  all 
things  in  capacity,  so  far  as  it  derives  its  subsistence  from  the  first  power. 
There,  however,  power  is  generative  of  all  things.  But  the  power  of  matter 
is  imperfect,  and  is  indigent  of  the  hypostasis  which  is  generative  *  of  all 
things  according  to  energy.  Very  properly  therefore  is  it  said  by  So- 
crates that  all  beings  are  from  bound  and  infinity,  and  that  these  two  io- 
telhgible  principles  primarily  derive  their  subsistence  from  God.  For 
that  which  congregates  both  of  them,  and  perfects  them,  and  unfolds  it- 
self into  light  through  all  beings  is  the  one  prior  to  the  duad.  And  union 
indeed  is  derived  to  all  things  through  that  which  is  first ;  but  the  division 
of  the  two  orders  of  things  is  generated  from  these  primary  causes,  and 
through  these  is  extended  to  the  unknown  and  inefiable  principle.  Let 
it  therefore  be  manifest  through  these  things,  what  the  two  principles  of 
beings  are,  which  become  proximately  apparent  from  the  oncj  according 
to  the  theology  of  Plato. 


CHAPTER    IX. 

In  the  next  place  let  us  show  what  the  third '  thing  is  which  presents 
itself  to  the  view  from  these  principles.  It  is  every  where  therefore  called 
that  which  is  mixed,  as  deriving  its  subsistence  from  bound  and  infinity. 
But  if  bound  is  the  bound  of  beings,  and  the  infinite  is  the  infinite  of 
beings,  and  beings  are  the  things  which  have  a  subsistence  from  both 

*  Tor  i(rx^T(0¥  it  it  necessary  to  read  tax^»f* 

*  The  word  yemfrtxiis  is  omitted  in  the  original. 
'  TgiTov  is  omitted  in  the  originaL 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  Y 


Digitized  by 


Google 


170  «N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IIL 

these,  as  Socrates  himself  clearly  teaches  us,  it  is  evident  that  the  first  of 
things  mingled^  is  the  first  of  beings.  This,  however,  is  nothing  eke  than 
that  which  is  highest  in  beings,  which  is  being  itsdf,  and  nothing  else  than 
being.  My  meaning  is,  that  this  is  endent  through  those  things  by  ivhich 
we  demonstrate  that  what  is  primarily  being,  is  comprehensive  of  all 
things  intelligibly,  and  of  life  and  intellect.  For  we  say  that  life  is  triadic 
vitally,  and  intellect  intellectually  ;  and  also  that  these  three  things  being 
life  and  intellect  are  every  wh^e.  But  all  things  presubsist  primarily 
and  essentially  in  being*  For  there  essence,  life  and  intellect  subsist,  and 
tbe  ffocnmit  of  beings*  Life  however  is  the  middle  centre  of  being,  which 
\b  denominated  and  is  intelligible  life.  But  iulellectis  the  boundary  of 
benng,  and  is  intdligible  intellect.  For  in  the  intelligible  there  is  intellect^ 
and  in  intellect  the  intelligible.  There  however  intellect  subsists  intdli* 
gibiy,  but  in  intellect,  tiie  intelligible  subsists  intellectually. 

And  essence  indeed  is  that  which  is  stable  in  being,  and  which  is  woven 
together  wiih  the  first  princtples,  and  does  not  depart  from  the  one.  But 
life  is  that  which  proceeds  from  the  principles,  and  is  connascent  with  in- 
finite power.  And  intellect  is  that  which  converts  itself  to  the  principles^ 
conjoins  the  end  with  the  beginning,  and  produces  one  intelligible  circle. 
The  first  of  beings  therefore  is  that  which  is  mingled  from  the  first  prin^ 
ciples,  and  is  triple,  one  thing  which  it  contains  subsisting  in  it  essentially,, 
another  vitally,  and  another  intellectwaHy,  but  all  things  presubsisting  in 
it  essentially.  I  mean  however  by  the  first  of  beings  essence!  For 
essence  itself  is  the  summit  of  all  beings,  and  is  as  it  were  the  monad 
of  the  whole  of  things.  In  all  things  therefore,  essence  is  the  first.  And 
in  each  thing  that  which  is  essential  is  the  most  ancient,  as  deriving  its 
subsistence  from  the  Vesta  of  beings.  For  the  intelligible  is  especially 
this.  Since  intellect  indeed  is  that  which  is  gnostic,  hfe  is  intelligence,, 
and  being  is  intelligible.  If  however  every  being  is  mingled,  but 
essence  is  being  itself,  prior  to  all  other  things  essence  is  that  which  sub* 
sists  as  mingled  firom  the  two  principles  proceeding  from  the  one.  Hence 
Socrates  indicating  how  the  mode  of  generation  in  the  two  principles 
differs  from  that  of  the  mixture  says,  "  that  God  has  exhibited  bound  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IX.  OF  PLATO;  J7i 

infinity/'  For  they  are  unities  deriving  their  subsistence  from  the  one^  and 
as  it  were  luminous  patefactions  from  the  imparticipable  and  first  union. 
But  with  respect  to  producing  a  mixture,  and  mingling, through  the  first 
principles,  by  how  much  to  make  is  subordinate  to  the  unfolding  into  lights 
and  generation  to  patefaction^  by  so  much  is  that  which  is  mixed  allotted 
a  progression  from  the  one^  inferior  to  that  of  the  two  principles. 

That  which  is  mixed  therefore,  is  intelligible  essence,  and  subsists  pri- 
marily from  [the  first]  God,  from  whom  infinity  also  and  bound  are  de- 
rived. But  it  subsists  secondarily  from  the  principles  posterior  to  the 
unical  God,  I  mean  from  bound  and  infinity.  For  the  fourth  cause  which 
is  effective  of  the  mixture  is  again  God  himself;  since  if  any  other  cause 
should  be  admitted  besides  this,  there  will  no  longer  be  a  fourth  cause, 
but  a  fifth  will  be  introduced.  For  the  first  cause  was  God,  who  unfolds 
into  light  the  two  principles.  But  after  him  are  the  two  principles  bound 
and  infinity.  And  the  mixture  is  the  fourth  thing.  If  therefore  the 
cause  of  the  mixture  is  different  from  the  first  divine  cause,  this  cause 
will  be  the  fifth  and  not  the  fourth  thing,  as  Socrates  says  it  is.  Far- 
ther still,  in  addition  to  these  things,  if  we  say  that  God  is  especially 
the  supplier  of  union  to  beings,  and  the  mixture  itself  of  the  principles  is 
a  union  into  the  hypostasis  of  being,  God  is  also  certainly  the  cause  of  thiy 
primarily.  Moreover,  Socrates  in  the  Republic  clearly  evinces  that  the  good 
is  the  cause  of  being  and  essence  to  intelligibles,  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
sun  is  to  visible  natures.  Is  it  not  therefore  necessary,  if  that  which  is  mix* 
ed  is  primarily  being,  to  refer  it  to  the  first  God,  and  to  say  that  it  receives 
its  progression  from  him  ?  If  also  the  demiurgus  in  the  Timseus,  consti- 
tutes the  essence  of  the  soul  itself  by  itself  from  an  impartible  and  a  par- 
tible essence,  which  is  the  same  thing  as  to  constitute  it  from  bound  and 
infinity  ;  for  the  soul  according  to  bound  is  similar  to  the  impartible,  but 
according  to  infinity,  to  the  partible  essence ;— if  therefore  the  demiurgus 
mingles  the  essence  of  the  soul  from  these,  and  again  separately^  from 
same  and  different,  and  if  from  these  being  now  preexistent,  he  constitutes 
the  whole  soul,  must  we  not  much  more  say  that  the  first  God  is  the 
cause  of  the  first  essence  ?    That  which  is  mixed  therefore,  proceeds^  as 


Digitized  by 


Google 


172  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

we  have  said^  from  the  first  God,  and  does  not  subsist  from  tlie  principles 
alone  posterior  to  the  one^  but  proceeds  also  from  these,  and  is  triad ic* 
And  in  the  first  place  indeed,  it  participates  from  God  of  ineffable  union^ 
and  the  whole  of  its  subsistence.  But  from  bound,  it  receives  hyparxis,. 
and  the  uniform,  and  a  stable  peculiarity.  And  from  infinity,  it  receives 
power,  and  the  occult  power  which  is  in  itself,  of  all  things.  For  in  short, 
since  it  is  one  and  not  one,  the  one  is  inherent  in  it  according  to  bounds 
but  the , non-one  according  to  infinity.  The  mixture  however  of  both 
these,  and  its  wholeness,  are  derived  from  the  first  God.  That  which  is 
mixed  therefore,  is  a  monad,  because  it  participates  of  the  ones  and  it  is 
biformed,  so  far  as  it  proceeds  from  the  two  principles  ;  but  it  is  a  triad, 
so  far  as  in  every  mixture,  these  three  things  are  necessary  according  to 
Socrates,  viz.  beauty,  truth,  and  symmetry.  Concerning  these  things 
however,  we  shall  speak  again. 

In  what  manner,  however,  essence  is  that  which  is  first  mixed^we  shaU 
now  explain.  For  this  is  of  all  things  the  most  difficult  to  discover,  viz* 
what  that  is  which  is  primarily  being,  as  the  Elean  guest  also  somewhere 
says ;  for  it  is  n:fost  dubious  how  being  is  not  less  than  non-being.  In 
what  manner  therefore  essence  subsists  from  bound  and  infinity  must  be 
shown.  For  if  bound  and  infinity  are  superessential,  essence  may  appear 
to  have  its  subsistence  from  non-essences.  How  therefore  can  non-es>- 
sences  produce  essence  ?  Or  is  not  this  the  case  in  all  other  things  which 
subsist  through  the  mixture  of  each  other  ?  For  that  which  is  produced 
from  things  mingled  together,  is  not  the  same  with  things  that  are  not  min- 
gled. For  neitheris  soul  the  same  with  the  genera,  firom  which,  beingmingled 
together,  the  father  generates!  it,  nor  is  a  happy  life  the  same  with  the  life 
which  is  according  to  intellect,  or  with  the  life  which  is  according  to  plea- 
sure, nor  is  the  one  in  bodies  the  same  with  its  elements.  Hence  it  is  not 
wonderful,  if  that  which  is  primarily  being,  though  it  is  neither  bound  nor 
infinity,  subsists  from  both  these,  and  is  mixed,  superessential  natures  them- 
selves not  being  assumed  in  the  mixture  of  it,  but  secondary  progressions 
from  them  coalescing  into  the  subsistence  of  essence.  Thus  therefore 
being  consists  of  these,  as  participating  of  both,  possessing  indeed  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IX.  OF  PLATO.  173 

uniform  from  bound»  but  the  generative,  and  in  short,  occult  multitude 
from  infinity.     For  it  is  all  things  occultly,  and  on  this  account,  is  the 
cause  of  all  beings ;  which  also  the  Elean  guest  indicating  to  us,  calls 
being  the  first  power,  as  subsisting  according   to  the  participation  of  the 
first  power,  and    participating  of  hyparxis   from  bound,  and  of  power 
from  infinity.     Afterwards  however,  the  Elean  guest  defines  being  to  be 
power,  as  prolific  and  generative  of  all  things,  and  as  being  all  things  uni- 
formly.    For  power  is  every  where  the  cause  of  prolific  progressions,  and 
of  all  multitude ;  occult  power  indeed   being  the  cause  of  occult  multi* 
tude;  but  the  power  which  exists  in  energy,  and  which  unfolds  itself  into 
light,  being  the  cause  of  all-perfect  multitude.     Through  this  cause  there* 
fore,  I  think,  that  every  being,  and  every  essence  has  connascent  powers. 
For  it  participates  of  infinity,  and  derives  its  hyparxis  indeed  from  bound,, 
but  its  power  from  infinity.     And  being  is  nothing  else  than  a  monad  of 
many  powers,  and  a  multiplied  hyparxis,  and  on  this  account  being  i» 
one  many.    The  many  however  subsist  occultly  and  without  separation 
in  the  first  natures ;  but  with  separation  in  secondary  natures.     For  by 
how  much  being  is  nearer  to  the  one,  by  so  much  the  more  does  it  conceal 
multitude,  and  is  defined  according  to  union  alone.     It  appears  to  me 
also  that  Plotinus  and  his  followers, .  frequently  indicating  these  things,, 
produce  being  from  form  and  intelligible  matter,  arranging  form '  as  ana-, 
logous  to  the  onej  and  to  hyparxis,  but  power  as  analogous  to  matter.. 
And  if  indeed  they  say  this,  they  speak  rightly.     But  if  they  ascribe  a 
certain  formless  and  indefinite  nature  to  an  intelligible  essence,  they  ap- 
pear to  me  to  wander  from  the  conceptions  of  Plato  on  this  subject.     For 
the  infinite  is  not  the  matter  of  bound,  but  the  power  of  it,  nor  is  bound 
the  form  of  the  infinite,  but  the  hyparxis  of  it.     But  being  consists  of 
both  these,  as  not  only  standing  in  the  one^  but  receiving  a  multitude  of 
unities  and  powers  which  are  mingled  into  one  essence. 

*  For  wkffio^  in  the  original  it  it  necessary  to  read  ulos^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


174  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  HI 


CHAPTER   X. 

That  therefore  which  is  primarily  being  is  through  these  things  deno- 
minated by  Plato  that  which  is  mixed.  And  through  the  similitude  of 
it,  generation  also  is  mingled  from  bound  and  infinity.  And  the  in- 
finite indeed  in  this  is  imperfect  power ;  but  the  bound  in  it  is  form  and 
the  morphe  of  this  power,  dn  this  account  we  establish  this  power  to  be 
matter,  not  possessing  existence  in  energy,  and  requiring  to  be  bounded 
by  something  eke.  We  no  longer  however  say  that  it  is  lawful  to  call  the 
power  of  being  matter,  since  it  is  generative  of  energies^  produces  all 
beings  from  itself,  and  is  prolific  of  the  perfect  powers  in  beings.  For  the 
power  of  matter  being  imperfect  dissimilarly  imitates  the  power  of  being  j 
and  becoming  multitude  in  capacity,  it  expresses  the  parturition  of  mul- 
titude lin  the  power  of  being/  Moreover,  the  form  of  matter  imitates 
ultimately  bound,  since  it  gives  limits  to  matter,  and  terminates  its  infi- 
nifty.  But  it  is  multiplied  and  divided  about  it.  It  is  also  mingled  with 
the  privation  of  matter,  and  represents  the  supreme  union  of  the  hyparxis 
of  toeing,  by  its  essence  always  advancing  to  existence,  and  always  tending 
to  decay.  For  those  things  which  subsist  in  the  first  natures  according  to 
transcendency,  are  in  such  as  are  last  according  to  deficiency.  For  that 
also  which  is  primarily  being  is  mixed,  is  exempt  from  the  bound  of  in- 
finite life,  aad  is  the  cause  of  it.  But  that  which  consists  of  the  last  *  of 
forms  and  the  first  matter,  is  in  its  own  nature  void  of  life ;  since  it  pos- 
sesses life  in  capacity.  For  there  indeed  generative  causes  subsist  prior 
to  their  progeny,  and  things  perfect  prior  to  such  as  are  imperfect.  But 
here  things  in  capacity  are  prior  to  such  as  are  in  energy,  and  concauses 

"  The  punctuation  in  the  latter  part  of  this  sentence  in  the  original  is  erroneous  :  for  instead  of 
xcu  rriv  vf  ffxfinirot;  'KXtfiou^  coSiva  iuvufMi  ytvofi^ivri,  ro  tAi}4o^  aTFetxaa-aro,  it  should  be  xat  djv  cv  cxfiyp 

*  For  'jrgwrotj  here,  it  is  necessary  to  read  tirxotrot).  For  in  this  place,  Frodus  is  speaking  of  body. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  X.  OF  PLATO.  175 

are  subject  to  the  things  which  are  produced  from  them.  This  however, 
I  think,  happens  naturally,  because  the  gifts  of  tfaefirst  principles  pervade 
as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  and  not  only  generate  more  perfect  natures, 
but  also  such  as  have  a  more  imperfect  subsistence.  And  on  tiiis  account 
that  which  is  mixed  is  the  cause  of  generation,  and  of  the  nature  which  is 
mingled  here.  The  bound  and  infinity  however,  which  are  prior  to  being, 
are  not  only  the  causes  of  this  nature,  but  also  of  the  elenients  of  it,  of 
which  that  which  is  mixed  is  not  the  cause,  so  far  as  it  is  mixed.  For 
bound  and  infinity  are  twofold.  And  one  kind  of  these  is  exempt  from 
the  things  mingled,  but  another  kind  is  assumed  to  the  completion  of  the 
mixture.  For  I  think  it  is  every  where  necessary  that  prior  to 
things  that  are  mingled,  there  should  be  such  as  are  unmingled,  prior  to 
things  imperfect,  such  as  are  perfect,  prior  to  parts,  wholes,  and  prior  to 
things  that  are  in  others,  such  as  are  in  themselves ;  and  this  Socrates 
persuades  us  to  admit  not  in  one  thing  only,  but  also  in  beauty  and  sym- 
metry, and  in  all  forms.  If  therefore  the  second  and  third  genera  of  being 
and  forms  subsist  prior  to  their  participants,  how  can  we  assert  that 
bound  and  infinity  which  pervade  through  all  beings  have  their  first  sub- 
sistence as  things  mingled  ?  It  must  be  admitted  therefore,  that  they  are 
unmingled  and  separate  from  being,  and  that  being  is  derived  from  them^ 
and  at  the  same  time  consists  of  them.  It  is  derived  from  them  indeed, 
because  they  have  a  prior  subsistence;  but  it  consists  of  them,  because 
they  subsist  in  being  according  to  a  second  progression. 

The  genera  of  being  also  are  twofold ;  some  of  them  indeed  being  fa- 
bricative  of  beings,  but  others  existing  as  the  elements  of  the  nature  of 
each  being.  For  some  of  them  indeed  presubsist  themselves  by  themselves,, 
jas  possessing  a  productive  power  ;  but  others  being  generated  from  these.-, 
constitute  each  particular  being.  Let  no  one  therefore  any  longer  won- 
der, how  Socrates  indeed  in  the  Philebus  establishes  that  which  is  min- 
gled, prior  to  bound  and  infinity,  but  we  on  the  contrary  evince  that  bound 
and  infinity  are  exempt  from  that  which  is  mixed.  For  each  is  twofold, 
and  the  one  indeed  is  prior  to  beings  but  the  other  is  in  being ;  and  the 
one  is  generative,  but  the  other  is  the  element  of  the  mixture.  Of  this 
kind  also,  are  the  bound  and  infinity  of  the  mixed  life,  each  being  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


176  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  HI. 

element  of  the  whole  of  felicity.  Hence  also  each  is  indigent  of  each. 
And  neither  is  intellect  by  itself  desirable,  nor  perfect  pleasure.  It  is 
necessary  however,  that  the  good  should  consist  of  all  these,  viz.  of  the 
desirable,  the  sufficient,  and  the  perfect.  Bound  itself  therefore  and  in- 
finity, which  are  separate,  subsist  according  to  cause  prior  to  that  which  is 
mixed.  But  the  bound  and  infinity  which  are  mixed  are  more  imperfect 
than  the  mixture.  Hence,  from  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident  what  the 
(things  are  of  which  the  mixture  consists. 


CHAPTER    XI. 

In  the  next  place,  we  must  speak  of  the  triad,  which  is  consubsistent 
with  this  mixture.  For  n  every  mixture,  if  it  is  rightly  made,  as  Socrates 
says,  requires  these  three  things,  beauty,  truth,  and  symmetry.  For  nei- 
ther will  any  thing  base,  if  it  is  introduced  into  the  mixture,  impart  recti- 
tude, since  it  will  be  the  cause  of  error,  and  qf  inordinate  prerogative,  nor 
if  truth  is  at  any  time  separated,  will  it  suffer  the  mixture  to  consist  of 
things  that  are  pure,  and  which  are  in  reality  subdued,  but  it  will  fill  the 
whole  with  an  image  and  with  non-being.  Nor  without  symmetry  will 
there  be  a  communion  of  the  elements,  and  an  elegant  association.  Sym- 
metry, therefore,  is  necessary  to  the  union  of  the  things  that  are  mingled, 
and  to  an  appropriate  communion.  But  truth  is  necessary  to  purity. 
And  beauty  to  ord^r ;  which  also  renders  the  whole  lovely.  For  when 
each  thing  in  the  mixture  has  a  place  adapted  to  itself,  it  renders  both 
the  dements,  and  the  arrangement  resulting  from  them,  beautiful.  Here 
therefore,  in  the  first  mixture,  these  three  things  are  apparent,  symmetry, 
truth,  and  beauty.  And  symmetry  indeed  is  the  cause  to  the  mixture, 
that  being  is  one ;  truth  is  the  cause  of  the  reality  of  its  existence ;  and 
beauty  is  the  cause  of  its  being  intelligible.  Hence  it  is  intelligible  and 
truly  being.    That  also  nhich  is  primarily  being  is  more  uniform,  and  in- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  Xlt  OF  PLATO.  177 

telleet  is  conjoined  to  It,  according  to  its  &miliaritj  with  the  beautifiiL 
But  each  participates  of  exifttence,  because  it    is  being  deriyed  from 
beings    That  which  is  mixed  however,  is  supreme  among  beings,  because 
it  is  united  to  the  good.    And  it  appears  to  me,  that  the  divine  lamblichus 
perceiving  these  three  causes  of  being,  defines  the  intelligible  in  these 
three,  viz.  in  symmetry,  truth,  and  beauty,  and  unfolds  the  intelligible 
Gods  through  these  in  the  Platonic  theology.    In  what  manner  indeed, 
the  intelligible  breadth  consists  of  these,  will  be  most  evident  as  we  pro* 
ceed.     Now  however,  from  what  has  been  said,  it  is  perfectly  manifest 
why  Socrates  says  that  this  triad  is  found  to  be  in  the  vestibules  of  the 
good.    For  that  which  is  primarily  being  participates  of  this  triad  through 
its  union  with  the  good.    For  because  indeed  the  good  is  the  measure  of 
all  beings,  the.  first  being  becomes  itself  commensurate.    Because  the 
former  is  prior  to  being,  the  latter  subsists  truly  and  really.    And  because 
the  former  is  good  and  desirable,  the  latter  presents  itself  to  the  view  as 
the  beautiful  itself.    Here  therefore,  the  first  beauty  also  subsists ;  and  on 
this  account  the  one  is  not  only  the  cause  of  good,  but  likewise  of  beauty, 
zs  Plato  says  in  his  Epistles.    Beauty  however  subsists  here  occultly, 
since  this  order  comprehends  all  things  uniformly,  in  consequence  of  sub« 
sisting  primarily  from  the  principles  [bound  and  infinity].    But  where 
and  how  beauty  is  unfolded  into  light,  we  shall  shortlj  explain. 


CHAPTER  Xn. 


Such  therefore,  is  the  first  triad  of  intelligibles,  according  to  Socrates 
in  the  Philebus,  viz.  bound,  infinite,  and  that  which  is  mixed  from  these. 
And  of  these,  bound  indeed  is  a  God  proceeding  to  the  intdligible  sum- 
mit, from  the  imparticipable  and  first  God,  measuring  and  defining  all 
things,  and  giving  subsistence  to  every  paternal,  connective,^  and  undefiled 


Digitized  by 


Google 


178  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

genus  of  Gods.  But  Jnfinite  is  the  never-failing  power  of  Uiis  God,  un«^ 
folding  into  light  all  the  generative  orders,  and  all  infinity,  both  that  which 
is  prior  to  essence,  and  that  which  is  essential,  and  also  that  which  pro- 
ceeds as  far  as  to  the  last  matter.  And  that  which  is  mixed,  is  the  first 
and  highest  order  of  the  Gods,  comprehending  all  things  occultly,  deriving 
its  completion  indeed  through  the  intelHgible  connective  triad,  but  uni- 
cally  comprehending  the  cause  of  every  being,  and  establishing  its  summit 
in  the  first  intelligibles,  exempt  from  the  whole  of  things. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

After  this  first  triad  subsisting  from,  and  conjoined  with  the  oncy  we 
shall  celebrate  the  second,  proceeding  from  thisj  and  deriving  its  comple- 
tion through  things  analogous  '  to  the  triad  prior  to  it.  For  in  this  also 
it  is  necessary  that  being  should  participate,  and  that  the  one  should  be 
participated,  and  likewise  that  this  one'which  is  secondarily  one,  should 
be  generative  6i  that  which  is  secondarily  being.  For  every  where  parti- 
cipated deity  constitutes  about  itself  that  which  participates  it.  Thus 
whole  souls  render  bodies  consubsistent  with  their  causes :  and  partial 
souls  generate,  in  conjunction  with  the  Gods,  irrational  souls.  Much 
more  therefore,  do  the  Gods  produce  in  conjunction  with  the  one  alt  things. 
Hence,  as  the  first  of  the  unities  generates  the  summit  of  being,  so  like- 
wise the  middle  unity  coijstitutes  the  middle  being.  But  every  thing 
which  generates,  and  every  thing  which  makes  or  produces,  possesses  a 
power  prolific  of  the  things  produced,  according  to  which  it  produces, 
corroborates  and  connects  its  progeny.  Again  therefore,  there  will  be  a 
second  triad  unfolded  into  light  analogously  to  thq  first.  And  one  thing 
ihdeed,  is  the  summit  of  it,  which  we  call  one,  deity,  and  hyparxis.     But 


For  «Aoy«y  it  is  necessary  to  read  «v«Aoy»y. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  Xni.  OF  PLATO.  179 

another  thing  is  the  middle  of  it^  which  we  call  power.  And  another 
thing  is  the  extremity  of  it,  which  we  say  is  that  which  is  secondarily 
being.  This  however  is  intelligible  life.  For  all  things  are  in  the  intelli* 
gible,  as  was  before  demonstrated,  viz.  to  be,  to  live,  and  to  energize  intel* 
lectually.  And  the  summit  indeed,  of  the  intelligible  order,  is  all  things 
according  to  cause,  and  as  we  have  frequently  said,  occultly.  But  the 
middle  of  it,  causes  multitude  to  shine  forth,  and  proceeds  from  the  union 
of  being  into  manifest  light.  And  the  extremity  of  it,  is  now  all  intelli* 
gible  multitude,  and  the  order  of  intelligible  forms.  For  forms  have  their 
subsistence  at  the  extremity  of  the  intelligible  orders  For  it  is  necessary 
that  forms  should  subsist  first  and  become  apparent  in  intellect.  If  there- 
fore being  abides  exemptly  in  the  first  mixture,  but  now  proceeds,  and  is 
generated  dyadically  from  the  monad,  there  will  be  motion  about  it ;  and 
if  there  is  motion,  it  is  also  necessary  that  there  should  be  intelligible  life. 
For  every  where  motion  is  a  certain  life,  since  some  one  calls  even  the 
motion  of  material  bodies  life.  That  which  is  first  therefore,  in  this  second 
triad,  may  be  called  bound ;  that  which  is  second  in  it,  infinity ;  and  that 
which  is  the  third,  life.  For  the  second  triad  also  is  a  God,  possessing  pro- 
lific power,  and  unfolding  into  light  from,  and  about  itself,  that  which  is 
secondarily  being.  Here  however  also,  the  triad  is  analogous  to  the  first 
triad. 

But  again,  it  is  necessary  to  comprehend  by  reasoning  the  peculiarity 
of  this  triad.  For  the  first  triad  being  all  things,  but  intelligibly  and  uni- 
cally,  and  as  I  may  say,  speaking  Platonically,  according  to  the  form  of 
bound,  the  second  triad  is  indeed  all  things,  but  vitally,  and  as  I  may 
say,  following  the  philosopher,  according  to  the  form  of  infinity,  just  as 
the  third  triad  proceeds  according  to  the  peculiarity  of  that  which  is 
mixed.  For  as  in  the  progression  according  to  breadth,  that  which  is 
mixed  presents  itself  to  the  view  as  the  third,  so  likewise  in  the  progres- 
sion according  to  depth  of  intelligibles,  the  third  has  the  order  of  that 
which  is  mixed  with  reference  to  the  superior  triads.  The  middle  triad 
therefore,  is  indeed  all  things,  but  is  characterized  by  intelligible  infinity. 
For  the  three  principles  after  the  first,  orderly  distribute  for  us  the  intelli^ 
gible  genus  of  the  Gods.  For  bound  indeed,  unfolds  into  light  the  first 
triad ;  but  infinity  the  second  ;  and  that  which  is  mixed,  the  third.     It  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


180  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  111. 

infinite  power  therefore^  according  to  which  the  second  triad  is  character 
rized.  For  being  the  middle,  it  subsists  according  to  the  middle  of  the 
first  triad,  being  all  things  from  all.  For  in  each  triads  there  is  bound,, 
infinity,  and  that  which  is  mixed.  But  the  peculiarity  of  the  monads 
being  respectively  different,  evolves  the  intelligible  order  of  the  Gods. 
The  middle  triad  however,  thus  subsisting,  but  I  say  thus,  because  it  con- 
sistsof  all  the  things  of  which  the  triad  prior  to  it  consists,  yet  it  contains 
and  connects  the  middle  of  intelligibles  according  to  infinite  power,  and 
is  filled  indeed  from  a  more  elevated  union,  but  fills  the  union  posterior  to  * 
itself  with  the  powers  of  being.  And  it  is  measured  indeed,  from  thence 
unifonnly,  but  measures  the  third  triad  by  the  power  of  itself.  And  it 
abides  indeed,  in  the  first  triad  stably,  but  it  estabhshes  in  itself  the  triad 
which  is  next  in  order.  And  in  short,  it  binds  to  itself  the  intelligible 
centre,  and  establishes  one  intelligible  coherence ;  causing  indeed  that 
which  is  occult  and  possesses  the  form  of  the  one  in  the  first  triad,  to  shine 
fi^rth ;  but  collecting  the  intelligible  multitude  of  the  third  triad,  and 
comprdiending  it  on  all  sides«  The  being  however,  which  gives  complex 
lion  to  this  triad  is  mixed,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  being  of  the  triad 
prior  to  it,^  and  receives^the  peculiarity  of  life.  Foi  the  infinity  in  this 
generates  life. 

It  is  likewise  necessary  that  this  triad  should  participate  of  the  three 
things,  symmetry,  truth,  and  beauty*  That  which  is  primarily  being 
however,  principally  subsists  according  to  symmetry,  which  unites  it,  and 
conjoins  it  to  the  good.  But  the  second  triad,  principally  subsists  accord-^ 
ing  to  truth.  For  because  it  participates  of  that  which  is  primarily  beings 
it  is  being,  and  truly  being.  And  the  third  triad  principally  subsists 
according  to  the  beautifuk  For  there  intelligible  multitude,  order  and 
beauty,  first  shine  forth  to  the  view.  Hence  this  being  is  the  most  beaur 
tiful  of  all  intelligibles.  This  however  will  be  discussed  hereafter.  As 
there  is  a  triad  th^efore,  in  each  of  the  mixtures,  the  first  indeed,  sym- 
metry especially  comprehends  and  connects ;  the  second  truth,  and  the 
third  beauty.  And  this  induced  the  divine  lamblichus  to  say,  that  Plato 
in  these  tliree  defines  the  whole  of  the  intelligible  j^order}.  For  all  are 
in  each,  but  one  of  these  predominates  more  in  one  of  the  intelligible 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIV.  OFPj4ATa  igj 

monads  than  in  another.  Moreover,  the  third  triad  presents  itself  to  the 
Tiew  after  this.  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  extremity  of  being  should 
also  be  deified,  and  should  participate  of  an  intelligible  unity.  For  beings 
are  not  more  in  number  than  the  unities,  as  Parmenides  saysynor  are  the 
unities  more  numerous  thau  beings ;  but  each  progression  of  being  par* 
ticipates  of  the  one ;  since  this  universe  also,  according  to  each  part  of 
itself,  is  governed  by  soul  and  intellect.  By  a  much  greater  priority 
therefore,  must  the  intelligible  in  its  first,  middle,  and  last  hypostases^ 
participate  of  the  intelligible  Gods. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

As  the  first  unity  therefore,  after  tibe  exemrpt  cause  of  alt  things, unfoldsr 
into  light  intelligible  being,  and  the  second  unity,  intelligible  life,  thus  also 
the  third  constitutes  about  itself,  intelligible  intellect,  and  fills  it  with  divine 
union^  constituting  poweras  the  medium  between  itself  and  being,  through 
which  it  gives  completion  to  this  being,^  and  converts  it  to  itself.  In  thi& 
therefore,  every  intelligible  multitude  shines  foFth  to  the  view.  For  the 
whole  of  this  being  is  intelligible  intellect,,  life,  and  essence.  And  it  i» 
neither  all  things  according  to  cause,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  which  is- 
primarily  being,  nor  does  it  cause  aH  things  to  shine  forth,,  as  the  second 
being  doesy  but  it  is  as  it  were  all  things  according  to  energy,  and  openly.. 
Hence  also,  it  is  the  boundary  of  all  intelUgibles.  For  since  the  progres- 
sion of  beings  is  accomplished  according  to  similitude,  the  first  being  is 
most  similar  to  the  one  ;  the  second,  is  parturient  with  multitude,  and  is 
the  origin  of .  separation ;  but  the  third,  is  now  all-perfect,  and  unfolds 
into  light  in  itself,  intelligible  multitude  and  form. 

Farther  still,  as  the  first  triad  abides  occultly  in  bound,  apd  fi;(es  in 
itself  every  thing  that  is  stable  in  intelligibles ;  but  the  second  abides^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


182  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

and  at  the  same  time  proceeds ;  so  the  third,  after  progression  converts 
the  intelligible  end  to  the  beginning,  and  convolves  the  order  to  itself. 
For  it  is  every  virhere  the  province  of  intellect  to  convert  and  converge  to 
the  intelligible.  All  these  likewise  are  uniform  [i-  e.  have  the  form  of  one] 
and  intelligible,  viz.  the  abiding,  the  proceeding,  and  the  returning.  For 
each  of  these  is  not  asserted  after  the  same  manner  in  intelligibles.  And 
the]  inteUigible  genus  of  Gods  *  is  unical,  simple,  and  occult,  conjoining* 
itself  to  the  one  itself  which  is  prior  to  beings  ;  and  unfolds  *  into  light 
nothing  else  than  the  transcendency  of  the  one.  For  these  three  triads, 
mystically  announce  that  unknown  cause  the  first  and  perfectly  imparti- 
cipable  God.  The  first  of  them  indeed,  announcing  his  ineffable  union  ; 
the  second  his  transcendency,  by  which  he  surpasses  all  powers ;  and 
the  third,  his  all-perfect  generation  of  beings.  For  as  they  are  able  to 
comprehend  the  principle  which  surpasses  both  the  union  and  the 
powers  of  all  beings,  so  they  exhibit  to  secondary  natures,  his '  admirable 
transcendency ;  receiving  indeed  separately  the  unical  power  and  domi- 
nion of  the  first  God ;  but  unfolding  into  light  intelligibly  the  cause  which 
is  prior  to  intelligibles.  For  these  Gods  though  they  are  allotted  a  sim- 
plicity which  is  equally  exempt  from  all  the  divine  orders,  yet  they  fall 
short  of  the  union  of  the  father.  Of  this  triad  therefore,  which/  converts 
all  intelligibles  to  the  first  principle,  and  convolves  the  multitude  apparent 
in  itself  to  the  stable  union  of  the  whole  of  things,  one  thing  is  bound, 
and  unity  and  hyparxis ;  another,  is  infinity  and  power ;  and  another  is 
that  which  is  mixed,  essence,  life,  and  intelligible  intellect.  But  the  whole 
triad  subsists  according  to  being,  and  is  the  intellect  of  the  first  triad. 
For  the  first  triad  is  an  intelligible  God  primarily.  But  the  triad  posterior 
to  it  is  an  intelligible  and  intellectual  God.  And  the  third  triad  is  an  in- 
telleptual  God.  These  three  deities  also,  arid  triadic  monads,  give  com- 
pletion to  the  intelligible  genera.  For  they  are  monads^according  to  their 
deities ;  since  all  other  things  are  suspended  from  the  Gods,  and  also 

»  The  words  rm  ftera  in  the  original  immediately  before  to  vot^ov  tnov  ytyoj,  are  to  be  rejected 
as  superfluous. 
^  rxf  «iyci  is  omitted  in  the  original* 
^  For  wnmsi  it  is  necessary  to  read  ixur/j$. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XiV.    '  OF  PLATO.  igS 

powers  and  beings.     But  they  are  triads  according  to  a  separate  division. 
For  bound,  infinity,  and  that  which  is  mixed,  have  a  threefold  subsist- 
ence ;  but  in  one  place  indeed,  all  things  are  according  to  bound ;  in 
another,  all  things  are  according  to  infinity  ;  and  in  another,  all  things 
are  according  to  that  which  is  mixed.     And  in  one  place,  that  which  is 
mixed  is  essence ;  in  another,  it  is  intelligible  life ;  and  in  another,  intel- 
ligible intellect.     In  this  last  therefore,  forms  subsist  primarily.     For  the 
separation   of  intelligible?,  unfolds  the  order  of  forms;  because  form  is 
being,  but  is  not  simply  being.     Hence  that  which  is  primarily  being,  is 
being  itself,  and  is  that  which  is  being.     But  that  which  is  the  second 
being,  is  power,  proceeding  indeed  from  the  first  being,  and  existing  as  it 
were  a  duad  generative  of  the  multitude  of  beings,  but  not  yet  being 
multitude.     And  that  whicKis  the  third  being,  is  itself  the  multitude  of 
beings ;  being  there  existing  with  separation.     For  being  is  the  exempt 
cause  of  those  things  which  forms  constitute  divisibly.   And  of  the  things 
of  which  being  is  productive  collectively,  of  these,  forms  are  the  cause  in  a 
way  attended  with  separation.  Because  forms  indeed,  are  causes  produc- 
tive of  separation  in  their  effects,  and  also  because  forms  are  called  the 
paradigms  of  beings.     Being  however,  is  the  cause  of  all  things  posterior 
to  itself,  but  is  not  the  paradigm  of  them.  For  paradigms  are  the  causes  of 
things  which  are  separated  according  to  existence,  and  which  have  diffe- 
rent characters  of  essence.     After  the  one^  therefore  which  is  prior  to 
beings,  that  which  is  one-many  occultly,  arid  the  united  subsists.  On  this 
account,  it  is  that  which  is  divided  into  multitude,  and  which  tends  from 
the  uniform  to  the  splendid.     But  the  last  of  intelligibles,  is  that  from 
which  a  certain  distribution  into  parts  originates,  and  which  is  compre- 
hensive of  intelligible  multitude. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


184  on  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  lU. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

SociiAT£s  IheFefore,  in  the  Philebus,  affords  qs  such  like  auxiliaries  to 
the  theory  of  the  intelligible  triads.    It  is  requisite  however,  not  onlj 
to  abide  in  these  conceptions,  but  also  to  demonstrate  the  theology  of 
Plato  about  these  triads  from  other  dialogues,  and  from  them  to  point  out 
oue  truth  adapted  to  the  things  themselves.    We  shall  assume  therefore, 
what  is  written  in  the  Timseus,  and  shall  follow  our  leader  [Syrianus]  who 
has  unfolded  to  us  die  arcane  mysteries  of  these  triads,  and  conjoin  with 
the  end  of  what  has  been  said  the  beginning  of  the  following  discussion. 
In  theTimsBus  therefore,  Plato  investigating  what  the  paradigm  of  the 
whole  world  is,  discovers  that  it  is  comprehensive  of  all  intelligible  ani- 
mals, that  it  is  all-perfect,  that  it  is  tiie  most  beautiful  of  intelligibleSt 
thaj  it  is  only-begotten,  and  that  it  is  the  intelligible  of  the  demiurgus.  He 
likewise  denominates  it  animal  iteelf,  as  being  the  intelligible  paradigm  of 
every  animal,  and  of  that  which  is  the  object  of  sense.    Hence  it  is  ne- 
cessary that  this  animal  itself,  because  it  is  all-perfect,  and  the  most  beau- 
tiful of  intelligibles,  should  be  established  in  the  intelligible  orders.    For 
though  there  is  intelligible  animal  in  the  demiurgus,  yet  it  is  rather  intel- 
lectual than  intelligible,  and  is  not  the  most  beautiful  of  all  intelligibles, 
but  is  second  to  them  in  beauty  and  power.    For  primary  beauty  is  in 
the  intelligible  Gods.    In  the  demiurgus  also,  there  are  not  only  four 
forms  of  the  things  contained  in  the  worid,  but  there  is  all  the  multitude 
of  forms.    For  in  him  the  paradigms  of  individual  forms  presubsist.   But 
animal  itself  is  totally  constitutive  of  all  animals  by  the  intelligible  tetrad. 
The  demiurgus  likewise  is  not  like  animal  itself  only-begotten  among  be- 
ings, but  subsists  in  conjunction  with  the  vivific  cause,  together  with  which 
he  constitutes  the  second  genera  of  being,  mingling  them  in  the  crater  or 
bowl,  in  order  to  the  generation  of  souls.    For  of  the  things  of  which  in- 
telligible animal  is  effective  and  at  the  same  time  generative,  of  these  the 
demiurgus  is  allotted  the  cause  in  a  divided  manner,  in  conjunction  with 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  X?.  OF  PLATO.  ^  fgj^ 

Iheerater.    Hei»ce»  u  I  have  saicU  animal  iitsilf  id  exei&ptftbin  fbe  dfe- 
miurgus,  and  is,  as  Timaeus  every  where  denominates  it,  intdKgible. 

Nevertheless,  because  forms  are  first  separated  in  it,  and  because  it  is 
all-perfect,  it  subsists  in  the  third  order  of  intelligibles.  For  neither  that 
which  is  primarily,  nor  that  wbieh-iO;  secondarily 'being,'  is  all-perfect. 
For  the  former  is  beyond  all  separation ;  but  the  latter  generates  indeed^ 
and  is  parturient  with  intelligibles,  but  is  not  yet  the  multitude  of  beings. 
If  therefore  neither  of  these  is  multitude,  how  can  either  of  them  be  all- 
perfect  multitude  ?  If  however  all-perfect  multitude  shines  forth  in  the 
third  triad  of  inleUigibles,  as  was  a  littld  befivie  deoMimtiiatod)  but  animal 
itaelf  15  the  £iFSt  pamdigm  (for  it  is  ccroprelMMive  4f{  aM  inteUigiblls  aaU 
mals,  h  an  only-begotten  parradigift,  audi  ts^  not  coajmnei  with  any  otfaef 
principle)  it  is  necessary  Uiat  aoimal  ]>ts6lf  siMuld  be  eMablifllied  b^^^qt^ 
log  to  this  order.  For  ^ithar  there  will  not  be  an  intelUj^ble  paradigniy  ] 
fand  m  this  case,  how  will  seiisiblss  i>e  images  of  iwteMigibleB?  er  hew 
will  the  mtdligible  Gods  be  the  fatlierB  of  the  whole  of  things?)  or  if 
^ere  is,  it  is  the  third  in  intelligibleB.  For  the  natures  which  are  priot 
to  the  triad  in  intelligibles^  are  not  aH'-perfect ;  since  tfiey^  are  ifixempt 
iVom  the  division  into  multitude.  But  the  natures  posterior  to  it  are  not 
only^egotten.  For  they  proceed  together  with  others ;  the  mate  indeed^ 
with  the  female,  afid  tiiose  that  are  of  a  demiurgic  together  with  those 
that  are  of  a  generative  characteristic  Nor  are  they  the  most  foeant^l 
of  inteNigibles ;  for  beauty  is  in  the  intelligible.  But  animal  itself  is  all- 
perfect,  and  at  the  same  time  only  b^otten.  The  first  paradigm  of  beings 
theoefore,  is  arranged  in  the  third  triad  of  intelligibles.  MoreoTer,  animal 
itself  is  eternftl,  as  Timaeus  himself  says.  For  says  he,  ^'the  nature  of 
animal  is  etemak'^  And  again,  in  another  place  he  asserts,  ^  that  the 
paradigm  is  through  all  eternity  hdng/'  If  therefore  it  is  eternal,  it  par- 
ticipates  of  eternity.  And  if  that  which  participates  is  every  where 
secondary  to  that  which  is  participated,  animal  itself  is  secondary  to  eter- 
nity. And  if  it  is  through  all  eternity  being,  it  is  filled  with  the  whold 
power  of  eternity.    If  this  however  be  the  case,  it  subsists  proximately 

'  lit.    Intelligible  life,  or  life  itself,  or  the  fint  life. 

Proe.  Vol.  I.  2  A 


Digitized  by 


Google 


186  ON  THIS  THEOLOGY  BOOfi  UL 

after  eternity.    For  that  which  enjoys  the  whole  of  causes,  is  arranged 
proximately  aft^  them« 


CHAPTER    XVI. 

Mqbboybr$  if  eternity  has  the  same  ratio  to  intelligible  animal,  vfhkh 
time  has  to  thait  which  is  sensible,  but  the  universe  proxin^tely  partici* 
pates  of  time  (for  time  was  generated  together  with  the  universe)  it  is 
c^tainty  aecesaary  that  animal  itself  should  primarily  participate  of 
eternity.  Eternity  th^efore  is  beyond  the  first  paradigmi^  Jpor  eternity 
ind^  m^tsures  the  existence  of  animal  itself:  but  animal  itself  is  oiea-^ 
isured  and  fiU^  with  perpetuity  from  it.  To  whidi  may  be  added,  that 
we  ass4E)rt  eternity  to  be  the  cause  of  immortality  to  all  thing?.  Hence 
eternity  is  that  which  is  primarily  immortal.  For  as  that  which  is  pri* 
narily  being  is  the  cause  of  existence  to  all  things,  but  that  which  is 
effective  of  form  is  itself  prior  to  other  forms,  sq  that  which  is  the  cause 
of  perpetuity  and  immortality,  i^  itself  primarily  immortal.  The  daemo* 
piacal  Anstotle  also  rightly  calls  eternity  immortal  and  divine,  and  that 
from  whence  the  existence  and  life  of  all  things  are  suspend0d.  If  how- 
ever it  is  that  which  is  primarily  immortal,  and  not  according  to  partici* 
pation,  but  is  as  it  were  immortality  and  perpetuity,  it  will  be  life,  pos* 
tessing  from  itself  the  ever,  and  exuberantly  scattering  the  power  oi  per* 
petuity,  and  extending  it  to  other  things,  so  far  a^  each  is  naturally  adapt* 
ed  to  receive  it.  For  the  immortal  is  in  life,  and  subasts  together  with 
Jife.  Hence  Socrates  in  the  Phsedo,'  after  many  and  beautiful  demon- 
strations of  the  psychical  immortality,  says,  "  God  therefore,  my  dear 
Ce^es,  and  the  form  itself  of  life,  are  much  more  immortal.*  Hence,  in- 
telligible life,  and  the  God  who  is  connective  of  this  life,  primarily  pos- 
sess the  immortal,  and  are  the  fountain  of  the  whole  of  perpetuity.     But 

'  For  ^mifof  it  U  necessary  to  read  ^cuictvu 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.Xyi.  :0F.Pf.AfrO.  jjy 

this  is  eternity.     Eternity  therefore  has  its  subsistence  in  life^  and  will 
be  established  in  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  order. 

Farther  still,  it  is  necessary  to  assert  that  intelligible  eternity  is  one  of 
these  three  things,  viz.  that  it  subsists  either  according  to  being,  or  ac- 
cording to  life,  or  according  to  intelligible  intellect.  But  being,  as  the 
Elean  guest  says,  according  to  its  own  nature,  neither  stands  srill,  nor  is 
moved..  For  if  being  is  being  to  all  tliihgs,  and  essence  is  a  thing-  of 
this  kind,  much  more  must  this  be  tiid  case;  with  intelligible  essence,  and 
that  which  is  pirimarily  being.  For  they:  are  nothing  dse  than  essancft 
only*  But  being  unfolds  rootioa  uid  permanency,  aiid  the  oth^  geaem 
of  ^beings,  in  the  second  and  third,  progressions:  of  itself; .  The  first  being 
therefore^  as  we  hane  saidy  is  at  One  and  the  same'tiirie  exempt  from 
notion  and  permanency.  .  But  eteraity  according  to  Timaeus  alndesm 
one.  HeQce  also  tioie  imitatea  in;  its  motion  the  intelligible  pennwiency 
of  eternity^  i  £iet!i^ty  therefore  does  not  subsist  according,  to  that 
which  is  primafily  bdng,  nor.  yet  according  to  intelligible  intelleet/  For 
ndther  is  soul  time,  which  is  ntoved  through  the  whole  of  tim6.  And.ia 
shorty  in  divine  beings,  that  which  is  participated  is  every  wfa^re  eata^ 
bHshed  above  that  which  participates.  But  the  eternal  participates  of 
eternity,  just  as  that  whiqh  is  temporal  participates  of  tirn^e.  :  Eternity 
ther0fore  is  priot:  to  intelligible  intellect,  and  posterior  to  being ;  so  that 
it  is  established  in  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  breadth.  And  as  aoi^- 
mal  itself  is  eternal,  so  likewise  et€»*nity  is  that  which  is  always  bem'g. 
For  aa  animal  itself  participates  of  eternity,  so  eternity  participates  cif 
being,  and  is  the  cause  of  existence,  of  perpetual  life,  and  intellectioif^ 
and  measures  the  essences,  powers  and  energies  of  all  thiri^«         *        ,t 

*  It  bbtre  necessary  to  suppljoXX'ovSf^^tfiTftTovvouV'tiiiryoiirey, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


IM  ON  tfit£  THfiOLOOY  BOOK  HI. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

SiNCirB,  hawe^er^  eternity  mibstfete  according  to  the  middle  centre  of  m«> 
triKgibieB,  and  animtd  itself  according  to  the  extremity  of  them^  and  the 
most  spleDdid  of  that  whidi  is  inteUigiblo,  what  is  that  which  is  the  first 
of  tttelli^ibles^  abd  how  h  it  de^dnoinated  by  Tinyaeus?  He  says  there^ 
toe  bf  c<ieniity,  that  wl»le  it  abides  in  one,  time  proceeds  accoixiing  to 
mnnber;  and  that  by  motioh  it  adumbrates  the  permanency  of  eternity, 
but  by  mamiyeis  its  staible  unK>n<.  What  therefore  is  that  onct  in  whidi 
Tiwetts  Bays«l«rfiity  abid^  f  For  it  k  necefiswy  cidier  to  say  ^at  it  is 
tiM  one  of  «fbet«rity,  ^  the  oit\e  wt»ch  transcends  all  intelligibies,  or  the 
vnfe  of  tlie  £m  triad.  But  if  Mdeed,  we  say  that  it  is  the  amparticipable 
Ob^  liow  »  it  possible  that  any  tinii^g  can  abkle  in  that  which  is  exempt 
Ami  tdl  thinigs ;  Had  which  neither  admits  1^  habititdt  nor  commnnidik 
isf  tteO0lida)7  naitnres  with  itself?  For  every  thing  which  abiiles  in  any 
thing)  il  in  a.  oertirin  respect  on  all  sides  comprehended  by  that  in  which 
we 'say  it  abides.  It  is  howe^r  perfectly  impossible  tliat  the  first  one 
f&kould  either  comprehend  any  beings  or  be  coarranged  with  beii^.  But 
tf  «ny  ooe  ^o«ld  ^i^pposetbat  it  is  the  one  of  eternity,  in  which  Tinifi&os 
1Miy«>et€rnity  abides,  in  this  case, eternity  will  be  in  itself.  It  is  necessary 
4fO\vever,  that  it  should  abide  in  itsdf,  by  having  its  subsistence  in  abiding 
in  tliat  which  is  prior  to  itself.  For  to  abide  in  that  wliich  is  prior  to,  is 
better  than  the  establishment  of  things  in  themselves,  in  the  same  manner 
as  it  is  more  perfect  tlian  the  collocation  of  better  in  less  excellent  natures. 
If  therefore  eternity  abides  in  itself,  to  what  shall  we  primarily  assign 
permanency  in  that  which  is  prior  to  itself?  For  it  is  necessary  that  this 
being  more  divine,  should  have  its  generation  prior  to  that  which  is  infe- 
rior to  it.  If  therefore  eternity  can  neither  abide  in  itself,  nor  in  the  one 
which  is  prior  to  beings,  it  is  evident  that  abiding  in  one  according  to 
Tiniseus,  it  is  estahliahed  in  the  one  of  the  first  triads  or  rather  in  the  whole 


Digitized  by 


Google 


C3IAF.  XTUI.  OP  PLATO.  t$$ 

of  tbat  triad.  For,  as  we  have  before  obserired,  tihe  first  triad  it  the  eaiue 
of  stabilitj  to  all  beings,  in  the  same  manner  as  tiiie  middle  triad  it  ^ 
cause  of  their  progresnon,  and  the  third  triad  of  their  conver»on  to  Ikeiv 
principle. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Again  thsrsfore^  three  oiders  of  intelhgiblds  present  themselves  to  our 
Tiews  aceordii^  to  the  doctriQe  of  TimaBUSt  viai.  animal  ksetf^  etermtj, 
9nd  Itb^  one*  And  throu^  thb  one,  and  the  firm  establishment  in  k^ 
eternity  has  fi^ed  tiie  intelligible  kiagdom.  Bat  through  eterstit j^  animal 
itself  d^oes  the  bQundary  of  the  intelligible  Gods»  according  to  a  pet» 
petual  and  invariable  sameness.  And  animal  itself  indeed^  having  pro^ 
ceeded  tetradically,  is  suspended  from  the  duad  in  eternity.  For  etetnitj 
is  the  ever  in  covffumtion  with  being*  But  the  duad  in  eternity  participates 
of  the  intelligible  monad,  which  Timsaus  on  this  account  denominat&i 
one>  as  being  the  monad  aiid  principle  of  all  the  intelligible  breadth.  Since 
otherwise  indeed,  he  very  properly  calls  the  first  triad  one,  in  cooaequence 
of  its  being  e^ecially  characterized  according  to  bound,  demimioatang 
it  from  bound.  But  he  calls  the  middle  triad  dyadically,  eternity,  con^ 
necting  the  names  ;  because  this  triad  is  defined  according  to  intelligible 
power.  And  he  denominates  the  third  triad  animal  itself,  transferring' the 
appellation  to  the  whole  of  it,  from  the  extremity  of  the  triad.  The  first 
triad  therefore  is  the  union  of  all  the  intelligibles,  being  in  a  certain  respect 
coordinated  with  them.  For  the  union  is  difiistrent  from  this  whicli  is  ex- 
empt from  intelligibles  and  imparticipable.  It  is  also  the  supplier  cf 
stable  power.  For  all  things  are  established  on  account  of  it.  But  eteiv 
nity  is  primary  being,  and  is  that  which  is  primarily  established.  Hence, 
with  respect  to  the  permanency  of  the  whole  of  things,  we  say  that  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^ 


igd  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  UU 

tnttrnd  is  that  an  account  fff^ioh  this  permanenej  is  effected ;  but  that 
tjb!s  wcood  triad  is  thbt  by  which  it  is  produced.     For  tlie  firm  estabUsb^ 
aieot  of  beings  is  indeed  according  to  this  second  triad,  butts  onacc99m$ 
of  the  first.     But  the  second  triad  is  the  proximate  measure  of  all  b^ingsi , 
and   is  coordinated  with  the  things  that  are  measured.     There  are  also 
at  one  and  the  same  time  in  it,  bound  and  infinity ;  bound  indeed,  so  far 
as  it  measures  intelligibles ;  but  infinity,  so  far  as  it  is  the  cause  of  perpe- 
tuity, and  the  ever.     For  according  to  the  oracle,  eternity  is  the  cause  of 
never-failing  life,  of  unwearied  power,  and  unsluggish  energy.     Neverthe- 
less, eternity  is  more  characterised  by  infinity  [than  by  bound.]  For  it  com- 
prehends in  itself  infinite  time.     And  time  indeed  has  bound  and  infinity 
in  a  divided  manner.     For  according  to  its  continuity,  it  is  infinite;  but 
ifeccordmg'to  the  now  it  is  bounded.     For  the  now  is  a  bound. '  But  eter« 
miy  ertabHsbes  bound  and  infinity  in  the  same.     For  it  is  a  unity  and 
power.    And  according  to  the  one  indeed,  it  is  bound ;  but  according  to 
power  infinite ;  which  time '  also  demonstrates  as  from  images ;    because 
ilie.raiddle  triad  [of  intelligibles]  has  bound,  infiinity,  and  that  which  h 
mixed.     For  whence  is  the  bound  of  tin>e  derived  except  from  eterdal 
bound .^    For  the  temporal  bound  also  is  impartible,  in  the  same  manner 
as  die  bound  of  eternity  is  one.  For  the  impartible  is  the  image  of  the  one^ 
Whence  hkewise  is  the  infinity  of  the  continuity  of  time  derived  except 
from  the  power  of  the  infinite  ?    For  the  latter  is  a  stable  infinity,  but  the 
former  an  infinity  which  is  moved.     And  as  the  latter  stands  still  accord- 
ing to  the  oncj  so  the  fbrmer  is  moved  according  to  number.     Since 
whence  is  the  alliance  of  time  with  lives,  except  from  the  first  principle 
[of  life,  eternity  ?]     But  time  proceeds  through  all  temporal  life. 

Again,  therefore,  from  these  things  it  is  evident,  that  eternity  subsists 
according  to  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  Gods.  For  here  there  is  infi^ 
iiite  life,  and  the  cause  of  all  life,  intellectual,  psychical,  and  that  which 
subsists  partibly  in  bodies*  But  eternity  is  the  father  and  supplier  of  in«* 
iinite  life ;  since  eternity  is  also  the  cause  of  all  immortality  and  perpe- 
tuity;   And  Plotinus,  exhibiting,  in  a  most  divinely  inspired  manner,  the 

'  f  xf^v9$  18  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  X\rill.  Of  PLATO.  jpj 

peculiarity  "  of  eternity,  accordiDg  to  the  theology  of  Plato,  d^nes  it  tQ 
be  infinite  life,  at  once  unfolding  into  light  the  whole  of  itself,  and  its  own 
being.  For  establishing  its  life  in  the  intelligible  centre,  and  through  the 
one  indeed  measuring  its  being,  and  fixing  it  in  that  which  is  prior  to  itddf, 
but  through  power  causing  it  to  be  infinite,  it  unfolds  indeed .  the  uniform 
transcendency  of  the  first  triad,  but  defines  the  termination  of  the  Gods> 
and  extends  jfrom  the  middle  on  all  sides,  and  to  all  the  intelligible 
breadth.  Moreover  the  third  triad  is  filled  indeed  with  intelligible  life,^  and 
on  this  account  is  an  intelligible  animal,  and  the  first  animal. .  For  it  pri- 
marily participates  <^  the  whole  nature  of  thb  life  ;  but  unfolds  iato  light 
in  itself  the  first  of  forms,  to  which  also  the  demiurgic  intellect  extending 
itself,  constitutes  the  whole  world,  and  is  itself  the  intelligible  univers^f 
and  the  apparent  world  the  sensible  universe.  Hence  also,.  Plato  denoHii^ 
bates  animal  itself  all*perfect  Or  rather,  if  you  are  willing  we  will-  speak 
thtts :  that  in  this  third  triads  there  are  bound,  infinity,  and  that  which  is 
mixed,  which  we  hare  called  intelligible  intellect*  Hence  the  whole  triad 
is  denominated  only-begotten  from  the  father  which  is  in  it:.  For  thi^ 
cause  of  bound  imparte  that  which  is  uncoordinated  with  other  things; 
and  an  exempt  transcendency.  For  that  ^hich  comprehends,  ftagrsTi* 
m^us,  all  such  animals  as  are  intelligible,  will  not  be  the  second  with 
any  other;  since  again,  it  would  be  requisite  that  there  shbuld  be  fmo* 
ther  animal  about  it.  Hence  that  which  comprehends  in  one  all  intelli- 
gible animals  is  a  whole.  But  every  where  whole  is  refen*ed  *  to  bouild^ 
and  parts  to  infinity.  So  that  if  on  this  account  animal  itsdf  i»  only-be^ 
gott«i»  it  will  possess  this  peculiarity  according  to  bound.  But  again,  it 
is  denominated  eternal  according  to  the  power  of  it.  For  this  poweo 
especially  pertains  to  that  which  is  eternaL  For  eternity  is  infinite 
power  alnding  in  one,  and  proceeding  stably.  Animal  itself,  however,  is 
all-perfect  according  to  intellectv  For  that  which  unfolds  in  itself  all  the 
intelligible  se{)aration  of  being,  is  intelligible  intellect.     And  that  inteU 

.     '  Instead  of  oiihoTyrrMf  it  is  necessary  to  ^ead  liMTttra^         . 

*  l^anjs  is  omitted  in  the  originaL 

*  Instead  of  Tfo  tow  tftparo^x^nd  wgo  tii$  aictifm^,  it  is  necessary  to  read  frpo^  rovTrefaroif  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Igl  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  «i; 

lect)  according  to  tbe  deckioD  of  Plato,  will  be  a)l-|>erfe€t»  vbidi  compre* 
bends  all  intelligibles,  and  defines  the  boundary  of  the  intelligible  order. 
The  only-begotten,  therefore,  the  eternal,  the  all-perfectt  bound,  infinity; 
und  that  which  is  mixed,  manifest  the  nature  of  intelligible  animaL  On 
this  acconnt,  Timseas  also,  in  these  three  conclusions,  r^ainds  us  of  the 
paradigm,  vie.  in  the  conclusion  which  shews  that  the  universe  is  only- 
be^tten,  and  again,  in  the  generation  of  time,  and  in  the  all-peffeet  ccmr^ 
preheusion  of  all  animals. 

If  likewise  Timsras  says,  that  animal  itself  is  tbe  most  beaijttiful  of  all 
intelligibles,  and  that  this  has  tbe  third  order  in  intelligibies,  it  will  aot 
%e  wonderful.  For  it  has  be^i  before  aaserted  by  us,  that  every  where 
the  cause  of  the  best  mixture  is  the  triad  symmetry,  truth,  and  beauity* 
But  beauty  principally  shines  forth  in  the  third  progression  of  being,  im4 
exhibits  its  luminous  nature  together  with  intelligible  farms,  just  as  truth 
shines  forth  in  theseoond,  and  symmetry  in  the  first  progression  of  bew^ 
If^  however,  truth  is  indeed  the  first,  beauty  the  second,  aud  symme<ary 
^  third,  it  is  by  no  means  wonderfiil,  that  according  to  order,  truth  and 
beaiity  should  be  prior  to  symmetry ;  but  that  symmetry  being  more  ap^ 
parent  in  the  first  triad  than  the  other  two,  should  shine  forth  as  th^ 
third  in  the  secondary  progressions.  ¥<x  these  three  subsist  occultly  in 
the  first  triad.  And  truth  indeed,  so  fiir  as  it  is  intelligible  knowledge^  is 
in  the  second  triad ;  but  beauty  so  far  as  it  is  the  form  of  fomis  is  in  the 
third  triad.  For  that  this  triad  subsists  there  first,  is  evident  from  this, 
that  tmth  is  primarily  in  that  which  is  especially  being,  prior  to  know- 
ledge. But  beauty,  which  pervades  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  b^ngs,  is  ne- 
cessarily in  the  first  being,  from  which  the  last  of  beings  are  derived. 
And  the  first  symmetry  is  in  that  which  is  primarily  mixed.  For  every 
mixture  requires  symmetry,  in  order  that  what  is  produced  from  it  may 
be  one  certain  thing.  Though  these  three  things,  theref(^e,  presubsist 
there,  for  we  assume,  as  acknowledged  universally,  that  symmetry  is 
there,  and  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligible  animals,  as  Timaeus  says,  yet 
at  present  we  shall  dismiss  the  further  consideration  of  them,  as  we  have 
elsewhere  precedaneously  discussed  them,  and  have  especially  endea- 
voured to  enforce  what  we  conceive  to  be  the  opinion  of  Plato  concern- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


tJlIAP.  XIX.  OF  PLATO.  j03 

mg  dieir  order.  For  we  have  spoken  of  these  things  m  a  ti^eat^  i^otiM^ 
ingof  one  book,  in  whieh  we  demonstrate  Ibat  truth  is  co-ordkrafee  to  1^ 
philosopher^  beauty  to  the  lover,  and  symmetry  to  the  flauskian;  «*d 
that  8u<^  as  is  the  order  of  these  iives,  such  also  is  the  l^Iatiofi  0f  lMi4i, 
beauty,  and  t^ymmetry  to  each  other* 

Animal  itself,  therefore,  may  with  the  greatest  jusitice^  be  <»Skd  ftMt 
beautiful,  so  far  as  it  is  eminently  contained  in  iiitelligible  beauty.     9c^ 
beauty  is  went  to  be  tarried  in  forms,  and  is  as  it  were  the  fo^tnof  A)ln9My 
Pinfolding  that  whic^  is  occelt  in  tke  g^dy  causitig  its  lovelioest  to  dllmt 
ibitb,  and  attracting  to  its  owa  ^lendor  &e  desire  w4ikih  is  cMiceated 
about  it.    And  to  the  good  indeed,  aU  things  fyoskess  -a  ^ditenft  a»d  ar<&Mfe 
tendency ;  bat  we  are  excited  to  tibe  beadtiHil  wiCh  ai^tonisAimeBt  4Ml 
iDotion.     For  the  illwninatioii  from  it,  and  its  ^6acy,  ac^^ly  petnM#e 
through  ev^ry  fiouj,  jmd  as  being  IJie  tnost  siotilbr  df  all  thibgft  to  lAe  jj^^MT, 
it  GMv^erts  levery  iod  that  rari'^s  it.    l\ito  M»id  blso,  beboltl^  tiHit 
wUeh  is  arcane  ehining  forth  as  it  were  to  IJbe  tifew^  ne^ces  hi/  tibd  ni* 
iiiires  that  which  it  sees,  and  iis  astonished  aboatit.    And  aft  ib  the  flUHt 
holy  of  the  mysteries,  prior  to  the  mystie  spectacle^,  those  th«t  aii6  itii- 
f»ated|  are  fteited  with  astonishment,  so  in  intdligiUes  prior  to  the  pattiigi- 
pation  of  the  good^  beauty  shining  forth,  astonishes  those  that  behold  JMt, 
convertftthe^oul  to  itself,  and  b^tig  e^tabliehed  in  the  testibulefs  [o^fAr 
gMMTj  shows  what  that  is  which  is  in  the  ady ta,  and  what  the  tmnfldMl^ 
dency  is  of  occult  good.    Thn>Bgh  these  things  therefbre,  let  it  be  i^i^pi^ 
r«yi|  whence  beauty  originates,  and  liow it  first  ^ines  forth;  and  4to 
that  animal  it^f  is  the  most  Ibeitatiftd  of  all  intdligiMes« 


mm^^ 


€HA1T£R  XIX. 

Since,  however,  Tlmseus  txiy^  XhaX.^jpqiBa»xj  gxA 
digms  have  their  subsistence  in  intdligible  animal,  and  that  aU  these  are 
.  Proc  Vol.  t  1  B 


Digitized  by 


Google 


194  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  Ul. 

four,  unfolding  themselves  first  into  light,  according  to  the  all-peFfcct  te- 
tradf — 'this  being  the  case,  in  the  first  place  it  deserve^  to  be  considered,, 
that  as  species  or  forms  present  themselves  to  the  viejr  in  the  intelligible,, 
.it  is  necessary  by  a  much  greater  priority,  that  the  genera  of  beings  should 
pre-subsist  in  intelligibles.     For  it  is  not  possible  to  admit  that  forms  are 
intelligible,  but  that  genera  are  intellectual  only.     But  as  forms  exist 
•intelligibly  indeed,  according  to  their  first  subsistence,  but  the  pleroma, 
or  plenitude  of  them  sliines  forth  in  the  intellectual '  gods,  and  divides 
that  which  is  total  into  more  partial  decrements,  produces  the  uniform, 
into  multitude,  and  expands  that  which  is  exempt  into  co-ordinate  causes, 
thus  ^Iso  the  genera  of  being  are  occultly  and  indivisibly  in  intelligibles, 
.but  are  accompanied  with  separation  in  intellectuals.     Andon  this  ac- 
count the  first  triad  indeed  has  essence  for  that  which  is  mixed ;.  but  the 
second  has  life,  where  there  was  motion  and  permanency^  life  both  abiding 
/an4  proceeding;  and  in  the  third  there  are  sameness    and  difierence. 
For  the  all-perfect  multitude  indeed,  is  through  intelligible  difference, 
but  the  united   and  that   which  is  comprehensive  in  common  of  parte 
.  according  to  genera,  and  according  to  one,  is  through  intelligible  same*^ 
.  ness.    And  all   these  subsist  intelligibly,.  essenti?iny,   and  unifi)rmly  in 
these  triads. 

In  the  first  place  therefore,  this  deserves  to  be  inferred  by  those  who 
love  to  survey  the  nature  of  things,  and  it  is  also  fit  that  they  should  attri- 
bute co-ordinate  genera  to  intelligible  forms.  For  it  neither  was  nor  will 
'  be;lawful  for  genera  to  shine  forth  secondarily  *  after  forms*  Hence  much 
more  must  it  be  admitted  that  genera  subsist  in  the  intelligible  afler  the 
above-mentioned  manner,  by  those  who  admit  tliat  there  are  intelligible 
forms.  In  the  next  place,  in  addition  to  these  things  we  must  sur- 
vey how  this  tetrad  of  forms  subsists^  and  how  it  shines  forth  in  intelli- 
gible intellect  analogous  to  the  principles.  For  it  is  divided  into  a  mo- 
nad and  triad.  For  so  far  as  the  idea  of  the  celestial  gods  is  arranged 
prior  to  the  others,  it  is  defined  according  to  a  divine  cause.     It  appears 

'  For  vo))roif  it  U  necessary  to  read  vofpoi^. 
^  For^SfUTfpot  it  is  necessary  to  read  lwr»f<»i^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XiX.  OF  PLATO.  195 

however  tome  that  intelligible  intellect  returning  to  the. principles  of  the 
-i?hole  of  things,  according  to  the  conversion  of  itself,  it  becomes  the  ple- 
nitude of  forms,  aiid  is  all  things  intellectually  and  at  the  same  time  in- 
telligibly, comprehending  in  itself  the  causes  of  beings,  and  being  fiill  of 
the  ineffable  and  exempt  cause  of  all  things,  constitutes  the  monad  of  the 
gods;  whence  also,  Plato  I  think  calls  it  the  idea  of  the  gods.  But  re- 
ceiving the  intellectual  causes  of  the  three  principles  posterior  to  /Ae  one,  it 
exhibits  three  ideas  after  this,  one  of  them  indeed,  being  the  cause  of  air- 
wandering  and  volant  animals,  this  cause  proceeding  analogous  to  bound. 
Hence  also  it  constitutes  gods  that  are  uniform,  elevating,  undefiled, 
united  to  the  celestial  gods,  and  which  receive  measures  second  in  dignity 
to  theirs,  and  have  the  same  relation  to  those  gods  that  govern  generation 
co-ordinately,  as  the  celestial  gods  have  to  these,  according  to  exempt 
transcendency.  But  it  exhibits  the  cause  of  the  aquatic  gods,  co-ordi« 
nate  with  generative  and  infinite  power,  and  which  produces  gods  that 
are  the  suppliers  of  motion  and  prolific  abundance,  and  that  are  the  in- 
spective  guardians  of  life ;  .since  also  this  water  itself  which  is  the  object 
of  sense  is  under  the  dominion  of  effusion,  infinite  lation  and  ihdefinite- 
ness.  Hence  likewise  it  is  attributed  to  vivific  powers.  And  intelligible 
intellect  exhibits  the  prccedaneous  cause  of  terrestrial  and  pedestrious 
gods,  in  a  manner  adapted  to  the  nature  of  that  which  is  mixed.  It  also 
generates  gods  who  contain  the  end  of  the  whole  of  things,  who  are  stable, 
^vho  subdue  the  formless  nature  of  matter  by  the  last  forms,  and  fix  the 
seat  of  mundane  natures  in  the  one  centre  of  the  universe.  For  deriving 
their  subsistence  from  the  first  Vesta  as  it  were,  or  seat  of  beings,  they  sta- 
bly define  thjs  mundane  seat.  Thus  therefore  forms  first  unfold  them- 
selves into  light  in  intelligible  intellect,  possessing  their  progression  and 
order  according  to  the  first  principles.  It  is  necessary  however,  in  addi- 
tion to  these  things,  to  infer  this  in  the  third  place,  following  Timseus, 
that  according  to  this  triad,  the  multitude  of  intelligible  parts  shines 
forth,  and  the  whole  is  divided  into  an  all-perfect  order  of  parts.  For 
that,  says  he,  of  which  other  intelligible  animals  both  according  to  one, 
and  according  to  genera  are  parts,  is  the  first  and  most  beautiful  paradigm 
of  the  universe.     But  if  other  intelligible  animals  are  parts  of  this,  it  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1^  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

e^deptdiat  it  iiiai  wbple,  comprehendmg  in  itself  the  multitude  of  ia- 
te)ljgiJble  parts,  and  that  it  is  connective  of  all  intelligible  parts.  It  must 
be  inferred  therefore  that  this  triad  is  the  first  cause  of  production  and 
fabrication.  For  if  it  contains  the  primary  paradigms  of  things,  it  is  evi^ 
d^nt  that  the  orderly  distribution  of  secondary  natures,  originates  from  it* 
And  if  it  is  an  animal  constitutive  of  all  animals,  every  psychical  extent, 
and  all  the  extent  of  bodies,  have  their  progression  from  thence ;  and  it 
will  also  comprehend  the  intelligible  causes  of  all  Uie  vivific  and  deraiur|fic 
orders. 


GHAPTJER  XX. 

S^trqH.  coficeptions.  therefore,  as  these,  may  be  assumed  from  what  h 
wriliea  in  the  l^imseus' concerning  the  three  intelligible  triads,  conformably 
to  what  is  sai^  of  them  in  the  Philebus,  surveying  in  each  bound,  infinity, 
aiid  that  ^hich  is  mixed.  If  you  are  willing  also,  we  Avill  show  from 
what  is  scattered  in  tlie  Sophista,  that  Plato  had  the  same  conception  as 
we  liave  concerning  the  first  principles.  The  Elean  guest  theitefore,  in 
that  dialogue,  doubting  against  the  assertion  of  Parmenides  that  the  uni- 
verse is  one,  unfolding  intelligible  multitude,  and  shouing  how  it  is  sus* 
pend^d  from  thetme^  at  first  indeed,  he  argues  from  the  one  being  £or  being 
characterized  by  the  one]  and  reminds  us  that  this  is  passive  to /A€  one,  and 
participates  of  the  one,  but  is  not  the  one  itself^  nor  that  which  is  prima- 
rily one.  But  afterwards,  he  produces  the  conception  of  the  distinction 
between  the  imparticipable  one  and  being,  from  whole.  For  if  the  one 
beiqg  is  a  whole,  as  Parmenides  testifies,  but  that  which  is  a  whole  has 
parts,  aind  that  which  has  parts,  is  not  the  one  itself,  the  one  being  will  not 
be  ^  same  as  the  one.    In  the  third  place  therefore,  he  argues  from  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAIMtX.  OFFLATa  ^97 

all«-peifect  Fcmt  that  which  is  perfectly  divided,  and  is  oonnectiveof 
many  parts,  can  never  have  the  same  subsistence  as  that  which  is  entirely 
one.  And  having  proceeded  thus  far  he  shows  that  what  is  void  of  mul- 
titude, is  in  its  own  nature  exiempt  from  the  one  being,  proceeding  ib 
the  demonstration  of  this  through  three  arguments;  And  at  one  time 
indeed,  he  begins  from  the  one  being,  at  another  time  from  whole,  and  at 
another  from  alL  It  is  better  however  to  hear  the  words  themsdvear  of 
Plato.  That  the  one  therefore,  is  not  the  same  with  the  one  being,  he  pmves 
through  the  following  words^  "  But  what  with  respect  to  those  who 
as&ert  that  the  universe  is  one  ^  IVDust  we  not  enquire  to  the  utmost  6f 
our  power  what  they  aay^  being' is?  Certainly^  To  this  question  therefore 
they  may  answer :  Do  you  say  tbare  is*  one^  thing  albne?  We  do  say  so. 
Or  will  they  not  speak,  in  this  ma3lne^^  Thi^*  will.  What  then,  do  you*  call 
being  any  thing?  Yesi  Da  yomcall  it  tkeam;  empioyingtwo  namc^r 
respecting  thesame  thing?  Ox  how  doyouisay  ?  What  will  be  their  an- 
SMrer.alier  this  O  gtiest^'  Through  this  therefore,  Plato' separatingfAe- Mr 
and  being  from  each  otfasr,  and. showing  that  the  conception  of  Hte  me 
is  different  from  that  of  beings  and  that  these  are  not  the  same  with  each 
other»  evinces  th^  the  most  proper  and  primary  one  is-exetupt  fttymthe. 
one  being*  For  the  one  being  does  not  abide  purely  in  an  hyparxisvoid' 
of  multitude  and  possessing  the  form  of  one-  But/*c  om  it^eifis  escentpt' 
from  ev&ry  addition.  For  by  whatevjer  you  may  add  to  it,  you  will  di- 
minish its  supreme  and  inef&ble  union.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  arrange 
the  one  prior  to  the  one  bdr^g^  and  to  suspend  the  one  being  from  that 
which  is  one  alone.  For  if  the  (me  and  the  one  being  were  the  same,  and 
it  made  no  difi^aioe  to  say  one  and  being  (since  if  tliey  differed,  the  one 
would  again  be  cl^angedfromUie  one  being,)  if  therefore  tlie  one  diflferr 
in  no  respect  from  the  owe  being,  alt  things  will  be  one,  and  there  wiil 
not  be  multitude  in  beings,  nor  wiil  it  be  possible  to  denominate  things, 
lest  there  should  be  two  diings,  the  thing  and  the  name.  For  being  ex- 
empt from  all  multitude,  and  all  division,  there  wiB  neither  be  a  name  of* 
any  thing,  nof  any*  discoosrse^  about  it,  but  the  name  wtH  appear  to  be  the 
same  with  the  thing.    And  neither  will  a  name  be  the  name  of  a  things 


Digitized  by 


Google 


198 


o:n  the  theology  book  rn. 


but  a  name  will  be  the  name  of  a  name,  if  athing  is  the  same  with  a 
name,  and  a  name  is  the  same  with  a  thing,*  and  a  thing  will  be  the  thing 
of  a  tiling.  For  all  things  will  exist  about  a  thing  the  same  as  about 
a  name,  through  the  union  of  the  thing  and  the  name.  If  therefore,  these 
things  are  absurd,  and  the  one  is,  and  also  being,  and  being  participates  of 
the  one^  the  one  and  the  one  being  are  not  the  same. 

But  that  whole  also  is  not  the  same  with  the  one^  Plato  afterwards  de- 
monstrates [in  the  same  dialogue,]  beginning  as  follows  :  "  What  then  } 
Will  they  say  that  whole  is  different  from  the  one  being,  or  that  it  is  the 
same  with  it.'^  Undoubtedly  they  will  and  do  say  so.  If  therefore  whole 
is,  as  Parmeriides  says,  **  that  which  is  every  where  similar  to  the  bulk  of 
a  perfect  sphere,  entirely  possessing  equal  powers  from  the  middle;  for 
nothing  is  greater  or  more  stable  than  this  :*' — if  this  be  the  case,  it  is  ne- 
cessary that  being  should  have  a  middle  and  extremities.  And  having 
these,  there  is  every  necessity  that  it  should  have  parts.  Or  how  shall  we 
say  ^  Just  so.  Nothing  however  hinders  but  that  when  it  is  divided,  it 
may  have  the  passion  of  the  one  in  all  its  parts,  and  that  thus  the  all  and 
whole  may  be  one.  Undoubtedly.  But  is  it  not  impossible  ^that  that 
which  suffers  these  things  should  be  the  one  ?  Why  ?  Because  according 
to  right  reason,  that  which  is  truly  one  should  be  said  to  be  entirely  with- 
out parts.  It  must  indeed  necessarily  be  so.  But  such  a  thing  as  we  have 
just  now  mentioned,  in  consequence  of  consisting  of  many  parts  would 
not  accord  with  the  one!'  Through  these  things  therefore,  the  Elean  guest 
arguing  from  wholeness  after  the  one  being, ^and  also  from  the  division  of 
the  parts  of  wholeness,  demonstrates  that  the  all  is  not  one.  For  if  whole 
is  in  beings,  as  Parmenides  in  his  verses  testifies  it  is,  all  things  will  not  be 
the  one.  For  the  one  is  impartible ;  but  whole  possesses  parts.  Whole 
therefore  is  not  the  one  itself.  For  that  transcends  all  things  and  whole- 
ness; but  whole  is  passive  to  the  one.  Hence  also  it  is  denominated 
whole ;  for  it  is  not  the  one  itself.  Hence  all  things  are  not  one  void  of 
separation  and  multiplication. 

Moreover,  the  all  is  comprehensive  of  many  parts.     For  whole  indeed, 

^    Inttead  of  ro  trpayiLa  rep  ovofbori;  it  is  necenary  tx>  read  ro  owfia  rap  irpay/xan. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX.  OF  PLATO.  J99 

consists  at  first  of  two  parts;  but  the  all  possesses  a  multitude  of  parts, 
and  participating  of  wholeness  at  the  same  time  is  all,  as  being  perfectly 
distributed  into  parts.  This  therefore  is  not  Me  OTie  itself  ^  but  is  passive  to 
the  one.     For  the  one  itself  is  impartible.     Biit  it  is  impartible  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  be  ex>empt  from  all  parts.     Hence  the  all  is  not  the  sanofe 
with  tHe  one.     We  therefore,  have  divided  whole  and  the  all,  but  Plato 
conjoins  them,  when  he  says :"  Nothing  however  hinders  but  that  when 
it  is  divided,  it  may  have  the  passion  of  the  one  in  all  its  parts,  and  that 
thus  the  all  and  whole  may*  be  one/'    Atthe'same  time  however,  they  are 
divided  after  the  above  mentioned  manner.     From  these  three'  arguments 
therefore,  the  Elean  guest  separates  the  one  from  the  participants  of  the 
one,  and  doubts  against  those  who  assert  all  things  to  begone,  viz,  the  one 
being,  whole  and  the  all;  of  which  the  all  indeed  participates  of  whole, 
and  is  a  self-perfect  multitude,^  consisting  of  many  parts;  but  whole  par- 
ticipates of  being*     For  being  is  not  whole,  as  Parmenides  testifies.  These 
therefore,  having  such  an  order  as  this,  is  it  not  necessary  that  the  argu- 
ments of  Plato  should  be  made  conformably   to  the  three  intelligible' 
triads?.    For  it  was  tequisite,  since  Parmenides  defined  the  one  being  in 
intelligibles,  that  Plato  should  from  thence  derive  his  demonstriations  of 
the  distinction  between  the  one  prior  to  intelligibles,  and  the  one  which  is 
in   intelligibles..     For  the  doubts  against  Parmenides,  evince  in  many 
places  that  the  one  which  is  participated  derives  its  subsistence  from  the 
imparticipable  union.     The  one  *  therefore  is  not  in  these  triads,  but  the 
one  beingand  whole.     But  with  respect  to  the  all,  it  is  evident  that  it  is 
in  the  extremity  of  the  intelligible  order.     For  that  which  is  in  every 
respect  perfect,  and  all  intelligible  multitude,  have  their  subsistence  in  that 
extremity.     But  whole  is  in  the  middle  centre,  and  in  the  bond  of  the 
intelligible  breadth.     For  whole  is  adapted  to  have  a  subsistence  prior  to 
the  all ;  since  the  all  is  a  whcJe,  but  whole  is  not  necessarily  aH.     For  the 
all  is  divided  multitude  ;  but  that  which  contains  multitude  in  itself,  and 
which  is  not  yet  separated  is  whole.     And  this  especially  pertains  to  eter- 
nity.    For  eternity  is  the  measure  of  all  intelligible  multitude,  just  asi 

'  For  voBfctf  here  itis  necessary  to  read  voijt^.. 
*  It  ii  requisite  here  to  supply  to  sv.. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


£00  ON  THE  13IEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

mboie  k  ^  cdn^ience  and  union  cif  tiw  dlL     But  the  one  being  is  in 
the  firet  triad.     For  the  catch  especially  the  peculiarity  of  this  triad,  as 
Timaeus  also  has  demoiDitrated.    jAiid  beiog  which  is  occultly  and  intelli- 
gibly being,  and  which  is  the  canse  c£  eesenoe  to  all  <s4iier  things,  prima^ 
xily  shines  £oTth  tihere.    Again  tberafere,foikwiag  the  Elean  guest,  three 
triads  present  tfaemsdveB  to  our  Tiew ;  tiie  £mt  indeed  according  to  the 
one  beii\g ;  ihe  tseoraid  ftooordin^  to  whole ;  and  the  third  according  to 
the  all.    To  which  also  the  demnrgus  <if  the  universe  looking,  adorns 
the  sensible  vmivenie,  defining  tiie  visible  natnra  wkh  reference  to  that 
jH^teH'^lde  all ;  bat  taowwith  ref^^nmoe  to  the  intetligiFble  whc^enees.    On 
which  account  also  tirae  is  coaiin«ed.    And  as  the  iDtcDigible  whole  com- 
l^^haads  two  parts,  butcontainstfae  parte  in<iiiet)Oftndary,aAer  the  same 
waABert  time  also  is  famuided  by  tke  omt,  but  by  its  twofold  parts  is  in* 
Snite,    These  thiti^  therefore,  wie  shall  shorUy  after  moreditly  discnss 
when  we  «peak  concerning  tiie  Parmeoides.     For  tihe  conceptions  of  the 
JEUean  ^uest  are  ihie  fntdda  of  the  mystenes  of  the  Parmenides.    Before 
however  we  turs  to  the  Parmeciides,  let  m  discuss,  if  it  is  agreeable  to  you, 
the  three  triads  irom  the  begwaiag,  collecting  <be  ccmceptaon  of  I^ato 
Xrom  lus  assettkois  that  an  scattered  in  many  places. 


CHAPTER  XXL 


Thxbb  are  three  triads  thenelore,  as  we  have  frequently  observed,  and 
they  are  divided  after  this  roaAner  into  bound,  infinity,  and  that  winch 
is  mixed.  Hence  there  are  triple  intelligible  bounds,  triple  infinities,  and 
triple  mixtures.  But  of  every  intelligible  triad,  the  bound  in  each  is  de- 
nominated father ;  the  infiaite,  poirer;  and  that  which  is  mixed,  intellect. 
And  let  not  any  one  apprehend  -that  these  names  are  foreign  from  the 
philosophy  of  Plat9.    For  it  will  appear  that  he  uses  these  appeUations 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CBA^  XXI.  OP  PLATO.  20I 

itv  tke  before  inentioned  truuk  more  than  any  one.     For  lie  denominates 
the  first  God  father  and  lord  in  his  EpisUesu     It  is  evident  however,  that 
as  the  first  God  snrpatsses  even  the  paternal  order,  the  first  paternal  is  m 
the  inteltigibte  Gods.     For  these  arc  they  that  are  most  eminently  allied 
to^Ae  ane,  and  that  intelligibly  unfold  his  inefi^ble  and  unknown  union. 
}f  therefore  the  first  God  is  denominated  one  and  father  from  the  natures 
tliat  pfosimatdy  proceed  from  hinftji--- if  this  betbe  case,  as  the  intelligible 
Gods  are  primarily  unities,  so  likewise  they  are  primarily  ^sttiiers.     For 
Plato  gives  names  ta  the  ineffable  in  a  twofold  respect,  either  from  the 
summits  of  beings,  or  front  all  beings^.     For  tbiough  these  the  transcen* 
dency  e(  the  one  is  knowm     Moreorer,  the  Elean  guest  calls  being  that 
which  is  powerful  afid  pawer.    The  first  power  therefore  exists  prior  to 
being,  and'  is  united  to  the  father ;  but  it  particularly  accords  with  beings 
which  also  it  fHIs.     Hence  being  as  participating  of  po\fer  is  denominated 
powerfut;  but  as  united  to  it,  and  producing  aH*  beings  accord^m^  to^il^ 
it  is  called  power-     If  however  both  liato  himself,  and  hts  most  genuine 
disciples,  frequently  call  all  [true]  beings  intellect  (on  which  account,  in 
many  places  they  make  three  principles,  the  good^  intellect  and  soul, 
denominattng  every  [true]  being  intellect)  you  will  also  have  the  third  in 
these  intellect.     But  it  is  necessary  not  to  be  ignorant  of  the  difference. 
Vw  with  respect  to  intellect,  one  kind  is  intellect  as  with  reference  to 
byparxis.     For  when  we  denominate  the  unity  in  each  triad  intelligibte, 
as  the  object  of  desire  to  being,  and  as  filling  being,  thto  we  call  that 
w^bich  ranks  as  the  third  in  the  triad  intellect.    For  it  is  intelligible  as 
essence  and  intellect,  but  not  as  the  intellect  of  essence,  but  of  father  aod 
deity.     For  every  participated  deity  is  intelligible,  as  being  the  plenitude 
of  its  participant.     But  another  kind  is  intellect  which  k  the  intellect  of 
essence ;  according  to  which  we  say  that  the  being  of  the  third  triad,  is 
the  intellect  of  that  which  is  primarily  being.    For  this  is  essential  intd- 
leet,  being,  allotted  its  own  essence  by  energizing.'    For  all  things  ate 
essentially  in  it,  and  both  the  more  simple  genera,  and  the  primary  pa- 
radigms ;  for  it  is  intelligible  intellect.    But  the  tihird  kind  is  intellectual 

^  '  Vte  axm  m  nftfyaif  it  it  Ofcetsarf  to^cndL  «Kircp  rep  mt^uf. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  C 


Digitized  by 


Google 


20a  Oli  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IlL 

intellect,  which  subsists  analogous  ta  intelligible  intellect,  is  conjoined  with 
it,  and  is  filled  from  it,  possessing  intellectually  those  things  which  are  in 
the  other  intelligibly.  And  in  short,  it  is  necessary  every  where  that 
such  things  as  are  first  according  to  each  series,  should  have  the  form  of 
the  things  that  are  prior  to  them.  Hence  also  they  are  called  tlungs  first, 
and  possess  a  certain  transcendency  of  essence  towards  coordinate  na- 
tures.  Since  therefore,  that  which  is  prior  to  intelligibles  is  God,  the  first 
intelligibles  are  Gods  and  unities.  And  since  the  intdligible  is  essential, 
the  first  intellects  are  essences.  Since  also  intellect  is  every  where  ac« 
cording  to  its  own  nature  intellectual,  the  first  souls  are  intellectuaL 
Because  likewise,  souls  are  the  plenitudes  of  life,  the  first  of  bodies  are 
most  vital  And  because  the  bodies  that  are  perpetual  are  moved  in  a 
drcle,  the  summits  of  material  bodies  are  moved  in  conjunction  with 
those  bodies  that  are  perpetual.  This  therefore  is  the  cause  why  the  unities 
are  frequently  called  inteUigibles,  and  beings  intelligible  intellects. 

That  Plato  however  knew  this  triad,  I  mean  father,  power  and  intellect, 
we  shall  learn  by  looking  to  the  demiurgic  order.  For  in  this  the  triad  is 
most  remarkably  apparent.  Hence,  on  account  of  its  union  with  the  in« 
telligible,  it  is  filled  with  tliis  triad,  and  possesses  these  things  in  a  more 
divided  manner  than  animal  itself,,  or  intelligible  eternity.  Immediately 
therefore,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fabricaiioii  in  the  Timseus,  the  demi- 
urgus  calls  himself  father,  ^^  Of  which  works  I  am  the  demiurgus  and 
father."  *  But  shortly  after  he  unfolds  his  power,  "  Imitating  my  power 
ia  your  generation/'  This  therefore  is  also  wonderful,  that  he  has  deli- 
vered to  us  the  most  theological  conception  concerning  power.  For  in 
the  first  place  indeed,  he  calls  it  the  power  of  the  father,  when  he  says, 
*'  Of  which  works  I  am  the  demiurgus  and  father,"  and  that  the  power  is 
his,  [is  evident  from  the  words,]  *^  Imitating  my  power :''  so  that  accord* 
ing  to  Plato  power  is  of  the  father.  And  in  the  next  place,  he  ascribes 
to  this  powor  a  peculiarity  generative  of  the  whole  of  things  ;  for  this  is 
evident  from  the  words  "  In  your  generation.*'  Power  therefore  is  the 
cause  of  generation  and  of  the  progression  of  beings*  And  in  the  last 
place,  he  delivers  the  intellectual  peculiarity  of  the  demiurgus.  **  Having 
thus  spoke,  again  into  the  fomier  crater  in  which  he  bad  t^npered  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXI.  OF  PLATO.  203 

soul  of  the  universe,  he  poured  minting  the  remainder  of  the  former 
mixture-'*  For  to  pour,  to  mingle,  mixture,  and  to  be  productive  of  soul, 
pertain  to  intellect.  Though  what  necessity  is  there  for  asserting  these 
things,  since  prior  to  this  he  calls  the  demiurgus  intellect.  **  AVhatever 
ideas  therefore  intellect  perceived  by  the  dianoetic  energy  in  animal  itself, 
such  and  so  many  he  conceived  it  necessary  for  this  universe  to  contain/' 
Hence  the  demiurgus  is  father,  and  power  and  intellect.  And  he  poss- 
esses these  things  as  much  as  possible  on  account  of  intelligibles.  For  he 
is  a  God  as  father,  on  account  of  them.  He  is  also  power,  and  the  gene- 
rator of  wholes,  and  knows  beings  intell^tually,  on  account  of  them. 
For  in  them  intelligible  knowledge  first  subsists.  Much  more  therefore 
are  father,  power  and  intellect  in  intelligibles ;  from  which  also  the  demi» 
urgus  being  filled,  participates  of  this  triad.  For  Plato  assumes  each  of 
these  analogously;  For  as  the  paternal  triad  in  inteUigibles  gives  sub- 
sistence to  intelligible  eternity,  so  the  demiurgus  makes  those  works  to  be 
indissoluble  of  which  he  is  the  fath^.  And  as  in  intelligibles,  eternity 
proceeding  according  to  all  power  goierates  intelligible  animal  itself,  so 
the  demiurgic  power  gives  subsistence  to  mundane  animals  that  are  per«- 
petual  and  divine,  and  imparts  to  the  junior  Gods  another  power  which 
is  generative  of  mortal  animals.  That  any  one  therefore  may  assume 
these  names  from  Plato  is  evident  firom  what  has  been  said. 

Since  however,  being  has  an  hypostasis  triply  in  intelligibles,  one  is 
primarily  being  and  prior  to  the  eternal ;  but  another  is  secondarily  being, 
and  the  first  eternity ;  and  another  is  being  ultimately,  and  is^ntelligible 
and  eternal  intellect.  And  here  indeed  there  is  being,  but  there  eternity, 
and  there  intellect.  And  eternity  is  more  comprehensive  than  intellect ; 
but  being  than  eternity.  For  every  intellect  is  eternal,  but  not  every 
thing  eternal  is  intellect.  For  soul  according  to  its  essence  is  eternal,  and 
every  thing  which  participates  of  eternity,  participates  also  by  a  muck 
greater  priority  of  being.  For  with  perpetuity  of  existence,  existence  is 
entirely  consubsistent^  But  that  which  participates  of  existence  is  not 
universally  eternally  being.  For  bodies  also  participate  in  a  certain  res* 
pect  of  the  natvure  of  existence  but  they  are  not  eternal.  Intellect  ther^ 
fore  constitutes  an  intelleetual  essoice  only,  so  far  as  it  is  intiellect ;  since 


Digitized  by 


Google 


204  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

BQ  far  as  it  is  also  life  and  being  it  constitutes  all  tilings*  But  eternity 
constitutes  both  tbe  intellectual  and  psychical  essence.  iFor  the  mixture 
[in  the  second  triad]  was  intdJigible  life*  But  being  constitutes  the  in- 
tellectual»  the  psychical,  and  the  corporeal  life.  For  matter  also  is  being 
[most  obscurely,]  and  is  capacity  indeed,  but  formless  being,  and  non* 
being,  falling  off  from  the  participation  of  being.  If,  however,  some  one 
should  say  that  it  is  being  in  power  or  capacity,  yet  it  has  this  power 
from  being.  For  capacity  is  the  forerunning  participation  of  energy. 
Aod  thus  much  concerning  these  things. 

But  what  sufficient  argumait  of  division  does  Socrates  afford  us  in  the 
Fbaedrus,  cooceming  these  inteilig^e  triads  ?  And  how  from  what  is 
€leiivered  by  faim  may  we  recur  to  tbe  conception  of  the  hypostasis  of  the 
iDostprindpd  Gods?  Socrates  therefore  in  that  dialogue,  being  inspired 
fay  the  NyEipl»^  celebrates  evi^y  thing  divine  as  beautiiiil,  wise  and  good^ 
Mid  says  l^at  by  th^se  the  ^ool  is  nototished.  But  if  every  thing  divine 
18  A  tiling  €tf  tbb  tkkid,  tUs  is  the  case  with  the  intelligible  by  a  much 
greater  priority.  AsmS  fdi  tiiese  in<ieed  are  every  wbere,  bat  in  the  first 
triad, the jgood  pruicipaJiy  tubsbts  ;  in  the  second  tbe  wise;  and  in  the 
third  th^  beautifiil.  For  in  this  there  is  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligibks. 
But  in  the  second  triad  truth  and  the  first  intelligence  subsist.  And  in 
the  first  there  is  ibe  comniensurate,  which  we  say  is  the  same  as  the  good. 
_Btft  Socrates  in  the  Phi]ebus  says  that  the  element  of  the  good  is  the  de- 
airatble,  the  sufficient,  and  the  perfect.  The  desirable  therefore  pertains 
indeed  to  bound ;  for  it  is  the  unioa  and  goodness  of  all  the  triad,  and 
Ae  triad  converges  about  it.  But  the  suflScient  pertains  to  infinity.  For 
tdfiictency  is  a  power  capable  of  pervading  to  all  things,  and  of  being 
present  to  aU  things  witJiont  impediment.  And  the  perfect  pertains  to 
that  wbrch  is  mixed.  For  this  is  that  which  is  primarily  triadic ;  since 
•very  miactureiias  its  coalition  from  tlie  triad.  The  elements  therefore 
of  the  good  mrfbld  to  vs  the  ^rst  triad  ;  and  the  elements  of  intelligit^ 
Wmdcnn,  the  seoond  triad.  But  every  tiling  wise  is  fall  of  being,  is  gene* 
i«tive  of  truth,  a»d  is  ctmvertive  of  imperfect  fiatures  to  their  perfection^ 
Theftill  therefore  pertains  to  t^e  second  bomid ;  fer  tbis  is  uniformly  filled 
with  the  pMticipation  of  the  natures  prior  to  itself.    For  tbe  full  is  every 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CJHAF.  XKII.  O^  PLATO.  205 

trhere  adapted  to  bouod,  just  as  that  which  cannot  be  filled  is  adapted  to 
the  iirfinite.  But  the  prolific  pertains  to  the  second  power,  and  to  infinity^ 
For  that  which  does  not  abide  in  the  fulness  of  itself,  but  is  prolific  and 
generative  of  other  things,  is  -especially  indicative  of  divine  infinity.  And 
the  convertive  pertains  to  that  which  is  mixed.  For  this  as  being  allotted 
the  end  of  the  triad,  converts  every  thing  imperfect  to  the  fiiH,  and  unites 
itself  prior  to  other  things  to  the  bound  of  the  whc^  trift*!. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

» 

MoBSOTBB,  the  elements  of  beauty  are  the  peculiarities  of  the  thkd 
.  triad  of  intelligibles.  But  these  are,  as  we  have  before  observed,  tfaa 
lovely,  the  delicate,  and  the  splendid.  The  lovely  therefore,  being  ar- 
ranged analogous  to  the  desirable,  pertains  to  bound.  But  the  delicate 
being  coordinate  to  the  sufficient,  pertains  to  the  infinite  power  which  k 
in  the  beautiful.  And  the  splendid  is  of  an  intellectual  pecuharity.  For 
this  is  the  beautiful  of  beauty;  is  that  which  illuminates  all  things,  and 
astonishes  those  that  are  able  to  behold  it.  And  as  apparent  beauty 
shining  most  manifestly,  is  seen  through  the  clearest  of  the  senses  (for 
the  objects  of  this  sense  have  many  differences  according  to  Aristotle, 
and  this  sense  pervades  farther  than  the  rest)  so  likewise  intelligible  beauty 
af^pears  to  the  intellect  of  the  soul  shining  intelligibly.  For  it  is  an  in- 
teiiigible  form.  And  on  this  account  the  splendor  of  beauty  is  apparent 
to  intellect.  Splendid  beauty  therefore,  as  Socrates  calls  it,  shines  forth  at 
the  extremity  of  the  intelligible  order.  For  this  is^he  most  splendid  of 
intelHgihles,  is  intelligible  intellect,  and  is  tiiat  which  emits^  the  intelligible 
light,  that  when  it  appeared  astonished  the  intellectual  Gods,  and  made 
them  iulmire  their  fiilher,  as  Orpheus  says.  Such  tlierefore  is  the  prepa- 
ration to  the  »cieiv:e  of  the  intelligible  Gods  which  may  from  tl^ese  thing*, 
be  assumed.    And  now  it  will  appear  how  beauty  is  indeed  occultly  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


205  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  HI. 

the  end  of  the  first  intelligible  triads  but  subsists  in  the  third  triad  so  as  to 
have  manifestly  proceeded  into  light  For  in  the  former  it  subsists  kc- 
cording  to  one  form  only  ;  but  in  the  latter  it  subsists  triadically.  It  is  also 
evident  how  each  of  the  triads  is  at  one  and  the  same  time  a  monad  and  a 
triad*  For  the  first  triad  being  characterized  according  to  the  ^oarf,derives 
its  completion  from  the  three  elements  of  the  good.  But  the  second 
being  characterized  by  the  wise  is  contained  in  the  triad  of  wisdom. 
And  the  third  subsisting  according  to  the  beautiful,  is  all-perfect  through 
the  triad  of  beauty.  If  however  the  beautiful  is  occultly  in  the  first 
triad,  and  shines  forth  triadically  in  the  third,  it  is  evident  that  intelligible 
intellect  loves  the  first  triad,  and  has  love  conjoined  with  its  beauty. 
And  this  is  the  intelligible  love  of  the  first  beauty.  From  these  there- 
fore, intellectual  love  proceeds,  together  with  faith  and  truth,  as  we  have 
before  observed.  For  the  three  intelligible  monads,  the  good,  the  wise 
and  the  beautiful,  constitute  three  powers  which  lead  'upwards  all  other 
things,  and  prior  to  other  things  the  intellectual  Gods.  Concerning  these 
things  however,  we  shall  speak  hereafter. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Let  us  now  then  direct  our  attention  to  the  theory  of  the  Parmenides. 
But  I  wish  again  to  remind  the  reader  of  what  we  have  before  demon- 
strated. It  has  been  shown  therefore,  that  it  isnecessary  to  divide  the 
second  hypothesis  into  the  whole  progressions  of  the  one  being ;  and  that 
this  hypothesis  is  nothing  else  than  the  generation  and  progression  of  the 
Gods,  proceeding  supernally  from  the  supreme  union  of  intelligibles  as 
fiur  as  to  a  deified  essence.  For  the  discussion  is  not,  as  some  say  it  is,  in 
the  first  hypothesis,  concerning  God  and  the  Gods.  For  it  was  not  lawful 
to  Parmenides  to  conjoin  multitude  with  the  one^  and  the  one  with  mul- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIII.  OF  PLATO.  J07 

titude.  For  the  first  God  is  perfectly  exempt  from  the  whole  of  thiDgn* 
But  in  the  first  hypothesis  essence,  and  even  theme  it$elf^  are  taken  away 
from  the  first  God*  That  such  an  ablation,  however,  as  this  is  not  adapted 
to  the  other  Gods  is  evident  te  every  one.  Moreover,  neither  does  Par- 
roenides  in  the  first  hypothesis  speak  about  the  intelligible  Gods,  as  thc^ 
say  he  does ;  for  they  assert  that  the  negations  are  of  these  Gods,  bemuse 
they  are  conjoined  with  the  one^  and  in  simplicity  and  union  precede  ^  all 
the  divine  genera.  For  how  can  the  similar  or  the  dissimilar,  or  contact  and 
the  privation  of  contact,  and  all  the  other  particulars  which  are  denied 
of  ^Ae  one,  be  inherent  in  the  intelligible  Gods?  They  appear  indeed  to  me 
to  be  right  in  assertmg  that  the  things  which  are  taken  away  are  simili* 
tudes  of  the  Gods ;  but  they  do  not  speak  rightly  when  they  say  that  all 
of  them  are  similitudes  of  the  intelligible  Go^s.  To  which  it  may  be 
added,  in  opposition  to  this  assertion,  that  the  discussion  is  again  cim* 
coming  the  intelligible  Gods  in  the  second  hypothesis.  For  the  things 
which  are  denied  in  the  first,  are  affirmed  in  the  second  hypothesis.  This 
therefore,  as  I  have  said,  is  demonstrated  that  the  conclusions  with  refe^> 
ence  to  each  other  have  the  order  of  prior  and  posterior,  of  causes  and 
effects.  It  is  necessary  therefore,  that  proceeding  from  the  beginning,  we 
should  adapt  the  first  conclusions  to  the  first  orders,  the  middle  conclu* 
sions  to  the  middle  orders,  and  the  last  conclusions  1o  the  last  orders,  and 
should  demonstrate  that  as  many  questions  are  asked,  as  there  are  pro- 
gressions of  the  divine  orders.  And  in  the  first  place,  we  must  deliver 
the  doctrine  of  Partnenides  concerning  the  intelligible  Gods,  of  whom  we 
have  proposed  to  speak ;  since  Plato  speaks  about  these  in  many  places^ 
partly  indicating,  and  partly  clearly  unfolding  his  meaning. 

It  is  necessary  however,  that  we  should  collect  into  one  the  elaborate 
and  synoptical  theory  about  each  order^  since  it  wpuld  not  be  proper  pew 
to  repeat  the  exposition  which  we  have  given  in  our  commentaries  on 
that  dialogue.  But  assuming  each  of  the  conclusions  itself  by  itself,  I 
will  endeavour  to  refer  it  to  an  appropriate  order  of  the  Gods,  following 
ill  so  doing  the  divine  inspirations  of  our  leader  [Syrianus].    For  we  alsa 


'  Fof  wpofr}(fini§  it  it  oecessarj  to  lead  Trfotx^mi. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JI09  ON  TMB  THEOLOGY  BOOk  III. 

tkffMipKh  \ns  as^stance  hare  ifith  a  divine  bead  puf&ued  these  sacred  paths 
at^KHit  t)i^  theory  of  the  Parmenides  being*  agitated  with  a  divine  fuirjr, 
aod  wakened  a&  from  a  ppofound  steep  to  this  arcane  mystic  discipline. 
Afid  thus  nfiueh  concerning  the.  mode  of  the  whole  of  the  conckisioas« 
But  from  hence  I  shaU  pass  to  the  narration  of  the  things  proposed. 

The  first  and  imparticipable  ooe  therefore,  which  preexists,  beyond  the 
wiiole  of  things,  and  not  only  beyond  the  unkiesthat  participate,  but  also 
those  that  are  participated,  is  celebrated  throi>gh  the  first  hypothesis, 
being  defnonstrated  to*  be  thQ  cause  of  alt  things,  inefi^Uy,  but  nut  being 
defined  itself  i»  any  ooe  of  ^1  things,  nor  having  any  power  or  peculiarity 
of  a  kindred  nature  with  the  other  Gods.  But  aftfv  thm  [imparticipabk 
ones}  that  which  h  aJo«,e  wperessentiat  and  surpassing,  and  unmingied 
with  aH  hypavxi^,  is  a  ui»ty  participated  by  bdng,  and  constituting  about 
itMlf  tbe&*st  essence,  and  by  the  addition  of  this  participation  becoming 
SKore  veduiidant  than  that  w>hich  is  primarily  one.  This  however  is  a 
Buperessen'tia)  hyparxis,  and  the  hypa^rxis  of  die  first  inteliigible  triad. 
As  there  are  therefore  these  two  things  in  the  first  triad,  vie:,  the  one  acfd 
being,  and  the  former  generates,  but  the  latter  is  generated,  and  the  former 
perfects,  but  the  latter  is  perfected,  it  is  necessary  that  the  middle  of  both 
should  be  power,  through  which  and  together  with  which  the  one  con* 
»titutes  and  is  perfective  of  being*  For  the  progression  of  being  from  the 
one,  and  its  conversion  to  the  one^  is  through  power.  For  what  else  ccmi- 
joins  being  to  the  one^  or  causes  the  one  to  be  participated  by  being 
except  power?  For  it  is  the  progression  of  the  one^  and  its  extension  to 
being.  Heace,  in  all  the  divine  genera  powers  precede  progressions  and 
generations.  This  triad  therefore,  the  one,  power  ajid  being,  k  the  summit 
of  intelligibles.  The  first  of  these  indeed  producing ;  the  third  being  pro* 
duced;  aiid  the  second  being  suspended  from  the  one^  but  coalescing  with 
beiag. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIV.  OF  PLATO.  209 


CHAPTER   XXIV. 

This  triad  therefore,  Parmenides  delivers  immediately  in  the  beginning 
of  the  second  hypothesis,  adjoining  to  the  one  the  most  simple  participa- 
tion of  essence.  But  he  calls  it  the  one  being,  and  says  that  being  par- 
ticipates of  the  one^  and  the  one  of  being.  I'he  participation  however  of 
these  is  diflferent.  For  the  one  "  indeed  so  participates  of  being,  as  illumi- 
nating and  filling,  and  deifying  being ;  but  being  so  participates  of  the 
one^  as  suspended  from  the  one^  and  deified  by  it.  But  the  habitude 
which  is  the  middle  of  both,  is  ngt  with  them  void  of  essence.  For  neither 
is  the  habitude  which  is*  among  sensibles  in  no  respect  being,  and  much 
more  is  this  the  case  with  the  habitude  which  is  there.  But  this  habitude 
is  biformed.  For  it  is  of  the  one^  and  is  connascent  with  being.  For  it 
is  the  motion  of  the  one^  and  its  progression  into  being.  Parmenides  de- 
livers this  triad,  beginning  what  he  says  about  it  as  follows  :  "  See  there- 
fore from  the  beginning  if  Me  one  is.  Is  it  possible  then  for  it  to  be,  and 
yet  not  to  participate  of  essence  ?  It  is  not  possible.''  But  he  ends  speaking 
about  it  in  the  following  words:  "  Will  therefore  that  which  is  said  be 
any  thing  else  than  this,  that  the  one  participates  of  essence,  when  it  is 
summarily  asserted  by  any  one  that  the  one  is  ?  It  will  not.'*  This  there- 
fore is  the  first  intelligible  triad,  the  one,  being,  and  the  habitude  of  both, 
through  which  being  is  of  the  one  and  the  one  of  being,  in  a  manner  per- 
fectlyadmirable;  Plato  indicating  through  these  things,  that  the  father  is 
the  father  of  intellect,  and  that  intellect  is  the  intellect  of  the  father,  and 
that  power  is  concealed  between  the  extremes.  For  deity  is  the  father 
of  the  triad,  and  beincr  is  the  intellect  of  this  deity.  Yet  it  is  not  intel- 
lect in  the  same  way  as  we  are  accustomed  to  call  the  intellect  of  essence. 
For  every  such  intellect  stands  still  and  is  moved,  as  the  Elean  guest  says. 

'  In  the  original  iv  ov,  but  the  trae  readmg  is  eTidently  rv  alone. 

Froc.  Vol.  T.  2  D 


Digitized  by 


Google 


310  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IIL 

But  that  which  is  primarily  being,  neither  stands  still,  nor  is  moved,  as 
he  also  teaches.  The  first  triad  therefore  is  called  one  being ;  since  power  is 
here  occultly.  For  the  triad  does  not  proceed  from  itself;  but  subsists 
without  separation  and  uniformly,  being  primarily  defined  according 
to  divine  union.  HenCe,  this  is  the  first  participation  of  essence,  which 
participates  of  the  one- through  power  as  the  middle,  which  collects  toge- 
ther and  separates  both  the  one  and  being.  And  it  is  superessentiai  in- 
deed, but  is  conjoined  with  essence.  We  must  never  think  therefore  that 
all  power  is  the  progeny  of  essence.  For  the  powers  of  the  Gods  are  su- 
peressentiai, and  are  consubsistent  with  the  unities  themselves  of  the  Gods. 
And  through  this  power  the  Gods  are  generative  of  beings.  Rightly  there- 
fore, does  poetry  every  where  assert  that  the  Gods  are  able  to  do  all 
things.  For  essential  powers  indeed  are  not  capable  of  effecting  all 
things  ;  since  they  are  not  constitutive  of  superessentiai  natures.  The 
first  triad  therefore,  is  through  these  things  unfolded  to  us  by  Pannenides. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

But  immediately  after  this,  the  second  triad  is  allotted  a  progression, 
which  Parmenides  characterizes  by  intelligible  wholeness,  as  we  have 
shown  in  the  Sophista.  For  the  first  triad  being  uniform,  and  possessing 
all  things  intelligibly  and  occultly,  viz.  hyparxis,  power  and  being,  so  that 
power  which  is  the  cause  of  division,  subsisting  between  the  one  and  being, 
is  concealed,  and  becomes  apparent  through  the  comnmnion  of  the  ex- 
tremes with  each  other, —  the  second  triad  proceeds,  being  characterised  by 
the  first  intelligible  power,  and  having  the  monads  in  itself  distinguislied 
from  each  other.  For  all  things  being  united  and  without  distinction  in 
the  first  triad,  distinction  and  separation  shine  forth  in  this  triad.  Being 
also  and  power  are  more  divided  from  each  other.     And  that  which  con- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXV.  OF  PLATO.  21 1 

sists  of  these  is  no  longer  one  being  []or  being  characterized  by  the  erne,] 
but  is  a  whole,  so  that  it  has  the  owe  and  being  in  itself  as  parts.  For 
above  indeed  [i.  e.  in  the  first  triad]  all  things  are  prior  to  parts  and 
wholeness.  But  in  this  triad  there  are  both  parts  and  a  whole,  power 
unfolding  itselt*  into  light.  For  as  there  is  separation  here,  there  are  parts 
and  the  whole  consisting  of  these.  The  second  -triad  therefore  is  called 
intelligible  wholeness.  But  tlie  parts  of  it,  the  one  and  being,  I  call  the 
extremes.  And  power  being  here  the  middle,  connects  the  one  and  being, 
and  does  not  cause  them  to  be  one,  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  first 
triad.  Since  also  it  is  the  middle  of  both,  through  its  communicm  indeed 
with  being,  it  renders  the  one  one  being ;  but  through  its  communion  with 
the  oncy  it  perfectly  causes  being  to  be  one.  And  thus  the  one  being  cqd- 
sists  of  two  parts,  viz.  of  being  which  is  characterised  by  the  one^  and  of 
the  one  which  is  cliaracterized  by  being,  as  Parmenides  himself  says.  He 
begins  therefore  to  speak  about  this  triad  as  follows  :  "  Again  therefi>re, 
let  us  say  if  the  one  is  what  will  happen.  Consider  then  if  it  is  not  ne- 
cessary that  this  hypothesis  should  signify  the  one  to  be  a  thing  of  such  a 
kind  as  to  have  parts  f  But  he  ends  in  the  following  words :  ^'  That 
which  is  one  therefore  is  a  whole,  and  has  a  part." 

Through  these  things  therefore  Parmenides  defines  the  second  order  of 
intelligibles  to  be  a  wholeness.  For  as  existence  is  derived  to  all  things 
from  the  first  triad,  so  whole  from  the  second,  and  an  all-perfect  division 
from  the  third.  This  however  will  be  considered  by  us  hereafter.  Whole- 
ness therefore  is  triple,  l>eing  either  prior  to  parts,  or  consisting  of  parts, 
or  subsisting  in  a  part,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Plato.  For  in  the 
J^oiiticus  indeed,  he  calls  genus  a  whole,  but  species  a  part,  not  that  genus 
derives  its  completion  from  species,  but  exists  prior  to  it.  And  in  the 
1  unaeus  he  says  that  the  \vorld  is  a  whole  of  wholes.  And  all  the  world 
indeed  derives  its  completion  from  parts  that  are  wholes  ;  but  each  of  the 
parts  is  a  whole,  not  as  the  universe  is,  but  partially.  Wholeness  there- 
fore, being  triple  as  we  have  said,  according  to  Plato,  the  unity,  and  the 
intelligible  and  occult  cause  of  these  is  now  delivered,  unically  compre- 
hending and  constituting  three  wholenesses  ;  according  to  the  hyparxis 
indeed  of  itself,  the  wholeness  prior  to  parts ;  but  according  to  its  power. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


212  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  Ul, 

the  wholeness  which  is  from  parts  ;  and  according  to  its  being  the  whole- 
ness which  is  in  a  part.  For  the  one  is  prior  to  all  multitude  ;  but  power 
communicates  in  a  certain  respect  with  both  the  extremes,  and  compre- 
hends in  itself  the  peculiarities  of  them  ;  and  being  in  a  certain  resf)ect 
participates  of  the  one.  Hence  the  first  of  the  wholenesses,  or  that  which 
is  prior  to  parts  is  deri^'ed  from  a  unical  hyparxis.  For  it  is  a  monad, 
and  is  itself  constitutive  of  parts,  and  of  the  multitude  which  is  in  them. 
But  the  second  wholeness  is  from  power.  For  it  derives  its  completion 
from  parts,  just  as  in  the  power  which  is  collective  of  the  one  and  being, 
the  extremes  in  a  certain  respect  shine  fojth  to  the  view.  Ahd  the  third 
wholeness  is  from  being.  For  being  is  a  part,  and  is  the  progeny  both  of 
power  and  the  one^  and  possesses  each  of  these  partially.  i\fter  the  in- 
telligible therefore,  three  wholenesses  are  divided  according  to  the  diflfer- 
ent  orders  of  beings.  But  the  intelligible  wholeness  comprehends  the 
three  unically,  and  is  the  intelligibly  connective  monad  of  this  triad,  every 
way  extending  the  powers  of  itself  from  the  middle  of  the  intelligible 
and  occult  order. 


CHAPTER    XXVL 

Immediately  after  this  triad  we  may  see  another  proceeding,  in 
which  all  intelligible  multitude  shines  forth,  and  which  Parmenides  indeed 
constitutes  a  wholeness,  but  a  wholeness  consisting  of  many  parts.  For 
after  the  occult  union  of  the  first  triad,  and  the  dyadic  separation  of  the 
second,  the  progression  of  the  third  is  generated,  which  has  indeed  its 
subsistence  from  parts,  but  the  parts  are  many,  with  the  multitude  of 
which  the  triad  prior  to  it  is  parturient.  For  in  this  triad  there  is  a  unity, 
^nd  power,  and  being.     But  the  one  is  multiplied,  and  also  being   and 

*  Instead  of  avrti^  it  is  necessary  to  read  fvo^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  XXVI.  OF  PLATO,  213 

power.     And  thus  all  the  triad  indeed  is  a  wholeness;  but  each  of  its  ex- 
tremes, viz.  the  one  and  being,  as  it  is  multitude  conjoined  through  collec* 
tive  power,  is  again  divided  and   multiplied.     For  this  power  conjoining 
unical  multitude  to  the  multitude  of  beings,  of  some  of  these  it  causes 
each  through  progression  to  be  being  characterized  by  the  one^  but  or 
others  each  according  to  participation  to  be  the  one  characterized  by  be- 
ing.    For  here  indeed  there  are  two  parts  of  the  wholeness,  the  one  and 
being;  but  the  one  participates  of  being,  for  it  is  conjoined  with  it^  and 
being  participates  of  the  one.     The  one  of  being  therefore,  is  again  divid- 
ed, so  that  the  one  and  being  generate  a  second  unity  conjoined  with  the 
part  of  being.    But  being  participating  of  the  one^  is  again  separated  into 
being  and  the  one.     For  it  generates  a  more  partial  being  suspended  from 
a  more  partial  unity.     And  being  consists  of  more  partial  deified  beings, 
and  is  a  more  specific  mojiad.     The  cause  however  of  this  progression  is 
power.     For  power  is  effective  of  two  things,  and   is   the  operator  of 
multitude.     For /Ac  one  indeed  calls  forth  into  multitude,  but  being  con- 
verts to  the  participation  of  the  divine  unities.     Whence  therefore  does 
Parmenides  begin  to  teach  us  concerning  this  triad  ?   And  where  does  he 
conclude  his  discourse  about  it?     The  beginning,  therefore,  of  what  he 
says  on  this  subject  is  as  follows :  "  What  then  ?   Can  each  of  these  parts 
of  the  one  being,  viz.  the  one  and  being,  desert  each  other,  so  that  the  one 
shall  not  be  a  part  of  being,  or  being  shall  not  be  a  part  of  the  one?     It 
cannot  be."'    But  he  ends  thus :  "  Will  not,  therefore,  the  one  being  after 
this  manner  be  an  infinite  multitude  ?     It  seems  so." 

In  the  first  place,  therefore,  it  is  proper  to  understand  the  manner  of 
the  progression  of  the  divine  genera;  and  that  conformably  to  the  intel- 
ligible monad,  which  we  arrange  according  to  the  one  being,  the  duad 
posterior  to  it  which  we  call  a  wholeness  [proceeds.]  But  we  say  that  it 
consistsof  two  parts  which  are  separated  by  power,  and  that  intelligible 
multitude  presents  itself  to  the  view  from  the  monad  and  the  duad.  For 
when  all  things  are  said  to  be  parts  of  the  one  being,  viz.  secondary  things, 
and  such  as  become  apparent  through  the  separating  cause  of  power,  then 

'  It  is  necessary  to  correct  the  text  here,  and  to  read  as  follows :  n  ow ;  rmv  iMpioov  txartpov  rot^ 

TflOy  TOV  t¥OS  0VT9S  TO,  Tf  t¥  KCU  TO  OV  Of  a  tfTOXf  ITf  0*f  OVj  \  TO  CV.  X.  T.  A. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


214  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  UU 

Parmenides  delivers  the  union  which  pervades  from  the  monad  to  the 
third  triad.  But  when  power  separating  and  conjoining  the  unities  and 
beings,  gives  completion  to  multitude,  then  the  participation  of  the  duad 
becomes  perfectly  apparent,  as  I  think  Parmenides  demonstrates  when 
lie  says,  *•  so  that  it  is  necessary  two  things  should  always  be  generated, 
and  that  there  should  never  be  one  thing  (only.)"  This  triad,  therefore,  pro- 
ceeds according  to  both  the  preexistent  triads,  flowing  according  to  the 
Oracle, and  proceeding  to  all  intelligible  multitude.  For  infinite  multitude  is 
indicative  of  this  flux,  and  of  the  incomprehensible  nature  of  f)ower. 
Hence,  in  the  first  place,  I  have  said  that  the  hypostasis  of  this  triad  is 
through  these  things  demonstrated  to  be  suspended  from  the  triads  prior 
to  it.  And  in  the  next  place,  I  say,  that  this  triad,  according  to  Parme- 
nides, is  primogenial.  For  this  first  imparts  the  power  of  being  generated; 
and  Parmenides  calls  the  multitude  which  is  in  it  in  generatiouj  [i.  e.  be^ 
coming  to  6e,  or  rising  into  existence^  For  he  says  :  •*  And  the  part  will 
be  generated  from  two  parts  at  least.'*  xVnd  again.:  "  Whatever  part  is 
generated^  will  always  have  these  parts/'  And  in  what  follows :  "  So 
that  it  is  necessary  it  should  always  be  generated  two  things,  and  should 
never  be  one.''  Does  not  he,  therefore,  who  frequently  uses  the  word  ge- 
neration in  teaching  concerning  the  progression  of  the  intelligil)le  nuilti- 
tude,  proclaim  that  the  natures  prior  to  this  order  are  more  united  to  each 
otiier?  But  this  order  proceeds  to  a  greater  extent,  unfolds  the  occult 
nature  of  the  triads  prior  to  itself,  and  is  primogenial,  unfolding  in  itself 
prolific  power. 

In  addition  to  these  things  also,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  infinity 
of  multitude,  not  as  those  think  fit  to  speak,  who  assume  the  infinite  in 
quantity,  but  since  in  the  principles  of  the  whole  of  things,  there  are 
bound  and  infinity,  the  former  being  the  cause  of  the  union,  but  the 
latter  of  the  sepanition  of  multitude,  Parmenides  calls  the  first  and  intel- 
ligible multitude  infinite,  because  all  multitude  indeed,  according  to  its 
own  nature,  is  infinite,  as  being  the  progeny  of  the  first  infinity.  All  in- 
telligible multitude,  however,  is  a  thing  of  this  kind.  For  it  is  the  first 
multitude,  and  multitude  itself.  But  multitude  itself  is  the  first  progeny 
of  intelligible  infinity.     Intelligible  multitude,  therefore^  is  on  this  ac- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  "XXVII.  OF  PLATO,  215 

count  infinite,  as  unfolding  into  light  the  first  infinity,  and  this  infinity  is 
the  same  with  the  all^perfect.  For  that  which  has  proceeded  to  the  all^ 
and  as  far  as  it  is  requisite  an  intelligible  nature  should  proceed,  through 
the  power  which  is  generative  of  the  whole  of  things,  is  infinite.  For  it 
cannot  be  comprehended  by  any  other  thing.  But  intelligible  multitude 
is  comprehensive  of  all  intelligible  multitude.  For  if  indeed  tliat  which 
isf  primarily  infinite,  was  infinite  according  to  quantity,  it  would  be  re* 
quisite  to  admit  that  the  intelligible  is  infinite  multitude  of  this  kind.  Since, 
howevei%  the.  intelligible  is  infinite  power,  it  is  necessary  that  the  partici- 
pant of  the  primarily  infinite,  should  cause  infinity  to  shine  forth  accord- 
ing to  the  power  which  is  comprehensive  of  all  prior  natures.  And  if  it 
be  requisite  to  rekte  my  own  opinion,  as  that  which  is  primarily  one  is 
primarily  bound,  so  that  ^hich  is  primarily  multitude  is  infinite  multitude^ 
For  it  receives  the  whole  power  of  infinity,  and  producing  all  unities,  and 
all  beings,  as  far  as  to  the  most  individual  natures,  it  possesses  never-failing 
power.  It  is,  therefore,  more  total  than  all  multitude,  and  is  an  iticom^ 
prehensible  infinite.  Hence  unfolding  into  light  all  multitude,  it  bounds 
and  measures  it  by  infinite  power,  and  through  wholeness  introduces 
bound  to  all  things.  These  things,  thereficire,  may  be  assumed  from  Par« 
menides  concerning  the  third  intelligible  triad* 


CHAPTER  XXVH. 

Let  us  in  the  next  place  speak  in  common  about  all  the  intelligible 
Iriads.  With  respect  to  the  first  triad,  therefore,  which  is  occult,  and  is 
allotted  the  intelligible  summit  in  intelligibles,  Plato  at  one  time  proceed*- 
ing  from  the  union  which  is  in  it,  and  its  exempt  transcendency  with  re- 
spect to  the  other  triads,  denominates  it  one,  as  in  the  Timasus.  For  eter- 
nity, says  he,  abides  in  one.  But  reason  evinces  that  this  one  is  the  first 
triaid  of  intelligibles.     But  at  another  time  proceeding  from  the  extremi- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


21g  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  llL 

ties  which  are  in  it,  viz.  that  which  is  participated,  and  that  which  parti- 
cipates, he  calls  it  the  one  being,  considering  the  power  which  is  compre- 
hended in  these  as  ineffable,  in  consequence  of  its  subsisting  uniformly 
and  occultly.  And  at  another  time,  he  unfolds  the  whole  of  it,  accord- 
ing to  the  monads  which  are  in  it,  bound,  infinity,  and  that  which  is 
mixed  ;  bound  indeed  indicating  its  divine  hyparxis,  infinity  its  generative 
power,  aqd  that  which  is  mixed,  the  essence  proceeding  from  this  power. 
Plato,  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  teaches  us  through  these  names  the  first 
intelligible  triad  ;  at  one  time  indeed  through  one  name,  but  at  another 
through  two  names,  and  at  another  again  through  three  names,  unfolding 
it  to  our  view.  For  there  is  a  triad  in  it,  according  to  which  the  whole  is 
characterized  ;  and  a  duad  according  to  which  the  extremes  communicate 
with  each  other;  and  a  monad  which  exhibits  the  ineffable,  occult,  and 
Unical  nature  cf  the  first,  through  its  own  monads. 

But  Ihe  second  triad  after  this,  Plato  denominates  in  the  Timaeus  in- 
deed, eternity ;  but  in  the  Parmeuides  the  first  wholeness.  How  these, 
however,  are  allotted  the  same  peculiarity  we  may  learn  by  considering 
that  every  thing  eternal  is  indeed  a  whole;  viz.  if  it  is  perfisctly  eternal, 
and  has  the  whole  of  its  essenccand  energy  at  once  present.  For  every 
intellect  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  perfectly  establishing  at  once  in  itself,  the 
whole  of  intellectual  perception.  It  likewise  does  not  possess  one  part  of 
being,  but  is  deprived  of  another  part,  nor  does  it  partially  participate  of 
energy,  but  it  summarily  comprehends  the  whole  of  being,  and  the  whole 
of  intelligence.  If,  however,  in  its  energies  it  proceeded  according  to 
time,  but  had  an  eternal  essence,  it  would  be  allotted  the  whole  of  the 
latter,  and  this  alwa^'s  stably  the  same,  but  would  possess  the  former  va- 
riably,  so  as  to  exert  different  energies  at  different  times.  Eternity,  there- 
fore, is  every  where  the  cause  of  wholeness  to  the  natures  to  which  it  is 
primarily  present.  But  whole  also  is  every  where  comprehensive  of  per- 
petuity. For  no  whole  aband9ns  either  its  essence  or  its  proper  perfec- 
tion ;  but  that  which  is  primarily  corrupted  and  vitiated  is  a  partial  na- 
ture. For  on  this  account  also  the  whole  world  is  perpetual,  viz.  because 
it  is  a  whole,  and  this  is  likewise  the  case  with  all  that  the  heavens  contain, 
and  with  each  of  the  elements.    For  every  where  wholeness  is  connective 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVIL    ,  OF  PLATO.  tl7 

of  subjects.  Hence  eternity  is  consubsisteiit  with  wholeness^  and  whole 
and  eteraitj  are  tjie  same.  Eadi  also  is  a  measure)  the  one  of  things 
eternal,  and  of  all  perpetual  natures,  but  the  other  of  parts  and  of  all  muk 
titude.  Since,  however,  there  are  three  wholenesses,  one  indeed  being 
prior  to  parts,  another  subsisting  from  parts,  and  another  in  a  part, — 
through  the  wholeness  which  is  {Mior  to  parts,  eternity  measures  those 
unities  of  divine  natures  whidi  are  exempt  from  beings ;  but  through  the 
wholeness  which  derives  its  subsistence  from  parts,  it  measures  the  unities 
that  are  co-ordinate  with  beings ;  and  through  the  wholeness  which  is  in 
a  part,  it  measures  all  beings  and  whole  essences.  For  these  wholenesses 
being  parts  of  the  divine  unities,  they  possess  .  partibly  what  pre-exists 
unically  in  the  unities.  And,  moreover,  eternity  is  nothing  else  than  the 
ever  shining  forth  from  the  unity  which  is  connected  with  beings  But 
whole  consists  of  two  parts,  vi?.  of  the  o$ie  and  being,  power  existing  as 
the  collector  of  the  parts.  According  to  both  these  conceptions,  there* 
fore,  the  duad  pertaining  to  the  middle  intelligible  triad,  unfolds  the  uni- 
form and  occidt  hypostasis  of  the  first  triad. 

Moreover,  in  the  Timseus,  Plato  calls  the  third  triad  of  intelligibles, 
animal  itself,  intelligible,  all-perfect,  and  only-begotten.  But  in  the  Par- 
inenides  he  denominates  it  infinite  multitude,  and  a  wholeness  compre- 
hensive of  many  parts.  And  in  the  Sophista  he  peq>etually  calls  it  the 
intelligible  distributed  into  many  beings.  All  these  assertions,  therefore, 
are  the  progeny  of  one  science,  and  tend  to  one  intelligible  truth.  For 
when  Timseus  calls  this  triad  intelligible  animal,  he  also  asserts  it  to  be 
all-perfect,  and  comprehensive  of  intelligible  animals  as  its  parts,  both  ac- 
cording to  one  and  according  to  parts.  Hence  animal  itself  is  according 
to  this  a  whole,  comprehensive  of  intelligible  animals  as  its  parts.  And 
Parmenides,  when  he  shows  that  the  <me  being  is  all-perfect  multitude, 
demonstrates  that  it  is  consubsistent  with  this  order.  For  the  infinite  will 
be  all-powerful  and  all-perfect,  as  we  have  beforeobserved,  comprehend- 
ing in  itself  an  intelligible  multitude  of  parts,  which  also  it  generates; 
some  of  these  being  more  total,  but  others  more  partial,  and  as  Timseus 
says,  both  according  to  one,  and  according  to  genera.  Farther  still,  as  he 
calls  animal  itself  eternal  and  only-begotten,  so  Parmenides  first  attri- 
Proc.  Vol.  h  2  E 


Digitized  by 


Google 


218  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III. 

butes  the  ever  and  to  be  geoerated,  to  infinite  multitude^  wlien  he  says, 
"  And  thus,  according  to  the  same  reasoning,  whatever  partis  generated 
>fill  always  possess  these  two  parts:  for  the  one  will  always  contain  being, 
and  being  the  one ;  so  that  two  things  will  necessarily  always  be  gene- 
rated, and  no  part  will  ever  be  one/' 

•    Who,  therefore,  so  clearly  reminds  us  of  eternal  animal,  and  the  primo- 
genial  triad,  as  Parmenides,  first  assuming  id  this  order  generation  and  the 
ever,  and  so  continually  using  each  of  these  ?   The  same  thing,  therefore, 
is  both  an  all-perfect  animal,  and  all-powerful  intelligible  multitude.     For 
the  first  infinity  being  power,  and  every  intelligible  subsisting  according 
to  it,  and  receiving  from  it  a  division  into  parts,  I  think  it  proper  to  call 
it  all-powerful ;  thus  avoiding  the  appellation  of  the  infinite,  which  dis- 
turbs the  multitude.     That,  however,  which  in  these  things  is  both  difli- 
cult  to  understand,  and  for  which  Plato  especially  deserves  to  be  admired, 
we  must  not  omit,  but  demonstrate  to  the  genuine  lovers  of  truth.    For 
intelligible  animal  comprehends  four  intelligible  ideas,  according  to  which 
it  not  only  constitutes  the  genera  of  Gods,  but  also  the  more  excellent 
iirid  of  beings  after  the  Gods,  and  also  mortal  animals  themselves ;  for 
generating  it  extends  the  idea  of  air- wandering,  the  idea  of  aquatic,  and 
the  idea  of  terrestrial  animals,  from  the  Gods  as  far  as  to  mortal  animals. 
Since  animal  itself,  therefore,  comprehends  four  ideas,  and  through  the 
same  paradigms  produces  totally  divine,  daemoniacal  and  mortal  animals, 
this  deservedly  produces  a  doubt  in  those  who  love  the  contemplation  of 
tf  utby.  how,  the  causes  being  the  same,  and  the  same  primary  paradigms 
preexisting,  some  of  the  natures  which  are  constituted  are  Gods,  others 
daemons,  and  others  mortal  animals.     For  all  these  being  generated  with 
reference  to  one  form,  how   is  it  possible  they  should  not  have  the  same 
form  and  nature ;  since  it  is  requisite  that  one  idea  should  every  where 
be  generative  of  things  that  have  a  similar  form  ?    For  on  this  account  we 
admit  the  hypothesis  of  ideas,  in  order  that  the  intelligible  genus  of  Gods 
may  possess  and  contain  prior  to  multitude  monads  productive  of  similar 
natures.     This  doubt,'  therefore^  being  so  difficult,  some  one  may  solve  it 
logically  by  saying,  that  all  things  which  subsist  according  to  one  form 

*    Instead  of  «Tgigi«f^  it  is  necessary  to  read  avo§Kx^^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVII.  OF  1>LAT0.  219 

are  not  synonimous,  and  that  they  do  not  similarly  participate  of  their 
common  cause,  but  some  things  primarily,  and  others  ultiniately.  For 
each  form  is  the  leader  of  a  certain  series,  beginning  supemally,  and  sub- 
siding as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things.  For  according  to  the  oracle,  all 
things  begin  supernally  to  extend  their  admirable  rays  to  tjie  downward 
place.  Hence  it  will  not  be  wonderful  that  the  same  idea  should  pre- 
exist as  the  cause  of  Gods,  daemons,  and  mortal  animals,  producin^g  all 
things  totally,  and  delivering  the  more  partial  separation  of  things  to  the 
demiurgic  order,  in  the  same  manner  as  this  order  delivers  the  production 
of  individuals  to  the  junior  Gods.  For  inteliigibles  are  the  causes  of 
whole  series;  but  intellectuals  of  divisions  according  to  common  genera^. 
Supermundane  forms  are  the  causes  of  specific  differences ;  but  mundane 
of  things  which  are  now  individuals.  For  they  are  causes  which  are 
moved,  and  are  the  leaders  of  mutation  to  their  progeny. 

If  however  it  be  requisite  to  survey  the  thing  itself  by  itself,  and  how 
one  intelligible  form  is  the  cause '  of  Gods,  and  daemons  and  mortals, 
Parmenides  alone  is  able  to  satisfy  us  about  the  parts  which  are  contained 
in  the  intelligible  multitude.  For  be  characterizes  some  things  according 
to  being,  but  others  according  to  the  one.  For  the  one  being,  indeed^  is 
absorbed  by  the  one^  but  being  which  is  one  is  rather  absorbed  by  being, 
and  the  one  being,  and  being  which  is  one,  contain  in  themselves  each  of 
the  intelligible  animals.  According  to  the  one  being,  therefore,  Parme- 
nides constitutes  the  divine  genera,  together  with  an  appropriate  peculiari- 
ty. But  according  to  being  which  is  one,  he  constitutes  the  genera  posterior 
to  the  Gods.  And  according  to  the  one  being  indeed  of  being  which  is 
one,  he  constitutes  the  genera  of  daemons,  but  according  to  being  which  is 
one,  the  mortal  genera.  And  again,  according  to  the  one  being  of  the  one 
being,  he  constitutes  the  first  and  highest  genera  of  the  Gods ;  but  accord- 
ing to  the  being  which  is  one  of  it,  the  second  genera,  and  which  have  an 
angelic  order.  And  tlius  all  things  are  full  of  Gods,  angels,  daemons,  ani- 
mals,  and  mortal  natures.  And  you  see  how  the  medium  is  preserved  of 
the  more  excellent  genera.  For  being  which  is  one  is  the  angelic  boun- 
dary of  the  one  being  which  produces  the  Gods.     But  the  one  being  is  the 

>  It  leeim  requisite  to  eupplj  the  vord  mmv  after  the  woids  to  w  fvrnv  nSof . 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JJ20  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  KOOK  III. 

llaDQiouiacal  summit  of  being  which  is  one,  and  wliich  adorns  secondary 
natures.  As  to  the  unions,  however,  of  secondary  natures,  it  is  not  im- 
manifest  that  they  approximate  to  multitude,  and  to  the  progression  of 
the  natures  placed  above  tliem.  Nor  must  you  woiider  if  being  which  is 
one  is  the  cause  of  angels^  but  the  one  being  of  daemons.  For  in  one 
place,,  being  which  is  one  is  a  part  of  the  one  being,  but  in  another  the 
one  being  is  a  part  of  being  which  is  one.  And  here,  indeed,  the  union 
is  essential,  but  there  essence  has  the  form  of  the  one.  For  the  sunmiit  of 
being  which  is  one  is  a  thing  of  this  kind.  Deservedly,  therefore,  is  intel--^ 
ligible  multitude  all-powerful,  and  intelKgible  animal  alUperfect,.  as  being 
jat  once  the  cause  of  all  things,  and  this  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  Plata 
all  but  exclaiming,  [iti  the  words  of  the  Chaldaean  Oracle,]  ^^  Thence  a 
fiery  whirlwind  sweeping  along^  obscures  the  flower  of  fire,  leaping  at  the 
same  time  into  the  cavities  of  ihe  worlds.^  For  the  divine  unities  pro- 
ceeding gradually,  generate  the  multitude  of  all  mundane  natures.  This 
triad,  therefore^  is  the  fountain  and  cause  of  all  things :  and  firoin  it  all 
the  liie,  and  all  the  progression  of  the  Gods^  and  the  genera  superior  to  us,, 
and  of  mortal  animals  subsist.  For  it  produces  totally  and  uniformly  all 
things,  and  binds  to  itself  the  whole  principles  of  the  divisible  rivers  of 
nvifiibatioii^  and  the  production  of  forms. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Again,  therefore,  let  us  recur  from  the  divided  theory  of  intelfigibles 
to  the  all-perfect  and  one  science  of  them,  and  let  us  say  to  ourselves,  that 
this  intelligible  genus  of  the  Gods  is  unically  exempt  from  all  the  other  di- 
vine orders,  and  is  neither  called  intelligible  as  known  by  a  partial  intel- 
lect, nor  as  comprehended  by  intelligence  in  conjunction  with  reason,  nor 
yet  as  preexisting  in  all-p^ect  intellect.    For  it  transcends  botfi  total 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVIII-  OP  PUkTD.  22i 

and  partial  intelligibles^  and  exists  prior  to  all  intellectual  objects,  being 
an  imparticipable  and  divine  intelligible.  Hence,  also^  it  is  allotted  the 
same  transcendency  with  respect  to  all  the  intelligible  orders,  as  the  otic 
with  respect  to  every  genus  of  the  Gods.  For  this  intdligible  is  impar* 
ticipable,  and  supernally  fills  the  divine  and  intellectual  orders.  For 
if  every  intellect  is  intelligible  to  itself,  it  possesses  this  property  through 
the  intelligible  Gods.  For  plenitude  is  derived  to  all  things  from  thence. 
And  thus  the  intelligible  is  at  the  same  time  exempt  from  intellect,  exist- 
ing itself  by  itself;  and  at  the  same  time  the  intelligible  is  not  external  to 
intellect.  For  there  is  an  intelligible  which  is  conjoined  with  intellect; 
the  co-ordinate  being  derived  from  that  which  is  exempt,  the  participated 
from  that  which  is  imparticipable,  that  which  is  inherent  from  that  which 
is  preexistent,  and  that  which  is  multiplied  from  that  which  is  uniform. 
Intelligible  simplicity,  therefore,  must  not  be  defined  to  be  such  as  that 
which  we  are  accustomed  to  assert  of  intelligibles*  For  in  these  the  one 
becomes  equal  to  multitude,^  and  separation  ta  the  uniform  sameness  of 
essence.  But  intelligible  simplicity  is  uniform,  without  separation  and 
occult,  excelling  every  divisible  form  of  life,  and  intellectual  multitude. 
Hence  I  do  not  place  intelligible  simplicity  in  the  order  of  idea*  For  this 
form  is  partial,  and  is  subordinate  to  intelligible  union.  But  I  consider 
it  as  the  hyparxis  of  divine  natures,  and  as  generative  of  the  whole  of  the 
good  which  is  distributed  to  all  divine  natures,  and  in  which  the  Gods 
themselves  subsist.  For  the  goodness  of  the  Gods,  is  neither  form  nor 
habit,  but  the  plenitude  of  divine  self-sufllciency  and  divine  power,  ac- 
cording to  which  the  Gods  fill  all  things  with  good.  In  a  much  greater 
degree,^  therefore,  are  the  intelligible  Gods,^  because  they  are  united  to* 
the  goody  wholly  full  of  superessential  goodness,  and  being  established  in 
this,  they  contain  in  it  the  supreme  hyparxis  of  themselves.  Very  pro* 
perly,.  therefore,  do  we  say  that  the  intelligible  Gods  unfold  the  in^fiable 
principle  of  all  things,  and  his  admirable  transcendency  and  uniop: ;  sub« 
sisting  themselves  indeed  occultly,  but  comprehending  multitude  uni-- 
formly  and  unically ;  reigning  over  the  whole  of  things  exemptly,  and  be- 
ing uncoordinated  with  all  the  other  Gods.  For  as  the  good  illuminates 
all  things  with  superessential  light,  and  exhibits  the  Gods  who  are  the  fa** 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S9S  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  III . 

then  of  all  things,  so  likewise  the  intelligible  genus  of  Gods,  according  to 
a  similitude  to  the  good,  imparts  from  its^elf  to  all  the  secondary  Gods, 
intelligible  plenitude.  Hence,  according  to  each  distribution  of  the  Gods, 
there  is  an  appropriate  intelligible  multitude,  just  as  a  monad  analogous 
to  the  good  exists  prior  to  each  of  the  divine  orders.  And  this  monad 
indeed  is  the  preexistent  leader  of  union  to  secondary  natures.  But  in- 
telligible multitude  is  the  preexistent  source  of  beauty,  self-sufficiency, 
power,  essence,  and  all  inteUigible  goods.  For  the  Gods  antecedently 
and  intelligibly  comprehend  all  intellectual  natures,  and  contain  in  them* 
selves  all '  things  according  to  supreme  union. 


■  Instead  of  ra  x«f '  cmdo-iv,  it  is  requisite  to  read  iretyrx  x»V  evtociv$  and  then  the  end  of  this  book 
will  be  CO  mplete,  and  not  defective  as  the  latin  translatorPortus  imagined  it  was. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK    IV. 


CHAPTER  I. 


Let  the  discussion,  thereforei  of  the  intelligible  Gods,  unfolding  the 
mystic  doctrine  of  Plato  concerning  them  be  here  terminated  by  us.  But 
it  entirely  follows  in  the  next  place,  that  we  should  consider  after  the  same 
manner  the  narration  concerning  the  intellectual  Gods.  Since,  however, 
of  intellectuals  some  are  both  intelligible  and  intellectual,  viz.  such  as  ac- 
cording to  the  Oracle  perceiving  intellectually  are  at  the  same  time  intel- 
lectually perceived  ;  but  others  are  intellectual  only; — this  being  the  case, 
beginning  from  those  that  are  intellectual  and  at  the  same  time  intelligi- 
ble, we  will  in  the  first  place  determine  what  pertains  to  them  in  common, 
from  which  we  shall  render  the  doctrine  concerning  each  order  of  them 
more  perspicuous.  Again,  therefore,  let  us  recal  to  our  memory  those 
things  which  we  a  little  before  demonstrated,  viz.  that  there  are  three 
total  monads  which  are  entirely  beyond  the  Gods  that  are  divided  accord- 
ing to  parts,  viz.  essence,  life  and  intellect.  And  these  prior  to  the  par- 
tial participate  of  the  superessential  unities.  Essence,  however,  is  exempt 
from  the  rest.  Life  is  allotted  the  middle  order.  But  intellect  converts 
the  end  of  this  triad  to  the  beginning.  And  all  these  are  indeed  intelli- 
gibly in  essence ;  but  intelligibly  and  intellectually  in  life ;  and  intellect 


Digitized  by 


Google 


224  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

tually  ID  intellect.  And  as  secondary  natures  always  participate  of  the 
natures  placed  above  them,  but  these  prior  to  participation  presubsist 
themselves  by  themselves;  and  as  in  each  order  there  are  these  three 
things,  the  cause  of  abiding,  the  cause  of  proceeding,  and  the  cause  of  con-- 
version,  thou^  intellect  is  more  formalized  according  to  conversion,  but 
life  according  to  progression,  and  essence  according  to  permanency ; — 
this  being  the  case,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  the  first  intellectual  Gods 
being  essentialized  according  to  lifb  should  conjoin  imparticipable  intel- 
lect, and  the  intelligible  genus  of  Gods,  and  that  they  should  uniformly 
connect  the  various  progressions  of  secondary,  but  unfold  and  expand  the 
stable  hyparxis  of  precedaneous  causes.  For  imparticipable  life  is  a 
thing  of  this  kind,  circumscribing  that  which  is  primarily  being  and 
intellect,  and  participating  indeed  of  being,  but  participated  by  intellect 
But  this  is  the  same  thipg  ai  to  assert  that  intelligence  is  filled  indeed 
from  the  intelligible,  but  fills  intellect  from  itself.  For  being  is  the  intel- 
ligible, but  life  is  intelligence.  And  being  indeed  is  characterized  ao* 
cording  to  a  divine  hjfxinis;  biit  life  according  to  poiver ;  aiid  intellect 
according  to  inteUigifaie  intellect.  For  as  being  is  to  hyparxis,  so  is  intel- 
feet  to  betnfg.  And  as  intdligible  power  is  to  eadb  of  the  extren^y,  so  is 
life  to  tile  intelligible  and  to  intdlect.  And  as  power  is  generated  from 
^le  one  and  hyparxis,  but  constitutes  in  ootrjunction  with  the  one  the 
aature  of  l»£Dg,  so  life  proceeds  indeed  from  being,  and  gives  subsistence 
to  a  power  different  from  that  which  is  in  being.  As  also  the  one  itself 
which  exists  prior  to  being,  imparts  to  being  from  itself  a  second  unity, 
so  lUcewise  life  being  allotted  an  hypostasis  prior  to  intellect,  generates  in- 
tellectual hfe.  For  true  being  and  tlje  intelligible  which  precede  the  rest, 
supply  both  life  and  intellect  with  union.  Imparticipable  life,  therefore, 
but  which  participates  of  the  intelligible  monads  is  the  second  after  being, 
is  generative  of  imparticipable  intellect,  and  giving  completion  to  this 
medium,  and  containing  the  bond  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals,  is  illu- 
minated by  Gods  who  are  allotte<l  a  union  secondary  to  the  occult  sub- 
sistence of  intelligibles,  but  preceding  according  to  cause  the  sepaiation  of 
intellectual  natures.  For  the  unical,  indivisible,  simple,  and  primary  na- 
ture of  intelligibles,  subsides   through  the  medium  of  these  Gods  into 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  I.  OF  PLATO.  225 

multitude  and  separation,  aod  the  inexplicable  evolution  of  the  divine 
orders.  Whence  also,  I  think,  the  Gods  who  connectedly  contain  life 
which  is  infinite,  being  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  and  intdlectoal 
Gods,  and  carried  in  the  divisions  of  themselves  as  in  a  vehicle,  are  called 
intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual ;  being  filled  indeed,  from  the 
first  intelligibles,  but  filling  the  intellectual  Gods.  For  we  call  theintdligible 
Gods  intelligible,  not  as  coordinate  with  intdlect.  For  the  intelligible 
which  is  in  intdlect  is  one  thing,  and  that  which  produces  the  intellecti^ 
Gods  another :  and  we  denominate  the  Gods  that  subsist  according  to 
life  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intdlectual,  not  as  giving  completion 
to  intellect,  nor  as  being  established  according  to  intellectual  intelligence, 
and  imparting  to  intdlect  the  power  of  intellectual  perception,  but  to  the 
intelligible  the  power  of  being  intellectually  percdved,  but  we  give  them 
this  appdlation,  as  deriving  their  subsistence  from  the  intelligible  monads, 
but  generating  all  the  intdlectual  hebdomads.  And  because  they  are 
illuminated  indeed  with  intelligible  life,  but  subsist  prior  to  intellectuals, 
according  to  a  generative  cause,  we  think  fit  to  denominate  them  in  com«> 
mon,  connecting  their  names  from  the  extremes,  in  the  same  manner  as 
they  also  are  allotted  a  peculiarity  collective  <^  wholes  in  the  divine  orders* 
It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  they  subsist  according  to  this  medium,  and 
that  they  are  proximate  to  the  intelligible  Gods,  who  are  both  monadic 
and  triadic.  For  the  intelligible  triads,  with  reference  indeed  to  the 
highest  union  and  which  is  exempt  from  all  things,  are  triads ;  but  with 
reference  to  the  divided  es^nce  of  triads,  they  are  monads,  unfolding  into 
light  from  themselves  total  triads.  Since  intelligibles,  therefore,  in  their 
triadic  progression,  do  not  depart  from  a  unical  hyparxis,  the  intelligible 
and  at  the  same  time  intdlectual  Gods  subsist  triadically,  exhibiting  in 
themselves  the  separation  of  the  monads,  and  through  divine  difference, 
proceeding  into  multitude,  and  a  variety  of  powers  and  essences.  For 
the  natures  which  subsist  more  remote  from  the  one  principle  [of  all 
things,]  are  more  multiplied  than  the  natures  which  are  prior  to  them ;' 
and  are  diminished  indeed  in  powers,  and  the  comprehensions  of  second* 

'  For  fitimis  it  18  nepetiar^  to  Tead  mtrm, 

PrQc.  Vol.  I.  aF 


Digitized  by 


Google 


22(5  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV- 

arj  natures^  but  are  divided  into  more  numbers^  and  such  as  are  more 
distant  from  the  monad.  They  likewise  relinquish  the  union  which  is 
the  cause  of  primarily  efficient  natures^  and  variety  is  assumed  by  them 
in  exchange  for  the  occult  hyparxis  of  those  primary-  essences.  According 
to  this  reasoning,  therefore,  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  separation  is 
greater  than  the  separation  which  is  only  intelligible.  And  of  these 
again,  the  partial  orders  are  allotted  a  much  greater  division,  so  as  to  un- 
f(^d  to  us  a  multitude  of  Gods  which  cannot  be  comprehended  in  the 
numbers  within  the  decad.  Their  peculiarities  also  are  indescribable,  and 
inex[>licable  by  our  conceptions,  and  are  manifest  only  to  the  Gods  them- 
selves, and  to  the  causes  of  them.  Such,  therefore,  are  the  intelligible 
und  intellectual  Gods,  and  such  is  the  peculiarity  which  they  are  allotted, 
a  peculiarity  connective  of  extremes,  and  which  unfolds  into  light  prece* 
daneous,  but  converts  secondary  natures.  For  they  intellectually  per- 
ceive the  Gods  prior  to  them,  but  are  objects  of  intellection  to  the  Gods 
posterior  to  them.  Hence  also  Timaeus  establishes  all-perfect  animal  to 
be  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligibles,  because  there  are  kitelligibles  pos- 
terior to  it,  which  it  surpasses  in  beauty,  as  being  superior  to  them,  and 
because  it  is  the  boundary  of  the  first  intelligibles,  the  natures  posterior 
to  it  subsisting  intellectually.  According  to  this  reasoning,  therefore, 
the  first  intellectual  Gods  are  also  intelligible ;  and  we  do  not,  deriving 
these  things  from  a  foreign  source,  ascribe  them  to  Plato,  but  they  are  as- 
serted by  us  in  consequence  of  receiving  auxiliaries  from  him.  This, 
however,  will  be  more  manifest  through  what  follows. 


CHAPTER  II. 

In  the  next  place,  therefore,  we  shall  discuss  the  manner  in  which  the 
Gods  who  illuminate  the  breadth  of  imparticipable  life  proceed  from  the 
intelligible  Gods.    Since  then  the  intelligible  Gods  establish  in  themselves 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ir.  OF  PLATO.  227 

uniformly  things  multipKedy  occultly  such  as  are  divided,  and  according 
to  a  certain  admirable  transcendency  of  simplicity,  the  various  genera  of 
beings, — ^hence  the  first  intellectual  Gods,'  unfolding  their  indistinct 
union,  and  the  unknown  nature  of  their  hypostasis,  ,and  being  filled 
through  intelligible  power  and  essential  life  with  the  prolific  abun- 
dance of  wholes,  are  allotted  a  kingdom  which  ranks  as  the  second  after 
them.  And  they  always  indeed  produce,  perfect,  and  connect  them- 
selves, but  receive  from  the  intelligible  Gods  an'occdlt  generation ;  from 
intelligible  power  indeed,  receiving  a  peculiarity  generative  of  all  things ; 
but  from  intelligible  life  which  preexists  according  to  cause  in  the  iivtelU- 
gible,  receiving  the  nature  which  is  spread  under  them.  For  life  is  pri- 
marily indeed  in  intelligibles ;  but  secondarily  in  intelligibles  and  intd-' 
lectuals ;  and  in  a  third  degree  in  intellectuals ;  existing  indeed  according 
to  cause  in  the  first,  but  according  to  essence  in  the  second,  and  according 
to  participation  in  the  last  of  these.  The  first  intellectual,  therefore,  pro- 
ceed from  the  intelligible  Gods,  multiplying  indeed  their  union,  and  their 
unical  powers,  unfolding  their  occult  hyparxis,  and  through  prolific,  con- 
nective, and  perfective  causes  assimilating  themselves  to  the  essential,  en- 
tire, and  all*perfect  transcendencies  of  intelligibles.  For  in  intelligibles 
th^re  were  three  primarily  effective  powers ;  one  indeed  constituting  the 
essence  of  wholes ;  another  measuring  things  which  are  multiplied ;  and 
another  being  productive  of  the  forms  of  all  generated  natures. 
•  And  conformably  to  these,  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  powers  sub- 
sist; one  indeed,  by  its  very  essence  producing  the  life  of  secondary  na- 
tures, according  to  a  certain  intelligible  comprehension ;  but  another 
being  connective  of  every  thing  which  is  divided,  and  imparting  by  illu- 
mination the  intelligible  measure  to  those  natures  that  relinquish  the  one 
union  [of  all  things ;]  and  another  supplying  all  things  with  figure,  and 
form  and  perfection.  The  intelhgible  and  intellectual  orders  of  the 
Gods,  therefore,  are  generated  according  to  all  the  intelligible  causes. 
From  power  indeed,  being  allotted  the  peculiarity  of  progression ;  but 
from  life  receiving  the  portion  of  being  which  is  suspended  from  them, 
for  life  is  conjoined  with  power;  since  life  is  of  itself  infinite,  all  motion 

'  |t  ia  necessary  to  supply  in  this  place  in  the  original,  fot^t  tm. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


f  J3  ^N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV 

faaviog  infinity  consub^isteot  with  its  nature^  and  the  power  of  infinity^  is 
generative  of  the  whole  of  things.     But  from  the  triadic  hypostasis  of  in« 
telligibles,  they  receive  a  distribution  into  first,  middle  and  last.     For  it 
is  necessary  that  all  things  should  be  detained   by  a  triadic  progression, 
and  that  this  should  be  the  case  prior  to  all  [other]  things  with  the  intelli- 
gible and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  genera  of  Gods.    For  because  they 
subsist  as  the  middle  of  wholes,  and  give  completion  to  the  bond  of  the 
^grst  orders,  according  to  their  summit  indeed,  they  are  assimilated  to  in* 
tdligibles,  but  according  to  their  extremity,  to  intellectuals.    And  they 
are  partly  indeed  intelligible,  and  partly  intellectual.     For  every  where 
the  progressions  of  the  divine  genem  are  effected  through  continued  shni* 
litude.     And  the  first  of  subordinate  are  united  to  the  ends  of  preexistent 
causes.    As  however,  the  first  and  the  last  in  the  middle  of  wholes  are 
both  intelligible  and  intellectual,  it  is  necessary  there  should  be  aconnec- 
live  medium  of  these,  according  to  which  medium  the  peculiarity  of  these 
Gods  is  principally  apparent.    For  that  which  is  intelligible  and  at  the 
same  time  intellectual,  in  one  part  indeed  is  more  abundant  than,  but  in 
another  equally  c(»nmunicates  with  both   these.     From   these  things^^ 
therefore,  the  continuity  of  the  progression  of  the  divine  orders  appears 
to  be  admirable.    For  the  extremity  of  intelligibles  indeed  was  intellec- 
tual, yet  as  in  intelligibles.  But  the  summit  of  intelligibles  and  at  the  same 
time  intellectuals,*  is  intelligible  indeed,  yet  it  possesses  this  peculiarity 
vitally.    And  again,  the  end  of  intelligibles  and  at  the  same  time  intel- 
lectuals, is  intellectual,  but  it  is  vitally  so.     But  the  beginning  of  intel- 
lectuals, is  intelligible,  and  presides  over  the  intellectual  Gods,  yet  it  has 
the  intelligible  intellectually.    And  thus  all  the  divine  genera  are  allotted 
an  indissoluble  connexion  and  communion,  an  admirable  friendship,  and 
well-ordered  diminution,  and  a  transcaidency,  partly  coordinate  and 
partly  exempt.    That  which  proceeds  too,  is  always  in  continuity  with 
its  producing  cause ;  and  secondary  natures  together  with  a  firm  esta- 
blishment in  their  causes,  make  a  progression  froin  them.  There  is  likewise 
one  series  and  alliance  of  all  things;  secondary  natures  always  subsisting 
from  those  prior  to  them,  through  similitude.    After  what  manner,  there- 
fore, the  intelligible  and  ^t  the  same  time  intellectual  Gods,  unfold  them- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IIL  OP  PLAf O. 


2t9 


selves  into  light  from  tbe  inteliigible  Gods,  may  through  these  things  be 
Kcollected. 


CHAPTER  IIL 

In  ihe  next  place,  let  us  show  how  they  are  divided  in  their  progreK* 
sions,  and  what  difference  the  triads  of  these  Gods  are  allotted  with 
respect  to  the  intelligible  triads.  These  Gods,  therefore,  are  also  divided 
triply,  after  the  above  mentioned  manner ;  being  conjoined  indeed  to  the 
intelligible^  through  their  summit ;  but  to  the  intellectual  through  their  end ; 
and  through  the  middle  bond  of  the  extremes,  being  allotted  the  pecuti* 
arity  of  each  equally,  and  extending  to  both  the  intelligible  and  intellec* 
tua]  genera  of  Gods,  as  the  centre  of  these  two-fold  orders,  uniformly 
containing  the  communion  of  wholes.  They  are  likewise  divided  triply^ 
because  in  these  all  things,  viz.  essence,  hfe,  and  intellect,  are  vitally,  in 
the  same  manner  as  they  are  intelligibly  in  the  Gods  prior  to  them,  and 
'  intellectually  in  the  Gods  that  derive  their  subsistence  from  these.  And 
essence  indeed  is  the  intelligible  of  life;  but  life  is  the  middle  and  at  th^ 
same  time  the  peculiarity  of  this  order ;  and  intellect  is  the  extremity,  and 
that  which  is  proximately  carried  in  intellectuals  as  in  a  vehicle.  All 
things  therefore  subsisting  in  these  Gods,  there  will  be  a  division  of  them 
into  first,  middle,  and  last  genera.  And  in  the  third  place,  they  are  di* 
yided  triply,  because  it  is  necessary  that  life  should  abide,  proceed,  and 
be  converted  to  its  principles ;  since  of  beings,  the  first  triad  was  said  to 
estabUsh  all  things,  and  prior  to  other  things  the  second  triad*  Eternity, 
therefore,  abides  stably  in  the  first  triad.  But  the  triad  posterior  to  this, 
is  the  supplier  to  wholes  [and  therefore  to  all  things,]  of  progression,  mo- 
tion, and  life  according  to  energy.  And  the  third  triad  is  the  supplier  of 
conversion  to  the  one,  and  of  perfection  which  convolves  all  secondary 
natures  to  their  principles.    Hence  it  is  necessary  that  the  intelligible  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


iSO-  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV 

at  the  same  time  intellectual  Gods,  should  primarily  participate  of  these 
ihtee  powers,  and  should  abide  indeed  in  the  summit  of  themselves ;  but 
proceeding  from  thence,  and  extending  themselves  to  all  things,  should 
again  be  converted  to  the  intelligible  place  of  survey,  and  conjoin  to  the 
beginning  of  their  generation  the  end  of  their  whole  progression. 

The  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  Gods  therefore  are, 
as  I  have  said,  triply  divided.  And  essence  indeed  is  that  which  ranks  as 
first  in  them,  but  life  is  the  middle,  and  intellect  the  extremity  of  them. 
Since  however,  each  of  these  three  is  perfect,  and  participates  of  the  in- 
telligible monads,  I  mean  of  the  essence  which  is  there,  of  intelligible  life, 
and  of  intelligible  intellect,  they  are  tripled  according  to  the  participation 
of  primarily  efficient  causes.  And  the  intelligible  of  life  indeed  possesses 
essence,  intellect,  and  life  inteUigibly ;  but  the  intelligible  and  intellectual 
of  it,  possesses  essence,  life  and  intellect,  intelligibly  and  at  the  same  time 
intellectually ;  and  the  intellectual  of  it  possesses  these  intellectually  and 
intelligibly. '  And  every  where  indeed,  there  is  a  triad  in  each  of  the  sec- 
tions, but  in  conjunction  with  an  appropriate  peculiarity.  Hence  three 
intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  triads  present  themselves  to 
our  view,  which  are  indeed  illuminated  by  the  divine  unities,  but  each  of 
them  contains  an  all-various  multitude.  For  since  in  intelligibles,  there 
was,  an  all-powerful  and  all-perfect  multitude,  how  is  it  possible  that  this 
multitude  should  not  in  a  much  greater  degree,  be  evolved  and  multiplied, 
in  the  Gods  secondary  to  the  intelUgible  order,  according  to  the  prolific 
cause  of  them  ?  Each  triad  therefore  comprehends  in  itself  a  multitude 
of  powers,  and  a  variety  of  forms,  producing  intelligible  multitude  into 
energy,  and  unfolding  into  light  the  generative  infinity  of  intelligibles. 
And  we  indeed,  being  impelled  from  the  participants,  discover  the  pecu- 
liarity of  the  participated  superessential  Gods.  But  according  to  the 
order  of  things,  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  monads  generate  about 
themselves  essences,  and  all  lives,  and  the  intellectual  genera.  And 
through  these,  they  unfold  the  unknown  transcendency  of  themselves, 

>  In  Ae  original,  after  x«i  vouy  in  this  sentence,  it  is  necessary  to  supply  ¥wrrws  x«i  voi^s,  re  de 
vo§g9¥.    Apd  after  mpms,  it  is  also  requisite  to  supply  xtu  yoi^rco;,  as  in  the  above  transhitioa« 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  III.  OF  PLATO-  231 

preserving  by  itself  the  preexistent  cause  of  the  whole  of  things.  There 
are  however,  as  we  have  said,  three  intelligible  triads.  And  there  are 
also  three  triads  posterior  to  these,  which  appear  to  be  tripled  from 
them,  according  to  their  prolific  perfection.  ' 

But  it  is  necessary  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  intelligible,  and  also  of 
the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  triad,  should  be  defined 
according  to  another  mode.  !For  in  the  intelligible  order  indeed,  each, 
triad  had  only  the  third  part  of  being ;  for  it  consisted  of  bounds  and  in- 
finity, and  from  both  these.  But  this  was  essence  indeed  in  the  first  triad, 
intelligible  life  in  the  second,  and  intelligible  intellect  in  the  third.  The 
natures  however  prior  to  tliese  were  unities  and  superessential  powers, 
which  give  completion  to  the  whole  triads.  But  in  the  inteUigible  and  at 
the  same  time  intellectual  order,  each  triad  Jias  essence,  life  and  intellect; 
one  indeed  intelligibly  and  at  the  same  time  intellectually,  but  more  in- 
telligibly, so  far  as  it  is  in  continuity  with  the  first  intelligibles ;  but  ano- 
ther intellectually  and  intelligibly,  but  more  intellectually,  because  it  is 
proximately  carried  in  intellectuals ;  and  another  according  to  an  equal 
part,  as  it  comprehends  in  itself  both  the  peculiarities.  Hence  the  first 
triad,that  we  may  speak  of  each,  was  in  intelligibles,  bound,  infinity,  and 
essence ;  for  essence  was  that  which  was  primarily  mixed.  But  here  the 
first  triad  is  essence,  life  and  intellect,  with  appropriate  unities.  For  es- 
sence is  suspended  from  the  first  deity  [of  this  triad,]  life  from  the  second, 
and  intellect  from  the  third.  And  these  three  superessential  monads,  unfold 
the  monads  of  the  first  triad.  But  again,  the  second  triad  after  this,  was  in 
the  intelligible  order,  a  superessential  unity,  power,  and  intelligible  and  oc- 
cult life.  Here  however,  essence,  life  and  intellect  are  all  vital,  and  are  sus- 
pended from  the  Gods  who  contain  the  one  bond  of  the  whole  of  this  or- 
der. For  as  the  first  unities  were  allotted  a. power  unific  of  the  middle 
genera,  so  the  second  unities  after  them^  exhibit  the  connective  peculia- 
rity of  primarily  efiicient  causes.  After  these  therefore,  succeeds  the 
third  triad,  which  in  the  intelligible  order  indeed  was  unity,  power,  and 
intelligible  intellect ;  but  here  it  consists  of  three  superessential  Gods,  who 
close  the  termination  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
Gods,  and  begird  all  things  intellectually,  I  mean  essence,  life  and  intdlect. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


g32  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

Hiey  are  likewise  the  suppliers  of  divine  perfectioDy  ^  iqiitating  the  all- 
perfect  intelligible  triad,  just  as  the  connectedly  containing  Gods  imitate 
the  intelligible  measure,  and  the  Gods  prior  to  these,  the  generative  cause 
of  intelligibles.  The  three  intelligible  therefore,  and  at  the  same  time  in- 
tellectual triads,  are  thus  generated,  and  are  allotted  such  a  difierence  as 
thisy  with  respect  to  the  intelligible  triads. 


CHAPTER  IV, 


Again  however^  returning  to  Plato,  let  us  accord  with  him,  and  exhi- 
bit the  science  which  preexists  with  him  concerning  each  of  these  triads. 
And  in  the  first  place,  let  us  assume  what  is  written  in  the  Phaedrus,  and 
survey  from  the  words  themselves  of  Socrates,  how  he  unfolds  to  us  the 
whole  of  the  orderly  distinction  of  these  triads,  and  the  differences  which 
it  contains.  In  the  Phaedrus  therefore,  there  are  said  to  be  twelve  lead- 
ers who  preside  over  the  whole  [of  mundane  concerns,]  and  who  conduct 
all  the  mundane  Gods,  and  all  the  herds  of  daemons,  and  convert  them  to 
the  intelligible  nature.  It  is  also  said  that  Jupiter  is  the  leader  of  all 
these  twelve  Gods,  that  he  drives  a  winged  chariot,  adorns  and  takes  care 
of  all  things,  and  brings  all  the  army  of  Gods  that  follow  him,  first  indeed 
to  the  place  of  survey  within  the  heaven,  and  to  the  blessed  spectacles, 
and  discursive  energies  of  the  intelligibles  which  are  there.  But  in  the 
next. place  Jupiter  brings  them  to  the  subcelestial  arch  which  proximate* 
ly  begirds  the  heaven,  apd  is  contained  in  it,  and  after  this  to  the  heaven 
itself,  and  the  back  of  heaven;  where  also  divine  souls  stand,  and  being 
borae  along  together  with  the  heaven,  survey  all  the  essence  that  is  beyond 
it.  Socrates  further  adds,  that  prior  to  the  heaven  there  is  what  is  called 
the  supercelestial  place,  in  which  true  and  real  ^sence,  the  plain  of  trutbi 

*  ^or  riXfitr«roi  it  h  necenar^  to  r^  r^Xiionnrof. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  X.  OF  PLATO.  233 

the  kingdom  of  Adrastiat  and  the  divine  choir  of  virtues  subsist,  and  that 
souls  being  nourished  through  the  intellection  of  these  monads,  are  hap* 
pily  afiected,  following  [in  their  contemplation^  the  circulation  of  tho 
heaven. 

These  things  therefore,  are  asserted  in  the  Pheedrus,  Socrates  being 
clearly  inspired  by  divinity,  and  discussing  mystic  concerns.  It  is  n# 
cesgary  however,  prior  to  other  things,  to  consider  what  the  heaven  is  of 
which  Socrates  speaks,  and  iu  what  order  of  beings  it  is  established.  For 
having  discovered  this,  we  may  also  survey  the  subcelestial  arch,  and  the 
snpercelestial  place. '  For  each  of  these  is  assumed  according  to  habitude 
towards  th^  heaven ;  the  one  indeed  being  primarily  placed  above  it,  bu* 
ihe  other  being  primarily  arranged  under  it. 


CHAPTER   V, 


What  therrfore  is  the  heaven  to  whidb  Jupiter  leads  the  Gods  ?  For 
if  we  should  say  that  it  is  the  sensible  heaven,  as  certain  other  persons  say 
it  is,  it  will  be  necessary  Uiat  the  more  excellent  genera  should  be  con- 
verted to  things  naturally  subordinate  to  themselves.  For  if  Jupiter  the 
mighty  leader  in  the  heaven  proceeds  to  this  sensible  heaven,  and  leads  to 
it  all  the  Gods  that  follow  him,  he  will  have  a  conversion  to  things  sub- 
ordinate,  and  posterior  to  himself.  And  together  with  Jupiter,  this  will 
also  be  the  case  with  all  the  leaders,  and  the  Gods  and  daemons  suspend- 
ed from  these;  though  the  same  Socrates  in  the  Phaedrus  says,  that  even 
a  partial  soul  when  perfected  is  conversant  with  sublime  concerns,  and 
governs  the  whole  world.  How  is  it  possible  therefore,  that  the  leaders 
of  whole  souls  should  be  converted  to  the  sensible  heaven,  and  exchange 

^  After  Ti|y  umvfct¥§av  ^S«>  it  i$  obvicyosly  xiecesmuy  fo  idd  x^  r«y  vtnfougeanov  f<mf. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  3  G 


Digitized  by 


Google 


234  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IT. 

the  intdligible  place  of  survey  for  an  inferior  allotment,  when  through 
these  souls  they  preside  over  the  universe,  in  order  that  they  may  illumi- 
nate mundane  natures  with  a  liberated  and  unrestrained  power?  In  ad- 
dition to  these  things  also,  what  are  the  blessed  intellections  of  the  Gods 
within  this  sensible  heaven,  and  what  are  the  evolutions  ofallthe  know- 
Ifdge  of  sensiblcs? '  For  in  short  the  Gods  know  sensible*,  not  by  a  con-i 
version  to  them,  but  by  containing  in  themselves  the  causes  of  them. 
Hence  intellectually  perceiving  themselves,  they  know  sensibles  causally, 
mid  rule  over  them,  not  by  looking  to  them^  and  verging  to  the  subjects 
of  their  government,  but  by  converting  through  love  inferior  natures  ta 
Ibemselves.  Neither  therefore,  is  it  lawful  for  the  Gods  who  adorn  the 
whole  of  heaven,,  and  think  it  worthy  their  providential  care,  to  be  ever 
situated  under  the  circulation  of  this  heaven ;  nor  is  there  any  blessedness 
in  the  coatemplation  of  the  things  which  exist  under  It ;  nor  arc  the  souls 
that  are  converted  to  this  conteniplatioa  among  the  number  of  those  that 
are  happy>  and  that  follow  the  Gods,  but  they  rank  among  those  that  ex^ 
ehange  intelligible  for  doxastic  nutriment,  such  as  Socrates  says,  the  souls 
are  that  are  lame,  that  have  broken  their  wings,  and  are  in  a  merged  con- 
dition. Since  tlierefore  passions  of  this  kind  belong  to  partial  souls,  and 
these  not  such  as  arc  happy,  how  can  we  refer  a  conversion  to  the  sensi- 
ble heaven  to  the  ruling  and  leading  Gods  ? 

Farther  stilly  Socrates  says  that  souls  standing  on  the  back  of  the  hen* 
ven,  are  carried  round  by  the  circumvolution  itself  of  the  heaven ;  but 
Timaeus,  and  the  Athenian  guest  say,  that  souls  lead:  every  thing  in  the 
beavens  by  their  own  motions,,  externally  cover  bodies  with  their  motions, 
and  living  their  own  life  tlirough  the  whole  of  time,,  impart  to  bodies  se- 
condarily efficient  powers  of  motion.  How  therefore  do  these  things  ac- 
cord with  those  wha  make  this  heaven  to  be  sensible?  For  souls  do  not 
contemplate  and  dance  round  intelligibles,  through  the  circulation  of  the^ 
heavens;  but  through,  the  unapparent  convolutioa  of  souls,,  bodies  re- 
volve in  a  circle,  and  about  these  perform  their  circulations.  If  there- 
fore any  one  should  say  that  the  sensible  heaven  circumvolves  souls,  and 

'  The  sentmcft  that  immediately  follows  this  in  the  original^  1$  so  defectivti  aa  to  be  perCictl]^ 
unintelligible.    LhaTe  not  therefore,  attempted  to  translate  it. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  Y.  OF  PLATO.  355 

that  it  is  divided  according  to  the  back,  the  profundity,  and  tlie  subce- 
lestial  arch,  many  absurdities  must  necessarily  be  admitted. 

But  if  some  one  should  say  that  the  heaven  is  intelligible,  to  which  Ju- 
piter is  the  leader,  but  all  the  Gods,  and  together  with  these,  daemons 
follow  him,  he  will  unfold  the  divinely-inspired  narrations  of  Plato  con- 
sentaneously to  the  nature  of  things,  and  will  follow  the  most  celebrated 
of  hii  interpreters.  For  Plotinus  and  Jamblichus  are  of  opinion  that  this 
heaven  is  a  certain  intelligible.  And  prior  to  these,  Plato  himself  in  the 
Cratylus  following  the  Orphic  theogonies  calls  the  father  indeed  of  Jupiter, 
Saturn,  but  of  Saturn,  Heaven.  And  he  evinces  that  Jupiter  is  the  de- 
miurgus  of  the  whole  of  things  through  the  names  [by  which  he  is  called^j 
investigating  for  this  purpose  the  truth  concerning  them.  But  he  shows 
tliat  Saturn  is  connective  of  a  divine  intellect;  and  that  Heaven  is  the  in- 
telligence, or  intellectual  perception  of  the  first  intelligibles.  For  sightj 
says  he,  looking  to  the  things  above,  is  Heaven.  Hence  Heaven  subsists 
prior  to  every  divine  intellect,  with  which  the  mighty  Saturn  is  replete; 
but^t  intellectually  perceives  the  things  above,  and  such  as  are  beyond  the 
celestial  order.  The  mighty  Heaven  therefore,  is  allotted  a  kingdom  wbidti 
is  between  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  orders.  For  the  circulatioci 
mentioned  in  the  Phaedrus  is  intelligence,  through  which  all  the  Gpds  sik} 
souls  obtain  the  contemplation  of  intelligibles.  But  intelligence  is  a  me^ 
dium  between  intellect  and  the  intelligible.  It  must  be  said  therefore, 
thatthe  whole  of  heaven  is  established  according  to  this  medium,  and  that 
it  contains  the  one  bond  of  the  divine  orders,  being  the  father  indeed  t)f 
the  intellectual  genus,  but  being  generated  from  the  kings  prior  to  it^ 
^hich  also  it  is  said  to  see.  But  on  one  side  of  it  the  supercelestial  plaice, 
and  on  the  other  the  subcelestial  arch  must  be  arranged. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


236  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 


CHAPTER  VL 


Again  therefore^  if  indeed  the  snpercelestial  place  is  the  imparticipa- 
ble  and  occult  genus  of  the  inteIHgible  Gods,  how  can  we  establish  so 
great  a  divine  multitude  there,  and  this  accompanied  with  separation, 
Yiz.  truth,  science,  justice^  temperance,  the  meadow^  and  Adra^tia  ?  For 
neither  do  the  fountains  of  the  virtues,  nor  the  separation  and  variety  of 
forms,  pertain  to  the  intelligible  Gods.  For  the  first  and  most  unical  of 
forms  extend  the  demiurgic  intellect  of  wholes  to  the  intelligible  paradigm, 
and  the  comprehension  of  forms  which  is  there.  But  Socrates  in  the 
Riaedrus  says^  that  a  partial  intellect  contemplates  the  supercelestial 
place.  For  this  intellect  is  the  governor  of  the  soul,  as  it  is  well  said  by 
the  philosophers  prior  to  us.  If  tlierefore,  it  be  necessary  from  this 
?inalogy  to  investigate  the  difference  of  intelligibles,  as  the  demiurgic  in- 
tellect indeed,  is  imparticipable,  but  a  partial  intellect  is  participable,  so 
with  respect  to  the  intelligible,  one  indeed  which  is  the  first  paradigm  of 
the  demiurgus,  pertains  to  the  first  intelligibles,  but  another  which  is  the 
first  paradigm  of  a  partial  intellect  pertains  to  the  second  intelligibles, 
which  are  indeed  intelligibles,  but  are  allotted  an  intelligible  transcenden- 
cy, as  subsisting  at  the  summit  of  intellectuals.  But  if  the  supercelestial 
j^ace  is  beyond  the  celestial  circulation,,  but  is  inferior  to  those  intelligi- 
ble triads,  because  it  is  more  expanded ;  for  it  is  the  plain  of  truth,  and 
h  not  unknown,  is  divided  according  to  a  multitude  of  forms,  and  pos- 
sesses a  variety  of  powers,  and  the  meadow  which  is  there  nourishes  souls,. 
and  is  visible  to  them,  the  first  intelligibles  illuminating  souls  with  ineffa* 
ble  union,  but  not  being  known  by  them  through  intelligence  j — if  this  be 
the  case,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  the  supercelestial  place  should  sub- 
sist between  the  intelligible  nature,  and  the  celestial  circulation.  If  Plata 
himself  also  admits  that  essence  which  truly  is,  exists  in  this  place,  how  is  it 
possible  that  he  should  not  also  admit  it  to  be  intelligible,  and  to  partici- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  Vn.  OF  PLATO.  337 

pate  of  the  firet  intelligibles?     For  because  indeed  it  is  essettee  it  is  intel- 
ligible ;  but  because  it  truly  is,  it  participates  of  being. 

Moreover,  possessing  in  itself  a  multitude  of  intelligibles,  it  will  not  be 
arranged  according  to  the  first  triad ;  for  the  one  being  is  there,  and  not 
the  multitude  of  beings^  But  possessing  a  various  life  which  the  meadow 
indicates,  it  is  subordinate  to  the  second  triad ;  for  intelligible  life  is  one^ 
and  without  separation.  And  again,  since  it  shines  forth  to  the  view  with 
divided  forms,  all-various  orders,  and  prolific  powers,  it  falls  short  of  the 
all-perfect  triad  [in  intelligibles].  If  therefore  it  is  the  second  to  these  m 
dignity  and  power^  but  is  established  above  the  celestial  order,  it  is  intel- 
ligible indeed,  but  is  the  summit  of  the  intellectual  Gods.  On  this  ac- 
count also,  nutriment  is  derived  to  souls  from  thence.  For  the  intelligi- 
ble is  nutriment,  since  the  first  intelligibles  also,  viz.  the  beautiful,  the 
wise  and  the  good,  are  said  to  nourish  souk.  For  by  these,  says  Socrates^ 
the.  wing  of  the  soul  is  nourished ;  but  by  the  contraries  to  these  it  is  cor^ 
rupted  and  destroyed.  These  things  however,  are  indeed  effected  by  the 
fir»t  intelligibles  exemptly,  and  through  union  and  silence.  But  the  su- 
percelestial  place  is  said  to  nourish  through  intelligence  and  energy,  and^ 
to  fill  the  happy  choir  of  souls  with  intelligible  light,  and  the  prolific  rivers, 
of  life. 


I    fmnmum 


tHAPTER  VII. 


After  tlie  supercefestial  place  however  and  the  heaven  itself,  is  the 
subcelestial  arch,^  which  it  is  obvious  to  every  one  ought  to  be  arranged 
under  the  heaven,  and  not  in  the  heaven^  For  it  is  not  called  by  Plato 
the  celestiaV  but  the  subcelestial  arch.  That  it  is  also  proximately  situ- 
ated under  the  celestial  circulation,  is  evident  from  what  is  written  con- 
cerning it.    But  if  it  be  necessary  to  make  the  subcelestial  arch  being 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^a 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 


«uch,  the  game  with  the  summit  of  intellectuals^  und  not  witli  the  end  of 
the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods,  it  will  be  now  necessary  to  contem- 
plate what  remains.  For  the  summit  of  intellectuals  separates  itself  from 
the  kingdom  of  the  heaven,  but  the  subcelestial  arch  is  on  all  sides  com- 
prehended by  it  And  the  former  indeed  constitutes  the  whole  of  intel- 
lect, intellectual  multitude,  and  as  Socrates  says,  the  blessed  discursive 
energies  of  the  Gods;  but  the  latter  only  bounds  the  celestial  series,  and 
supplies  the  Gods  with  the  means  of  ascending  to  the  heaven.  For  when 
the  Gods  are  elevated  to  the  banquets  and  the  delicious  food,  and  are 
filled  with  intelligible  goods,  then  they  proceed  ascending,  to  the  sub- 
celestial  arch,  and  throueh  it  are  raised  to  tlie  celestial  circulation.  Hence, 
if  you  say  that  the  subcelestial  arch  is  perfective  of  the  Gods,  and  con- 
verts them  to  the  whole  of  the  heaven,  and  the  supercelestial  place,  you 
will  not  wander  from  the  meaning  of  Plato.  For  the  Gods  are  indeed 
nourished  by  the  intelligible,  by  the  meadow,  and  by  the  divine  forms, 
which  the  place  above  the  heaven  comprehends ;  but  they  are  filled  with 
this  nutriment  through  the  subcelestial  arch.  For  through  this  they  also 
participate  of  the  celestial  circulation.  Hence  they  are  converted  in- 
deed, through  the  subcelestial  arch ;  but  they  receive  a  vigorous  intellec- 
tual perception  from  the  celestial  order ;  and  they  are  filled  with  intelli- 
gible goods  from  the  supercelestial  place.  It  is  evident  therefore,  that 
the  isupercelestial  place  is  allotted  an  intelligible  summit ;  but  the  circula- 
tion of  the  heaven,  the  middle  breadth ;  and  the  arch,  the  intelligible  ex- 
tremity. For  all  things  are  in  it.  And  intellect  indeed  is  convertive,  but 
the  intelligible  is  the  object  of  desire.  But  divine  intelligence  gives  com- 
pletion to  the  middle,  perfecting  indeed  the  conversions  of  divine  natures, 
and  binding  them  to  such  as  are  first,  but  unfolding  the  tendencies  to  in- 
telligiblejs,  and  filling  secondary  natures  with  precedaneous  goods.  I 
think  however,  that  through  these  tilings  we  have  suflSciently  reminded 
the  reader  of  the  order  pf  these  three. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  tX.  OF  PLATO.  239^ 

CHAPTER   VIII. 

Perhaps  however,  some  one  may  ask  us^  why  we  here  characterize 
the  whole  progression  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
Gods,  according  to  the  middle,  and  why  we  call  one  of  the  extremes  su- 
percelestial,  but  the  other  subcelestial,  from  their  habitude  to  the  middle,, 
indicating  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the  one,  but  the  proximate  and 
connected  diminution  of  the  other.  Perhaps,  therefore,  we  may  concisely 
answer  such  a  one,  that  this  whole  genus  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the 
same  time  intellectual  C^ods,^  binds  together  both  the  extremes^  being  to 
the  one  the  cause  of  canversion,.  but  to  the  other  of  becoming  unfolded 
into  light,  and  being  present  with  secondary  natures.  As  therefore,  we, 
denominate  all  the  intelligible  Gods  paternal  and  unical,  characterizing, 
them  from  the  summit,' and  as  we  say  that  they  are  the  boundaries  of  the 
whole  of  things,  viz.  those  that  are  effective  of  essence,  those  that  are  the 
causes  of  perpetuity,  and  those  that  are  the  sources  of  the  production  of 
forms,  after  the  same  manner  we  unfold  these  middle  Gods  as  the  leaders, 
of  all  bonds^  from  the  middle  which  is  in  them.  For  the  whole  of  this 
middle  order  is  vivific,  connective  and  perfective.  But  the  summit  of  it. 
indeed,  unfolds  the  impressions  of  iiitelligibles,  and  their  ineffable  union.. 
The  termination  of  it  converts  intellectuals,,  and  conjoins,  them  to  intelli- 
gibles..  And  the  middle  collects  into,  and  fixes  in  itself  as^  in  a  centre  the. 
whole  genera  of  the  Gods.  For  to  the  extremes  also  through  reference' 
to  the  middle  we  attribute  the  habitude  of  transcendency  and  diminution^, 
calling  the  one  above,,but  the  other  under  the  middle^ 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Througit  these  things  therefore,  we  may  concisely  answerhim,  as  £ 
have  said,,  who  doubts  concerning  these  names.     Here  bowever^it  is  fit 


Digitized  by 


Google 


t40  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

that  we  shoald  admire  the  divine  science  of  Plato,  because  he  has  nar- 
rated the  mode  of  the  ascent  of  the  whole  of  things  to  the  intdligible  con- 
formably to  the  highest  of  initiators.  For  in  the  first  place,  he  elevates 
«ouls  and  the  Gods  themselves  to  the  fountains^  through  the  liberated 
leaders.  For  the  blessed  and  most  abundant  spectacles  and  discursive 
eneri^es  are  particularly  in  these  fountains,  in  which  also  theurgists  place 
all  their  hope  of  salvation.  They  are  therefore  blessed  through  the  un- 
polluted monads;  but  they  are  most  abundant  through  the  cause  of  di- 
vine difference ;  and  they  are  spectacles  and  discursive  energies,  through 
the  intellectual  and  patertial  powers.  But  in  the  second  place,  Plato  ele- 
vates souls  and  Gods  from  the  fountains,  and  through  the  fountains  to  the 
leaders  of  perfection.  For  after  many  and  divided  intellections  the  good 
of  the  perfective  Gods  shines  forth,  being  supemally  expanded  from  the 
mtellectual  Gods  themselves,  and  illuminating  us,  and  prior  to  our  souls, 
whole  souls,  and  prior  to  these,  the  Gods  themselves.  But  from  the  per- 
fective Gods  Plato  elevates  souls  and  Gods  to  the  divinities,  who  ate  con^ 
nective  of  all  the  intellectual  orders.  For  the  perfective  Gods  are  sus- 
pended from  these  divinities,  subsist  together  with  them,  and  are  compre- 
hended by  them.  Such  also  is  the  commutiion  and  union  of  these  Gods, 
that  some  of  the  most  celebrated  [interpreters  of  Plato]  have  supposed 
that  there  is  an  all-perfect  and  indivisible  sameness  among  them,  in  conse- 
quence of  not  being  able  to  apprehend  by  a  reasoning  process  the  separa- 
tion which  is  in  them.  For  here  also,  it  may  appear  to  some  one  that 
Plato  calls  the  extremity  of  the  celestial  circulation,  the  arch.  This  how- 
ever is  not  the  case.  For  he  does  not  denominate  the  arch  celestial,  but 
bubcelestial.  As  therefore,  the  supercelestial  is  essentially  exempt  Jroin 
the  heaven,  thus  also  the  subcelestial  is  inferior  to  the  kingdom  of  tlie 
heaven.  Yor  the  former  indeed  is  indicative  of  transcendencv,  but  tl>e 
latter  of  a  proximately-arranged  diminution. 

After  this  circulation  however,  which  is  connective  of  tlie  whole  of 
things,  Plato  elevates  souls  aud  the  Gods  to  the  supercelestial  place,  and 
the  intelligible  union  of  intellectuals,  where  also  the  Gods  abiding,  are 
nourished,  are  in  a  happy  condition,  and  are  filled  with  inefl'abJe  and 
uhical   goods.     For  with  theurgists  also^  tlie  ascent  to  the  ineffable  ^^d 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IX»  OP  f»LATO.  244 

intelligiMe  po\rers  wUioh  ftr6  Uie  Mmrnits  of  all  intellectuals)  u  tbfo<^ 
the  eoutoecitive  G^ods.  In  what  vnanner  hoiv^ver,  the  Gods  ai«  hett  om|4> 
joined  to  the  Arst  iiite)ligifaigd»  Plato  no  kmger  unfolds  through  Wdvds; 
for  th«  totitadt  «nth  them  is  itietfabte,  an^  through  inefiftibles,  M  bi  i^M 
teaches  id  what  he  sayS  at)i»ut  thetti  in  tbli€  Phsedrus.  And  through  Hite 
onler^  ttie  mystie  ttnion  '«:idi  the  ^n«el1igibie  and  first-produt^itig  oattfteR  it 
dieted*  With  06  tberefone,  tliere  is  also  the  same  mo^le  off  cdiij«ubetibti» 
And  thmagh  this,  the  M»de  of  theurgvc  ascent  is  more  erediblov  i\»ir 
ast*4iole»  ascend  to  eicenipt  principles,  tlM*ottgh  the  natuttgs  ptokimtkttAf 
ptaeed  abotie  them,  tfauft  also  parts  imitating  the  asc^it  of  tvbdke,  tm 
cMjeibed  tiMr<yiigh  aiMdle  steps  t)^  ascent,  with  lAie  wottt  ttimple  iMid  in^ 
efidfole  ts««s««.  fV>r  trhat  Pkrto  has  deliverad  in  tliis  dialogiie  ^oficemit^ 
tflMte  «<Mil«,  lie  «lt6rwar4s  utifolds  concer&ing'Ours.  A«d  in  the  first  ^taoe 
iwdcudt  lie  cDnHdns  thcM  with  the  liberated  <iodsv  ^fterwstnls,  through 
these  lie  eleraiiM  them  to  the  perfbctive  tj^s.  Allerfeitrds>  thtvagli  tfaete, 
to  tile  ooMnectiv^  <Gods,  anid  in  a  Munlar  imwnner,  «s  Air  as  t»  th6  inatk' 
l^ble  Gods.  Socmtes  therefore,  narrating  the  moMle  «f  ascent  to  ivilieii- 
ligible  besaty,  mad  how  ibllowing  the  Oods^  prior  to  bodi«s  and  getiDi*- 
tiob,  we  were  partakers  of  thait  blessed  spectacle,  says:  **  i^r  kwnstheii 
lawful  to  see  splendid  beauty,  wheft  we  obtained  together  with  that  happy 
dioir,  this  blessed  vision  aiwl  spectacle,  we  tedeed  Ibllowing  Jupiter,  bM 
otbenib  oonjuBction  with  some  other  God,  perceiving,  and  being  Initialed 
in  those  mysteiies,  whk^  it  is  lawful  to  csSH  the  most  blessed  of  mysteries." 
How  then  wt^v  we  once  conjoined  with  intdligible  beauty  ?  T hmugh 
being  initiated,  says  he,  in  the  most  blessed  of  mysteries.  Whiat  dse 
therefore,  does  this  assert,  than  that  we  were  conjoined  with  the  perfec- 
tive leaders,  and  weve  initiated  by  tlK»)  in  •onier  to  enr  bang  tieplenished 
with  beauty  f  Of  what  goods  therefore,  is  the  initiation  tSie  procmt*? 
"Which  orgies,**  says  he,*'  were  celebrated  by  us,  when  we  were  entire  and 
impassive,  and  were  initiated  in,  and  became  spectators  of  entire,  simpIC} 
amd  qnietly  «table  visMMis."  The  mtire  therefoMv  is  derived  to  sonli  feoia 
ikit  tselestial  tarculatioa>  For  tJiis  <x>nta!ins,  and  is  'OOMiecfiv«  nf  all  ^ 
divine  genera,  and  also  of  our  bouls.  fivtiy  thing  however,  which  in  the 
whole  contains  parts,  comprehends  also  that  wtneh  ik  divided,  and  col- 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  H 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Ig42  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV- 

lects  that  which  is  various  into  union  and  simplicity.     But  the  entire, 

quietly  stabJe,  and  simple  visions,  are  unfolded  to  souls  supernaJly  from 

the  supercelestial   place,  through  the  connectedly-containing  Gods,     For 

the  mystic  impressions  of  intelligibles,  shine  forth  in  that  place,  and  also 

the  unknown  and  ineffable  beauty  of  characters.  For  muesisandepopteia* 

we  symbols  of  ineffable  silence,  and  of  union  with  mystic  natures  through 

intelligible  visions.     And  that  which  is  the  most  admirable  of  all  is  this, 

that  as  theurgists  order  the  whole  body  to  be  buried,  except  the  head,  in 

the  most  mystic   of  initiations,  Plato  also  has  anticipated   this,  being 

moved  by  the  Gods  themselves.  "  For  being  pure,''  says  he, "  and  liberated 

from  this  surrounding  vestment,  which  we  now  denominate  body,  we  ob* 

tained  this  most  blessed  muesis  and  epopteia,  being  full   of  intelligible 

light.**     For  the  pure  splendor  [which  he  mentions]  symbolically  unfolds 

,tp  us  intelligible  light.     Hence,  when  we  are  situated  iii  the  intelligible, 

Ve  shall  have  a  life  perfectly  liberated  from  the  body.     But  elevating  the 

head  of  the  charioteer  to  the  place  beyond  the  heaven,  we  shall  be  611ed 

with  the  mysteries  which  are  there,  and  with  intelligible  silence.     It  also 

appears  to  me  that  Plato  sufficiently  unfolds  the  three  elevating  causes, 

loy^,  truth,  and  faith,  to  those  who  do  not  negligently  read  what  he  has 

written.     For  what  besides  love  conjoins  with  beauty  ?    Where  is  the 

plain  of  truth,  e^ccept  in  this  place?     And  what  else  than  faith  is  the 

cause  of  this  ineffable  771  we5w  f     For  muesis  in  short,  is  neither   through 

intelligence   nor  judgment,  but  through  ihe  uhical  silence  imparted  by 

faith,  which  is  better  than  every  gnostic  ener<;y,  and  which  establishes 

both  whole  souls  and  ours,  in  the  ineffable  and  unknown  nature*  of  the 

' «  The  word  TiXmj  or  iniiiation,*^  szjs  Hermeas,  in  his  MS.  Commentary  on  the  Phxdrus,  <«  was 
so  denominated  from  rendering  the  soul  perfect.  The  soul  therefore  was  once  perfect.  But  here 
it  is  divided,  and  is  not  able  to  energize  wholly  by  itself.'*  He  adds:  «  But  it  is  necessary  to 
know  that  telete,  muesis,  md  epopteia,  rekirrj,  fwnjcrij,  and  rroTreia,  diflfer  from  each  other.  Teletc, 
therefore,  is  analogous  to  that  which  is  preparatory  to  purifications.  But  muesis,  which  is  so  called 
from  closing  the  eyes,  is  more  divine.  For  to  close  the  eyes  in  initiation  is  no  longer  to  receive  by 
sense  those  divine  mysteries,  but  with  the  pure  soul  itself.  And  froTrt i«  Epopteia  is  to  be  esta- 
blished m,  and  become  a  spectator  of  the  mysteries." 

*  ^uo-ci  is  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  X.  OV  PLATO. 


245 


Gods.    These  things  however,  have  proceeded  to  this  length  from  my 
sympathy  about  such  like  concerns. 


CHAPTER  X. 


But  ftgain  returning  to  the  proposed  theology,  let  us  unfold  the  con- 
ceptions which  Plato  indicates  to  us  concerning  each  order  of  the  intel- 
ligible and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  Gods,  llie  supercelestial  place 
therefore  is  intelligible.  Hence  also  Plato  says  that  it  is  essence  which 
truly  is,  and  that  it  is  visible  to  the  intellect  of  the  soul.  It  is  likewise 
the  one  comprehension  and  union  of  the  intellectual  Gods.  For  it  is  not 
intelligible  after  such  a  manner  as  animal  itself,  nor  as  the  first  eternity, 
nor  as  that  which  is  itself  primarily  the  one  being.  For  as  these  are  pri- 
marily intelligibles,  they  arc  exempt  from  all  other  intelligibles,  and  pre- 
subsist  by  themselves.  But  the  supercelestial  place,  is  proximately  es- 
tablished above  the  celestial  circulation,  and  of  this  is  the  intelligible; 
yet  it  is  not  simply  intelligible.  And  that  we  assert  these  things  rightly, 
Socrates  also  testifies,  imparting  the  intellection  of  this  intelligible  to  souls 
likewise,  through  the  heaven.  For  in  this  period,  according  to  which 
they  are  carried  round  together  with  the  circulation  of  the  heaven,  they 
behold  indeed  justice,  they  behold  temperance,  and  they  also  behold  sci-» 
ence,  and  each  of  the  beings  which  have  a  true  and  real  existence;  so  that 
if  the  supercelestial  place  is  intelligible,  and  real  being,  yet  it  is  intelligi- 
ble,  as  being  above  the  heaven.  The  first  intelligibles  however,  are  in- 
telligible according  to  their  own  essence,  and  according  to  the  exempt 
and  first  eflScient  cause  of  all  intellectual  natures.  For  the  mighty  Saturn 
likewise,  though  he  is  an  intellectual  God,  and  the  fulness  of  intellect,  is 
intelligible  as  with  reference  to  the  demiurgus;  for  he  is  the  summit  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^4A  ON  T»P  THEOLOGY  WQH  IV. 

\h^  iftt^Q^vwl  iriaij.  T^*  ^h«c€^a?:«^  the  pl^e  algq  ^Wcb  k  al>ove  tU« 
heaven,  is  allotted  an  intelligible  traHSC^iiHk?wy  with  ire*peot  to  th©  Q^le^ 
tial  circulation,  and  is  intelligible  as  in  the  first  intellectuals.  *  Hence 
also  it  subsists  analogous  to  the  first  triad  of  intelligibles.  That  triad 
however,  was  simply  intelligible.  For  the  intelligible  which  is  in  ^intelli- 
grbles,  at  once  exists  prior  to  all  second  and  third  intelligibles.  But  the 
supercelestial  place  is  not  simply  intelligible;  for  it  is  the  summit  of  intel- 
lectuals, and  not  of  intelligibles.  Hence  Plato  calls  the  first  triad  of  in- 
telligibles the  one  being ;  but  he  4enon>i nates  the  supercelestial  place^ 
truly-existing  essence.  For  the  former  indeed,  antecedes  all  beings  in  an 
admirable  simplicity,  and  in  the  occult  unity  of  being.  For  that  being  is 
tiie  int?HigiWe  itself,  and  i?  not  ia  one  respect  ipt^UigibJe,  bi»t;  m  a»Qther 
i»teHect;ut»l,  ftor  is  it  th^it  which  is  passive  tQ  [vii:.  participate?,  ofj  beit\g ; 
Imt  it  is  the  ^eat,  and  the  n\Q^t  9pcient  monad  of  being*  This  order  hQW-^ 
ever,  [vi?.  the  supercelestial  phtfle]  falls  ^hprt  of  the  union  of  tha^t  tci*d» 
9»d  participate!  pf  heicig,  but  is  oot  simply  heing.  Henc^  also  Plgto 
chUs  it  essence,  aq4  essence  which  truly  is,  a^  veceiving;  thja  intelligiU© 
a(i4  essential  according  to  the  essence  of  that;  which  is  primarily  being. 
4ad  the  first  triad  indeed  of  iateUigibles  was  paternal ;.  fprit  suhsi^t^  agcor^-r 
ing  to  divine  union  and  bound>  «nd  is  the  occult,  and  highest  boundary  of 
aJI  intelligibles.  Bat  the  supercelestial  place  is  maternal,  SMbsijthjg  ^q^ 
cording  to  infinity,  and  the  power  of  infinity,  ^ox  this  prder  is  fenainine 
and  prolific  J  and  produces  all  things  by  intelligible  powersu  Hence  alw, 
PI^tQ  calls  it  a  place,  as  being  the  receptacle  qf  the  paternaJ  cftuse?,  and 
"Ringing  fortl^,  and  producing  the  gener4tive  powers  pf  the  Gods  into  the 
hj(postasis  pf  secondary  natures.  Foi:  having  denomina,ted  matter  also  a 
^lac^i  he  calls  it  the  mother  and  nurse  pf  the  reasons  [i.  e.  of  the  produc- 
tive principJes],  which  proceed  into  it  from  being,  ^nd  the  paternal 
<?an8fe- 

According  to  this  analogy,  therefore,  Plato  thus  denominates  the  super-* 
q^estial  place,  as  feminine,  and  as  being  the  cause  of  those  things  ma^ 
t^rnally,  of  which  the  intdligible  father  is  the  cause  paternally.    Matter 

/  Instead  ot  oo^  mi  r^t$  wfon-trrots  voi^roi^  V9€f9^  it  is  necessary  to  read  0$  w  rti^  ^fcori^rei^  wtgci^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP-  X.  QF  VkATQ.  g4^ 

however  receives  forms  alone ;  but  the  mother  and  nurse  of  the  Gods,  Dfbt 
only  receives,  but  also  constitutes  and  generates  secondary  natures,  together 
with  the  father.  Nor  does  this  geaeralive  deity  produce  from  herself 
into  an  external  place,  her  progeny,  and  separate  them  from  her  own  com- 
prehension»  in  the  §ame  jnanner  ^s  th?  natures  which  generate  h^re, 
deliver  their  offspring  into  light  external  to  themselves ;  but  she  generates, 
comprehends  and  establishes  all  thing?  in  herself.  Hepce  ?i1sq  she  \s  the 
place  of  them,  ^s  being  a  seat  which  on  all  sides,  conttains  them,  an(J  as 
by  her  prolific,  and  primarily  efficient  powers,  preoccupying  and  con?^ 
twining  in  herself,  all  the  progressions,  multitude  and  variety  of  secondary 
n^^tures.  for  all  beings  subsist  in  the  Gods,  and  are  comprehended  qnd 
saved  by  tbem.  For  where  can  they  recede  froRi  the  Gods,  and  from.th§ 
comprehension  which  is  in  them  ?  And  how,  if  they  depart  frpm  theQi^i 
qao,  they  remain  even  for  the  smallest  portion  of  time?  In  a  particiil^r 
manner  however  the  powers  which  are  generative  of  divine  natures^,  gre 
s^id  to  comprehend  their  progeny,  sq  far  as  they  are  the  proj:imate  c^us^ 
pf  them,  and  constitute  their  essence  with  a  more  abundant  divisioQ,  and 
a  more  particular  providence.  For  paternal  causes  produce  ^econd^ry 
natures  uniformly^  exemptly,  and  without  coordination,  and  coipprphpqd>^ 
Jbut  unically  their  own  progeny.  And  in  simplicity  indeed,  they  pref^QUr 
py  the  variety  of  them ;  but  in  union  their  multitude.  It  is  evidQftt 
therefore,  from  what  has  been  said>  that  the  supercelestial  place  is.  intel- 
ligible, and  after  what  manner  it  is  intelligible.  In  additioq  to  thesf^ 
things  also  it  is  evident,  how  it  is  feminine ;  for  place  is  adapted  to  t;]^ 
generative  Gods  through  the  above-mentioned  causes,  And  the  meadpw  ml 
the  fountain  of  a  vivific  nature,  as  will  be  shortly  demon3trated.  Socral©}^ 
likewise  assumes  all  the  divine  natures  that  are  in  this  place,^  to  be  of  thi* 
kind,  [viz  to  be  of  the  feminine  genus]  I  mean  science  herself,  justice  her-? 
selfi  temperance  herself,  truth  herself,  and  Adrastia ;  which  na^y  ei;peci- 
ally  be  considered  as  a  certain  indication,  that  Plato  particularly  attri- 
bijtes  the  fenjinine  to  this  order,  aod  not  only  other  theologists. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


g46  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IT- 


CHAPTER  XI. 

What  therefore  is  the  cause  through  which  Plato  in  the  first  place  ce- 
lebrates this  deity  negatively,  analogous  to  the  one  f  And  what  are  the 
negations  ?  For  he  denominates  it,  without  colour,  without  figure,  and 
without  contact  And  he  takes  away  from  it  these  three  hyparxes,  colour, 
figure,  and  contact.  I  say  therefore,  that  this  order  being  the  summit  of 
the  intellectual  Gods,  is  unknown  and  ineffable,  according  to  its  peculi- 
arity, and  is  [only]  to  be  known  through  intelligible  impressions.  For 
being  the  summit  of  intellectuals,  it  conjoins  itself  with  intelligibles.  For 
how  could  intellectuals  be  conjoined  with  intelligibles,  unless  they  ante- 
cedently constituted  an  intelligible  transcendency  of  themselves  ?  But 
what  connexion  and  communion  could  be  surveyed  of  the  whole  orders 
of  things,  unless  the  extremities  of  such  as  are  first  possessed  a  certain 
^militude  to  the  beginnings  of  such  as  are  second  ?  For  on  account  of 
this  similitude,  these  are  connascent  with  each  other,  and  all  things  sub- 
sist according  to  one  series.  As  therefore,  the  end  of  intelligibles  was 
intellectual,  so  likewise  the  beginning  of  intellectuals  is  allotted  an  in- 
telligible hyparxis.  And  each  of  these  indeed  is  intelligible  ;  but  the  one 
is  intelligible  simply ;  and  the  other  is  not  intelligible  without  the  addi- 
tion of  the  intellectual.  These  therefore,  are  consubsistent  with  each 
other.  And  the  one  indeed,  is  the  paternal  cause  of  the  whole  of  things, 
so  far  as  it  is  intelligible,  and  the  intellectual  which  is  in  it  is  extended  in- 
telligibly. But  the  other  is  generatively  constitutive  of  the  same  things, 
because  it  is  intellectual,  and  intelligible  good  presides  in  the  intellectual 
genus.  All  things  therefore,  are  from  both,  exemptly  indeed,  from  the 
intellectual  of  intelligibles,  but  coordinately,  from  the  intelligible  of  in- 
tellectuals. And  both  indeed,  rejoice  in  unknown  hyparxes;  and  are 
alone,  as  Plato  uays,  known  by  intelligible,  mystic,  and  ineffable  impres- 
sions. Hence  also  he  calls  the  attempt  boldness  which  endeavours  to 
unfold  the  arcana  concerning  them,  and  to  explain  by  words  their  un- 
Jcnown  union* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  PLATO.  24^ 

From  the  end  of  the  intelligible  order  however,  the  summit  of  intetr 
lectuals  possesses  its  unknown  peculiarity.     For  so  far  as  it  conjoins 
itself  to  the  first  intelligibles,  and  is  filled  with  their  unical,  ineffable,  and 
paternal  hyparxis,  so  far  also  it  exists  in  an  unknown  manner  prior  to 
intellectuals.   Hence  it  is  incomprehensible  by  the  natures  posterior  to  it; 
but  it  is  known  by  those  prior  to  it,  being  super-expanded  into  a  continued 
union  with  them."  It  likewise  knows  the  natures  prior  to  itself  intelligibly ; 
but  this  does  not  at  all  differ  from  uniform  and  ineffable  knowledge. 
For  intelligible  knowledge  is  the  union,  cause,  summit,  and  unknown  and 
occult  hyparxis  of  all  knowledge.     Since  therefore,  the  one  and  united 
triad  is,  if  it  be  lawful  so  to  speak,  the  intellectual  image  of  the  unknown 
union  of  intelligibles,  and  presides  over  the  same  uniform  and  unknown 
power  in  intellectuals,  as  its  own  cause  does,  hence  Plato  mystically 
unfolds  it  through  negations.     For  every  where  that  which  is  highest, 
and  that  which  is   unknown,  are  analogous  to  the  unical  God.     As 
therefore,  we  are  taught  to  celebrate  this  God  throu^  negations,  after 
the  same  manner  we  endeavour  to  unfold  negatively  the  uniform .  and 
unknown  summits  of  secondary  orders.    And  in  short,  since'  Socrates 
in  the  Pha&drus  makes  the  ascent  as  far  as  to  the  supercelestial  place, 
arranging^  it  analogous  to  the  first,  as  in  this  order,  and  in  the  ascent  of 
souls,  he  celebrates  it  by  negations.     For  in  the  Timeeus,  Plato  contends 
that  the  one  demiurgus  through  whom  every^  demiurgic  genus  of  Gods 
subsists,  is  ineffable  and  unknown ;  and  every  where  that  which  is  highest 
has  this  transcendency  with  respect  to  secondary  natures.     For  it  imi- 
tates the  cause  which  is  at  once  unically  exempt  from  all  beings.     We 
celebrate  this  cause  however,. through  negations  alone,  as  existing  prior 
to  all  things ;  but  we  unfold  the  summits  which  proceed  analogous  to  It, 
^ffinnatively  and  at  the  same  time  negatively.     As  participating  indeed, 
the  natures  prior  to  themselves,  we  celebrate  them  affirmatively.     For 
Plath  calls  the  supercelestial  place  essence  which  truly  is,  the  plain  of 
truth,  the  meadow,  and  the  intelligible  place  of  survey  of  the  Gods,  and 
he  does  not  only   call  it  without  colour,  without  figure,  and  without 

■  For  «tm|»,  it  18  necessary  to  read  «ut«j^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


jt|8  OS  Tftt  iTftEOLOGY  btK>K  iV. 

TC&tAhx^  ikmh  VAn^'og  'affimmtiottft  ^ith  tttgiitidni.  Pot  thU  ordfef  te  a 
«Md'i%if&  between  die  intelligibte  Go(h  &iid  th6  firtt  i&tellectEfal  divi<ie 
«nrdei«,  ^iitaining  the  biobd  <)f  both.  And  it  guards  indeed  ititellectualiji 
tttctftditg  to  A  ubifbrm  lind  unkttoivn  tr^Ascendeticy,  but  tmnsMiu 
the  ^iMiitttdeft  of  iMt^lligibles  as  faf  <ii  to  the  )a«t  of  things.  It  likewise 
«lei^teft  %11  tMwgb  ftt  once,  according  to  one  t:otnt»on  dnion,  a-s  f^r  bs  to 
th«  iittMihgible father,  and  generates ^ftd  prodttees  them  asfar as  to  blotter. 
Seitig  then3fore  e^ftabhsbed  bet^neen  iSeit  imical  and  the  Multiplied  Gods, 
It4«  unfolded,  ttegati\"e!y  indeed,  through  tihe  unknotm  manner  in  which 
it  fmtiM;end6  ^ecdndat^  matures,  but  a^rmati^ly  thtotigh  it&  pattici^ 
lotion  of  the  'fiftt  Matures.  fVMr  the  £r^  dtmiut^us  is  called  in  the 
l^cfiitMs  fabricator  and  fatlte^,  and  good,  and  all  such  names,  ^  far  asbe 
purtidpates  of  t)reexi6teirt  t^udes;  but  to  tkr  as  he  it  the  ttionad  'df  all 
IkMdatiott,  Hato  leaves  him  unknown  and  inel&ble,  «iempt  from  all 
the  fabricittors  of  things.  For  he  «ays,  "  it  id  i!ifficolt  to  discover  him, 
sad  ifbM  Ibb&d,  it  it  Impossible  to  ^penk  dt  him  to  all  men.''  Thus 
llfsrefore  flato  unfolds  the  supencelestial  (^ace,  affirmatively  indeed,  as 
beittg  illed  flrom  the  first  causes,  at  on6  time  itideed  ^ealling  it  essen(^ 
mt^t^  irtAy  is,  sA  another  the  plain  «>f  truDk,  and  at  another,  something 
(^<of  this  kind;  bat'  so&r  as  it  transt^nds  the  intellectual  Gods, and 
«d  fiir  as  it  is  «iipreiue  and  unical,  he  celebrated  it  negativieJly,  in  the 
tame  mafiaer  «&  the  principle  irbidi  <is  eiempt  firotm  idl  tMngs, 


CHAPT£R  KIL 

It  follows  thetefore,  in  the  next  place,  thai  we  should  consider  wha% 
th6  negations  are,  and  from  wh&t  orders  they  are  generated^  In  the 
l^armenides  then,  the  negations  of  the  one  are  produced  from  all^  th^ 

'  8f  if  omitted  in  At  or^ind,  wUch  the  setiae  eridcBtly  requires  te  be  iseerted. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


'^lAk  ^gi^,  heUAse  ihi  me  is  %6  <ebuse  ^  aU  olf  them.  And  ev«rf 
{hftig  mWilcdSri^^  tb  tfie  %3r))^x4^  of  itself  pkt^ipBit&  «r  the  first 
^dci^;  ahcl  ^tfffe  on^  ¥ii  ^ehi^eq^ence'cJf  tt-ahsoetoditag  theise  is  m  tt  tHBok 
jgi^t^  Segr^  ^xmpi  fr6th  >«b^  iOimeai  pHileTiot  t6  these»  F^r  froai 
¥h€!Se  tlirthhi^  i#6(?ftfe^ ;  stttfeie  %lfcy  Wfedifrte  'pattiM^  tfife  pecettarities  «rf 
thdftfe.  liife'Woiirfet'^  i^'fevi^^til  fh;>in  Ittlt  otfcer  hypcrthfeses,  4ft  ^hitihthe 
skttfe  'i!6hcltfii6h^  ^ife  ^gafti  fcircJulatefl,  iit  tiie  ttflie  fbeing  voooeciled 
ti/^tlitt'  'iie^kffiVeiy,  And  at  ^nottttft:  ^flSlrttfativtiy.  Pert-  i^tot  iS  itbeFfc 
iVhJc/h  dbtild'bb  ablb'to'sttbsist,  ttriltf^s  it  was-^htetedeti^y  6ompr^i8»£lc4 
H(f6di^lng^6'c&ti^'ih  ^trhbW}  ©At  in  'the  ^UaSdfUs,  the  fhtegs  ^hidhw* 
dirfiiiad^df^e'jWfeliigfBte'Stitottiit  tff'aFl  fetelleetoals'are'the  tatuww  Whiok 
'yi^'^hjS^fid^t^'^t^bli^fed  ^fter'ihrs^uttifMH,  ^it.^-thb>iSteVesdJffitief^tikb 
6bHTiy6tWe,  HHe  pbif^<fliVe,  <fthd  ttie  'f^li^lnXal  Of  ti^sAmce  'pit^^)^  icoUal 
"hitiltedtxx^.  ¥6t  Hhfs  'sdihiUit  b^t^  'evetttpt  ffr&tti  tbcMe,  )it  aho 
'f^nVrf^has  ^11  'itie'lHtfeltiscttial  6088.  ^<yr  w4iilt'<«^j  |««Dtt8  «f ttherOads 
wWike'^onie,  'ifaat  'ihe  ttit£fe  Orders 't^bit^Hblr '^o  tlri!s  VutHttitt.'ans^D  4t. 
*PUtbihetef6t'e  Behbhii0at^''th^  cdlestifll  «t^r  wUeih  leoudectedljrcoonh 
;£kir/s'Wh61<es,iat)cl'i1IUidinat^  fhetn  ^with^idtelligible  light^'Cdlour;  boBatlse 
likewise  ifi'e  tipp^r^t  b(3diirty  df  thts  'sefusiljle  fa^bveiD  Is  Yespleddeit  tndi 
all  various  colours,  and  with  light.  Hence  be  calls  that  heavendintBil>«> 
Ie<^tual  cdlo\ir,  and  tight,  ^orthe  W^t  pro'oeediilg  ^from  tke  ^gml  isfpn 
the  ord^t^^  above  [the  heisiVtid]  linktid^v^ta '^nd  ck^iilt,  ^abiding  in  xthe 
ladjta  df  the  Gods;  l^dtdt  shin^  fdfth  in  tim  order,  and  from  rJjenig 
unappareht  becoiin^s  manifest.  Hence  it  is' assimilated  to  colour  >^ 
dfispring  df  light. 

Farther  still/if  this  h^tien  >fs  isight  beholding  the  things  above^ttkie 
intelligible '  of  It  may'  very'  propefly  be  called  colour  which-  is  oonjeiiBBed 
•wFtlrthe  sight.  Thte' icsWte  thfeifefoi»e  tif ' the- intelligibles  in  the ' heaven-is 
'without '  eolovir,  "btit  Is '  ei^tci^t  'O^tMn  'tfcem ;  fbr  sensible  c6lour  is^tlK 
6£r^lirittgi6f  th^it^lir'li^t.  ^But  Pkto  denomiff^tes  theotder^which'praxi. 
itikt^y  sub^iists  mfler  tiie  'eek^tiAl  brder,  And  which'  we  bave  *oaUfidr>the 
subbelisstial  ar6h,^figiilre.  '^dr'thearcfa  itself  is  the  'MMe  't>f '^M%ure. 
Ahd'in'^h6rt,'in  this  oMi^r,'Partn«nid%8  dlsp'plitces  in«eHeiitUftl<^gtire. 
^ButPl^'first^ktllibittte  timtAtt  'fo'  the'^tttfmit^ibf  idt»lld«<iaals^as is 
Troe,  Vol.  I.  2  1 


Digitized  by 


Google 


850  O^  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  1^, 

evident  from  the  conclusions  ^f  the  Parmenide^*  For  in  the  first  hypor- 
thesii^  taking  away  figure  from  the  om^  he  uses  this  as  a  medium,  \\z. 
i\iBttht  one  does  not  touch  itself.  "But  /A^  o/ie/' says  he,  "  does  not 
touch  itself."  -  And  the  conclusion  is  evident*  Here  therefore  contact 
first  subsists,  and  subsists  according  to  cause*  For  of  those  things  of 
which  the  demiurgus  is  proximately  the  caus^,  the  father  who  is  prior  to 
him  is  paradigmatically  the  cause.  In  this  order  therefore,  contact  is 
the  paradigm  of  the  liberated  Gods.  Hence  these  three  prders  are 
successive,  viz.  colour,  figure,  and  contact.  And  fromt  hese  the  super- 
celestial  place  is  essentially  exempt.  Hence  it  is  without  colour,  without 
jfigure,  and  without  contact.  Nor  does  it  transcend  these  three  priva- 
tively,  but  according  to  causal  excellence.  For  it  imparts  to  colour 
from, intelligibles  the  participation  of  light;  on  figure  it  confers  by  illu- 
mination intdlectual  bound ;  and  in  contact  it  supernally  inserts  union 
and  continuity,  and  perfects  all  things  by  its  power,  things  which  are 
touched  indeed,  through  union,  those  that  are  figured,  through  the  par- 
ticipation of  bound,  and  those  that  are  coloured,  through  the  illumination 
of  light.  .But  it  draws  upward,  and  allures  to  itself  every  thing  ineffably^ 
and  through  intelligible  impressions,  and  fills  every  thing  with  unical 
goods. 

If.  therefore,  we  assert  these  things  rightly,  we  must  not  admit  .the 
interpretation  of  those  who  are  busily  occupied  in  sensible  colours,  and 
contacts,  and  figures,  and  who  assert  that  the  supercelestial  place  is 
exempt  from  these.  For  these  are  trifling,  and  by  no  means  adapted 
to  that  place.  For  even  nature,  not  only  that  which  exists  as  a  whole, 
but  that  also  which  is  partial,  is  exempt  from  sensible  colours,  from 
apparent  figures,  and  from  corporeal  contact.  Wiiat  therefore  is  there 
venerable  in  this,  if  it  is  also  present  to  natures  themselves?  But  it Jls 
necessary  to  extend  colours,  and  figures,  and  contacts,  from  on  high  us 
fitr  as  to  the  last  of  things,  and  to  evince  that  the  supercelestial  place,  is 
similarly  exempt  from  all  these.  For  soul  also  and  intellect  participate 
.of  figure;  and  contact  is  frequently  in  incorporeal  natures,  according  to 
the  communion  of  first  with  secondary  beings,  and  it  is  usual  to  call 
these  communications  contacts,  and  Xo  denominate  the  touchmgs  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIII.  OF  PLATO.  35 J 

intellectual  perceptions  adhesions.  We  should  not  therefore  be  carried 
from  things  first  to  things  last,  nor  compare  the  highest  order  of  intel- 
lectuals with  the  last  of  beings,  above  which  both  soul  and  nature  are 
established.  For  in  so  doing  we  shall  err,  and  shall  not  attend  to  Plato, 
who  exclaims  that  it  is  boldness  to  assert  these  things  concerning  it.  For 
where  is  the  boldness,  and  what  the  unknown  power  transcending  our 
conceptions,  in  contemplating  the  truth  of  sensible  colours,  figures,  and 
contacts.  For  an  hypostasis  of  this  kind  is  known  by  physiologists,  and 
'not  by  the  sons  of  theologists.  Such  tlierefore  is  the  power  possessed  by 
the  negations  through  which  Plato  celebrates  the  supercelestial  place. 


CHAPTER  XIIL 


Ac  A  IN  then,  let  us  in  the  next  place  survey  the  affirmations^  how  thfcy 
exist  according  to  the  participation  of  the  first  intelligibles  themselves. 
The  supercelestial  place  therefore,  is  said  to  be  eissence  which  truly  is, 
because  it  participates  of  that  which  is  primarily  being.  For  to  be,  and 
truly  to  be  are  present  to  all  things,  as  the  progeny  of  the  intelligible 
essence.  For  as  tht  one  is  from  the  first  principle  which  is  prior  to 
intelligibles,  so  the  nature  of  being  is  from  intelligibles.  For  there  the 
one  being  subsists,  as  Parmenides  a  little  before  taught  us.  But'  the 
supercelestial  place  is  beheld  by  the  governor  of  the  soul,  because  it  is 
allotted  an  intelligible  transcendency  with  respect  to  the  other  intel- 
lectual Gods.  Hence  the  intelligible  good  of  it  is  rendered  manifest  from 
its  being  known  by  intellect.  This  intelligible  therefore,  in  the  sam^e 
manner  as  that  which  is  truly  being,  arrives  to  it  from  the  unical  Godd. 
For  they  are  primarily  and  imparticipably  intelligibles,  and  the  first 
efficient  causes  of  all  intelligibles.  These  things  also  concur  with  each 
other,  viz.  that  which  is  truly  being,  mid  the  intelligible.      For  every 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ioteUigible  is  truly  heing^  ^and  ^f?ery  ttwigj  H^lMpb  W  ^V  ^iffg  ^? 
intelligible,  For  inteUect  i»  inteUi^?  ^pprdvpjg  tp  i^  J^jjg  ^5m^ 
is  in  it;  but  #jcaardinjf  to  i*?  gPQ3tWP  pow/er  it  4?  ift^ll^  ^ni?e  fJ^Rp 
eyierjr  btellect  is  the  sM|>plipr  of  )ji¥?Tv)etdge ;  b«if  ^eyery  ^elligi|?Jp  j»  tb^ 
jBUfiplier  of  -essance.  Fpr  th^  wjbiich  eaj^  is  prjipfwrUy,  it  ffl(ipar|ts  by 
illuminatioju  to  the  siscan4»ry  oiv)^i!3« 


CHAPTER   XIV- 


In  the  third  place  therefore,  the  genus  of  true  science  is  said  to  be 
established  about  the  supercelestial  place.  For  these  two  things  ascend 
to  the  contemplation  of  tbftt  esstencp,  .vi?.  intellect  the  governor  of  the 
soul  (but  this  is  a  partial  intellect  established  indeed  above  souls,  and 
elevating  them  to  their  paternal  port)  and  true  science  which  is  the 
p^fection  of  the  soul.  This  therefore  /ei^rg^es  ^^bout  tb^  iplaoe,  as 
transitively  revolving  in  ^avrnQpic  ^me^spir^rabopt  being,  ^^t  inteJI^ct 
contemplates  it,  as  einployiqg  simply  ^qt^lec^n.  jF^aiitb^  :rS|;ill,  the 
science  which  is  in  m  is  one  tliipg,  butt^^t  (^h^  is^in  tbe^^i^pf^rqel^stial 
j>toce  another.  And  the  former  indeed  is  true,  bqt  the  latter  tis  truth 
itself.  What  therefore  is  it^  and  wlienqedoejs  .)t  fub(4st?  J(t|is  iqd^d  ^ 
..dieity  which  is  the  fountain  of  all  intellectual  ^Bowl^c^g^y  and  the  first 
.efficient  caiise  of  undeQled:and  stable  intelUgepce. '  ,^ut  itjshines  forth 
in^the;first triad  of  intellectuals,  beo^use  this  is  pe^fi^qtive  ,pf  all. other 
.tbi^gSfand  likewise  of  divine  souls.  For  these  ascending rtp  th^s  ;Uq|forni 
ipower  of  all  knowledge,  perfect  their  owp  kqowl^dge.  iFpr^jigh  of.  the 
joadefilod  souls,  says  Socrates,  revolying^tpgethi^r  with  Jupiter  and  the 
heaven,  surveys  justice,  temperance  ^nd  science.  Hqm^c^  the^e  three 
fountains lare  there,  b^ing  iat^l|i^ble  deities,; aad  itl^effounJaiftspf  the 

'  For  40«i»f eco^  it(  iS  WQ^Wff  to  r!^d  ya^f-f 0)^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


intellectual  virtues^  and  not  being,  as  sonie  think  they  are,  intellectual 
fonns.  For  Plato  is  accustomed  to  characterize  these  by  the  term  itself, 
as  for  instance  science  itself  and  justice  itself;  and  this  Socrates  says 
somewhere  in  the  Phaedo.  By^t  ^^e  when  he  says  justice  herself, 
temperance  herself,  and  science  herself,  he  appears  to  unfold  to  us  certain 
self-perfect  and  intelligible  deities,  which  have  a  triadic  subsistence.  And 
of  these  science  indeed  is  the  monad ;  but  temi>erance  has  the  second 
order ;  and  justice  the  third.  And  science  iddeed  is  the  supplier  of 
undefiled,  firm  and  immutable  intelligence ;  but  temperance  imparts  to 
aU  the  Gods  the  cause  of  conversion  to  themselves ;  and  justice  imparts 
to  them  the  cause  of  the  distribution  of  the  whole  of  good  accordms  to 
desert.  And  through  science  mdeed,  each  of  the  Gods  intellectually 
piijrceiyes  the  natures  prior  to  himself,  and  is  filled  with  intelligible  mteU 
ligjence ; '  but  through  temperance  he  is  converted  to  himself^,  an^  ^^pf^ 
a  second  union,  and  a  good  coordinate  to  the  conversion  to  .himself:  and 
through  justice  he  rules  over  the  natures  postenor  to  himself,  in  a  silent 
path,  as  tt^ey  sav«  measures  their  desert,  and  supplies  a  distribution  adapts 
to  each.  These  three  fountains  therefore  contain  att  the  energies  cif  the 
Gpds.  And  science  indeed  proceeds  analogous  to  the  ^rst  triad  of 
Ind  as  that  triad  imparts  essence  to  all  thi 


.i,i>^    >j 


intelligibles.  And  as  that  triad  imparts  essence  to  all  things^  so  this 
illuminates  the  Gods  with  knowledge.  But  temperance  proceeds 
analogous  to  the  second  triad  of  intelligibles.  For  temperance  imitates 
the  connective  iind  measuring  power  ot  that  triaa  ;  since  it  measures  ^the 
energies  of  the  Gods,  and  converts  each  of  them  to  itself.  Arid  justice 
proceeds  analogous  to  the  third  triad  of  intelligibles.  For  it  also 
separates  secondary  natures  according  to  appropriate  desert,*  in  the 
same  manner  as  that  triad  separates  them  intelligibly  by  the  first  para- 
digms. 

■  Here  also  it  is  requisite  to  adopt  the  same  reading  as  before,  p.  262. 

*  Instead  of  xara  njv  frgowi^KotHrMf  fxiivi),  it  teems^  requisite  to  read  xmra  n)y  wfocviHowaif  t^im, 
mo'xtf  f xiiyi),  as  in  the  translation. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^54  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV, 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Aftjer  these  things  therefore,  we  may  survey  another  triad 
preexisting  in  this  place,  which  also  Socrates  celebrates,  viz.  the  plain  of 
truth,  the  meadow,  and  the  nutriment  of  the  Gods.  The  plain  of  truth 
therefore,  is  intellectually  expanded  to  intelligible  light,  and  is  splendid 
with  the  illuminations  that  proceed  from  thence.  For  as  the  one  emits 
by  illumination  intelligible  light,  so  the  intelligible  imparts  to  secondary 
natures  a  participation  productive  of  essence.  But  the  meadow  is  the 
prolific  power  of  life,  and  of  all- various  reasons,  is  the  comprehension  of 
the  first  efficient  causes  of  life,  and  is  the  cause  of  the  variety,  and 
generation  of  forms«  For  the  meadows  also  which  are  here  are  pro* 
ductive  of  all-various  forms  and  reasons,  and  bear  water  which  is  tlie 
symbol  of  vivification.  And  the  nourishing  cauee  of  the  Gods,  is  a 
certain  intelligible  union,  comprehending  in  itself  the  whole  perfection 
of  the  Gods,  and  filling  the  Gods  with  acme  and  power,  in  order  thjit 
they  may  bestow  a  providential  attention  to  secondary  natures,  and  may 
possess  an  immutable  intellectual  perception  of  such  natures  as  are  first. 
Above  however,  the  Gods  participate  of  these  uniformly;  but  in  a 
divided  manner  in  their  progressions. 

With  respect  to  the  nutriment  likewise,  one  kind  is  called  by  Pfato 
ambrosia^  but  the  other  nectar.  **For  the  charioteer,"  says  he,  **  stopping 
the  horses  at  the  manger,  places  before  them  ambrosia,  and  afterwards 
gives  them  nectar  to  drink.''  The  charioteer  therefore,  being  nourished 
with  intelligibles,  unically  participates  of  the  perfection  which  is 
imparted  through  illumination  by  the  Gods.  I5ut  the  horses  participate  of 
this  divjsibly;  first  indeed  of  ambrosia,  and  afterwards  of  nectar.  For  it 
is  necessary  that  from  ambrosia,  they  should  stably  and  undeviatingly 
abide  in  more  excellent  natures ;  but  that  through  nectar  they  should 
Unmutably  provide  for  secondary  natures*     For  they  say  that  ambrosia 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XV.  OF  PLATO.  55^ 

is  solid,  bul  nectar  liquid  nutriment;  which  Plato  also  indicates  when. he 
says  that  the  charioteer  places  before  the  horses  ambrosia  and  afterwards 
gives  them  nectar  to  drink.     Hence  the  nutriment  of  nectar  manifesto 
the  unrestrained  and  indissoluble  nature  of  providence^  and  its  pro^ 
ceeding  to  all  things  in  an  unpolluted  manner.     But  the  nutriment  of 
ambrosia  manifests  stability,  and  a  firm  settlement  in  more  excellent 
natures.     From  both  these  however,  it  is  evident  that  the  Gods  both 
abide  and  proceed  to  all  things,  and   that  neither  their  undeviating 
nature,  and  which  is  without  conversion  to  subordinate  beings,  is  unpro- 
lific,  nor  their  prolific  power  and  progression  is  unstable ;  but  abiding 
they  proceed,  and  being  established  in  the  divinities  prior  to  themselves,, 
they  provide  for  secondary  natures  without  being  contaminated.    Nectar 
and  ambrosia  therefore,  are  the  perfections  of  the  Gods,  so  &r  as  they 
are  Gods;  but  other  things  are  the  perfections  of  intellect,  natare,.and 
bodies.     Hence  Plato  having  assumed   these  in  souk,  calls  the  souls^ 
|[ which  are  nourished  with  these,]  Gods.    For  so  far  as  they  also  parti, 
cipate  of  the  Gods,  so  far  they  are  filled  with  nectar  and  andbrosia^ 
These  however  in  their  progressions  have  a  bipartite  division;  the  one- 
indeed,  being  the  supplier  to  the  Gods  of  stable  and  firm  perfection;  but 
the  other,  of  undeviating  providence,  of  liberated  ladministration,  and  of 
an  unenvying  and  abundant  communication  of  good,  according  to  tlte* 
two  principles  of  the  whole  of  things,  which  preside  over  a  distribution 
of  this  kind.     For  it  must  be  admitted  that  ambrosia  is  indeed  analogous 
to  bound,  but  nectar  to  infinity.    Hence  the  one  is  as  it  were  humid,  and 
not  bounded  from  itself;  but  the  other  is  as  it  were  solid,  and  lias  a 
boundary  from  itself.     Nectar  therefore  is  prolific,  and  is  perfective  of 
the  secondary  presence  of  the  Gods,  and  is  the  cause  of  power;  of  a 
vigour  which  provides  for  the  whote  of  things,  and  of  infinite  and  never- 
failing  supply.     But  ambrosia  is  stable  perfection,  is  similar  to  bound,, 
is  the  cause  to  the  Gods*  of  an  establishment  in  themselves,  and  is  the 
supplier  of  firm  and  undeviating  intellection.     Prior  to  both  these  how*- 
ever^is  the  one  fountain  of  perfection,  and  seat  to  all  the  Gods,  which 
Plato  calls  nutriment,  and  the  banquet,  and  delicious  food,  as  unically 
perfecting  indeed  the  divided  multitude  of  the  Gods,  but  converting  aJli 


Digitized  by 


Google 


life  ON  rtk  fifiOLOGY  iobk  iv. 

manifestethe    aivlaed   drstribuiion    olc  ^ivin'e    niitniiieit;    kit  ^^ 


-sumciency 


CHAPTER  XVL 


superc^lestial  place  into  three  parte,  ror  \h%  inielligitde  sfutDinit  of 
intellectuals  is,  as  we  have  before  observedt  a  triiia.  immediately  the'r6- 
fore,  according  to  the  first  conception  of  this  place,  Plato  unfolds  its 
tnamc  nature^  assuming  indeed,  three  negsttives,  the  uncoloured,  the 
unfigured,  and  the  untansible^  Haviilg  likewise  established  three 
divinities  m  it,  vi^.  science^  temperance,  and  justice,  our  preceptor  and 
leader  [Synanus]  thinks  fit  to  divide  this  tiriad  Into  three  monads,  irid 
also  demonstrates  this  conformably  to  the  Orpliicltheoloffles.  If,'  however, 
H  be  requisite  to  disc^over  the  definite  peculiarit'ies  of  ihes^  i^fee'C<^- 
^esses,  from  what  ^as  beet)  already  Ipid  down,  we  must  understand ,^l!hat 
the  plain  of  truth,  the  meadow,  and  the  nourishing  c^use  of  tfie  GbdsWfe 
posited  there.  To  nourish  therefore  is  the  province  of  intelligible  perfec- 
tion. Hence  the  elevating  impul^  is  given  to  the  wing  of  the  soul, 'and 
also  intellectual  perfection,  according  to  the  nouiis^meht^  which  ^^lAoWs 
from  thence  into  the  soul.     But  the  pecufianty  of  fne  meadow,  is  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVI.  OF  PLATO.  257 

« 

possess  a  power  generative  of  reasons  and  forms;  and  of  the  eauses'  of 
the  production  of  animals.  Hence  also  souls  are  fed  about  the  meadow; 
and  the  pabulum  (ro/ti])  is  indeed  nutriment,  but  in^  a  divided  manner. 

The  plain  however  of  truth  is  the  expansion  and  manifestation  of 
intelligible  light,  the  evolution  of  inward  reasons,  and  perfection  pro- 
ceeding every  where.  This  therefore*  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  third 
monad.  But  fecundity  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  second ;  and  intelligible 
plenitude  of  the  first  For  all  the  supercelestial  place  is  indeed  illumi- 
nated with  the  light  of  truth.  Hence  all  the  natures  thai  are  contained 
in  it  are  called  true.  And  Socrates  says,  **  that  whatever  soul  attending 
on  divinity  has  beheld  any  thing  of  reality  shall  be  free  from  damage, 
till  another  period  takes  place/'  For  every  thing  in  that  place  is  truly 
being  and  intelligible,  and  is  full  of  divine  union.  In  the  first  monads 
however  [i.  e.  in  the  pl^in  of  truth  and  the  meadow,]  this  intelligible 
light  subsists  contractedly,  and  is  occultly  established  as  it  were  in  the 
adyta ;  but  in  the  third  monad  [viz.  in  the  nourishing  cause  of  the  Gods] 
it  shines  forth,  and  is  co-expanded,  and  is  co-divided  with  the  multitude 
of  powers.  We  may  therefore  from  these  things  survey  the  differences  of 
the  three  monads,  in  a  manner  conformable  to  the  Platonic  hypotheses. 
But  if  indeed  science  pertains  to  the  first  monad,  temperance  to  the 
second,  and  justice  to  the  third,  from  these  things  also  the  triad  will  be 
perfectly  apparent  And  does  not  science  which  is  stable,  and  the  uni- 
form intelligence  of  wholes,  and  which  at  the  same  time  is  consubsistent 
with  intelUgibles,  pertain  to  the  power  which  is  united  to  the  intelligible 
fisither,  and  which  does  not  proceed,  nor  separate  its  union  from  the  deity 
of  that  father  ?  but  does  not  the  genus  of  justice  pertain  to  the  power 
which  is  divided^  which  separates  the  intellectual  genera,  leads  the 
intelligible  multitude  into  order,  and  imparts  by  illumination  distribution 
according  to  desert  ?  And  does  not  the  genus  of  temperance  pertain  to 
the  power  which  is  the  medium  of  both  these,  which  is  converted  to 
itself,  and  possesses  the  common  bond  of  this  triad  ?   For  the  harmonic, 

'  For  tixmv  I  rea4  cuum.  *  u  e.  Perfection  proceeding  every  where. 

JProc.  Vol*  I.  2  K 


Digitized  by 


Google 


258  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

and  a  communication  with  the  extremes  according  to  reason^  are  the 
illustrious  good  of  this  middle  power. 

That  we  may  not  therefore  be  prolix,  what  has  been  said  being  suffi* 
cient  to  remind  us  of  the  meaning  of  Plato,  those  three  deities  are 
celebrated  by  us,  which  dividing  the  supercelestial  place,  are  indeed  all 
of  them  intelligible  as  in  intellectuals,  and  are,  likewise  summits,  and 
collective  of  all  things  into  one  intelligible  union.  One  of  these  however 
is  so  stably;  another  generatively ;  and  another  convertively,  possessing 
a  primary  effective  power  in  intellectuals.  For  one  of  them  indeed, 
unites  the  monads  of  all  the  Gods  and  collects  them  about  the  intelli- 
gible ;  bill  another  effects  this  about  the  progressions  of  the  Gods;  and 
another  about  their  conversions.  All  of  them  however  at  the  same  time 
collect  into  one  the  whole  of  an  hyparxis  which  always  abides,  proceeds, 
and  returns.  Hence  also  Plato  elevates  the  Gods  that  are  distributed  in 
the  world,  to  this  one  place,  and  converts  them  energizing  about  this  as 
collective  of  the  whole  orders  of  the  Gods  to  the  participation  of  intelli- 
gibles.  These  monads,  therefore,  educe  intelligible  forms,  fill  them  with 
the  participation  of  divine  union,  and  again  recall  the  natures  that  have 
proceeded,  and  conjoin  them  to  intelligibles.  Concerning  this  whole 
triad  however,  what  has  been  said  may  suffice. 


CHAPTER   XVn. 


It  remains  therefore,  that  we  should  pass  to  the  discussion  of  Adrastia, 
Socrates  indicating  that  she  possesses  her  kingdom  in  this  place.  For  that 
which  defines  the  measures  of  a  blameless  life  to  souls  from  the  vision  of 
these  inteUigible  goods,  is  certainly  there  allotted  its  first  evolution  into 
light.    For  the  elevating  cause,  being  secondary  to  the  objects  of  desire, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVII.  OF  PLATO.  359 

may  be  able  to  raise  both  itself  and  other  things  to  the  supercelestial 
place,  through  conversion.  But  that  which  defines  and  measures  the 
fruits  of  the  vision  of  the  intelligible  to  souls,  since  it  has  its  hyparxis  in 
the  intelligible,  imparts  by  illumination  beatitude  to  them  from  thence. 
It  is  established  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  in  that  place.  But  it  rules 
over  all  the  divine  laws  uniformly,  from  on  high,  as  far  as  to  the  last  of 
things.  It  likewise  binds  to  the  one  sacred  law  of  itself,  all  the  sacred 
laws,  viz.  the  intellectual,  the  supermundane,  and  the  mundane.  Whe- 
ther therefore,  there  are  certain  Saturnian  laws,  as  Socrates  in  the  Gorgies 
indicates  there  are,  when  he  says,  "  The  law  therefore  which  was  in  the 
time  of  Saturn  is  now  also  among  the  Gods ;"  or  whether  there  are  Jovian 
laws,  as  the  Athenian  guest  asserts  there  are,  when  he  says,  **  But 
justice  follows  Jupiter,  which  is  the  avenger  of  those  that  desert  the 
divine  law  f  or  whether  there  are  fatal  laws,  as  Timaeus  teaches  there 
are,  when  he  says,  ^^  That  the  demiurgus  announced  to  souls  the 
laws  of  fate  /' — of  all  these  the  sacred  law  of  Adrastia  is  connective 
according  to  one  intelligible  simplicity,  and  at  the  same  time  imparts  ex- 
istence to  all  of  them^  and  the  measures  of  power.  And  if  it  be  requisite 
to  relate  my  own  opinion,  the  inevitable  guardian  power  of  this  triad,  and 
the  immutable  comprehension  of  order  pervading  every  where,  presubsist 
in  this  goddess.  For  these  three  deities  not  only  unfold  and  collect  all 
things,  but  they  are  also  guardians  according  to  the  Oracle  of  the  works  of 
the  father,  and  of  one  intelligible  intellect. 

This  guardian  power  therefore,  the  sacred  law  of  Adrastia  indicates, 
which  nothing  is  able  to  escape.  For  with  respect  to  the  laws  of  Fate, 
not  only  the  Gods  are  superior  to  them,  but  also  partial  souls,  when  they 
live  according  to  intellect,  and  give  themselves  up  to  the  light  of  provi- 
dence. And  the  Saturnian  Gods  are  essentially  exempt  from  the  Jovian 
laws,  and  the  connective  and  perfective  Gods  from  the  Saturnian  laws ; 
but  all  things  are  obedient  to  the  sacred  law  of  Adrastia,  and  all  the  dis- 
tributions of  the  Gods,  and  all  measures  and  guardianships  subsist  on 
i^count  of  this.  By  Orpheus  also,  she  is  said  to  guard  the  de^liur^us  of 
the  universe,  and  receiving  brazen  drumsticks,  and  a  drum  made  from  the 
skin  of  a  goat,  to  produce  so  loud  a  sound  as  to  convert  all  the  Gods  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ggQ  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV- 

herself*  AihI  Socrates  imitating  this  fabulous  souod  which  extends  a 
certain  proclamation '  to  all  things,  in  a  similar  manner  produces  the  sa« 
cred  law  of  Adrastia  to  all  souls.  Por  he  says,  ^'  This  is  the  sacred  law 
of  Adrastia,  that  whatever  soul  has  perceived  any  thing  of  truth,  shall  be 
free  from  harm  till  another  period,^^  all  but  expressing  the  Orphic  sound 
through  this  proclamation,  and  uttering  this  as  a  certain  hymn  of  Adras* 
tia*  For  in  the  first  place  indeed,  he  calls  it  dftr/tMf,  a  sacred  law^  and  not 
¥9p»gy  a  law^  as  he  does  the  Saturnian  and  Jovian  laws*  For  d<rft»;  is  con- 
nected with  deity,  and  pertains  nK>re  to  intelligibles  [than  to  the  inteliec-^ 
tuals] ;  but  n^i^g  indicating  intellectual  distribution,  is  adapted  to  the  in- 
tellectual fathers.  And  in  the  second  place,  he  speaks  of  it  in  the  singular 
aind  not  in  the  plural  number,  as  Timaeus  does  of  the  fatal  laws.  In  the 
third  place  therefore,  he  extends  it  to  all  the  genera  of  souls,  and  evinces 
that  it  is  the  common  measure  of  their  happy  and  blessed  life,  and  the 
true  guard  of  those  souls  that  are  able  to  abide  on  high  free  from  all 
passivity.  For  such  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  ^^  And  the  soul  that  is 
able  to  do  this  always,  shall  always  be  free  from  harm.^'  This  sacred  law 
therefore,  comprehends  all  the  undefiled  life  of  divine  souls,  and  the  tem- 
poral blessedness  of  partial  souls.  And  it  guards  the  former  indeed  in- 
telligibly, but  measures  the  latter  by  the  vision  of  intelligible  goods.  And 
thus  much  concerning  Adrastia. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


With  respect  to  what  remain?  therefore,  we  shall  summarily  say,  that 
the  supercelestial  place  is  the  first  triad  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same 
time  inteHectuai  Grods,  possessing  three  peculiarities,  the  unfolding  into 

'  For  KnptfyiiMTi,  it  if  requisite  to  read  Kt^uyfiM  n. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIX.  OF  PLATO.  261 

light,  the  oonective,  and  the  defensive.  It  likewise  coniprelieiMls  all  these 
intelligibly,  and  in  an  unknown  manner,  conjoining  indeed  intellectuals  to 
intelligiUes,  but  calling  forth  the  prolific  powers  of  intelligifates#  re- 
ceiving in  itself  the  plenitude  of  forms  from  the  intelligible  paradigms,  and 
producing  its  own  meadow  from  the  fontal  summit  which  is  there.  But 
from  the  one  intellect  it  gives  subsistence  to  the  three  virtues^  perfects  all 
itself  by  intelligible  impressions,  and  in  its  in^Sstble  bosoms  receives  the 
whole  of  intelligible  light.  At  one  and  the  same  time  also  it  abides  in  the 
occult  nature  of  the  intelligible  Gods,  and  proceeds  inteltigibly  from 
thence,  shines  forth  to  the  view  of  intellectuals,  and  converts  and  draws 
upward  by  ineffable  powers  all  the  images  of  its  proper  unioD  which  it  has 
disseminated  in  every  thing.  To  this  place  likewise  it  is  necessary  that 
we  should  mystically  approach,  leaving  in  the  earth  aU  the  generation- 
producing  life,  and  the  corporeal  nature,  with  which  on  coming  hither  we 
were  surrounded  as  with  a  wall,  but  exciting  al<me  iAie  summit  of  the  soul 
to  the. participation  of  total  truths  and  the  plenitude  of  inteUi^k  nutri- 
ment. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


After  this  intelligible,  and  unknown  triad  however,  which  presides 
over  all  the  intellectual '  genera^let  us  survey  the  triad  which  ccmnectedly 
contains  the  bond  of  them,  intelligibly  and  at  the  same  time  intellectually. 
For  it  is  necessary  that  prior  to  intellect  and  the  intellectual  Gods,  the 
cause  of  connectedly  containing  should  be  in  these  Gods ;  and  that  this 
being  established  in  the  middle  of  the  intdUgible  and  intellectual  order, 
should  extend  to  all  the  divine  multitudes,  all  the  genera  of  beings,  and 


'  For  vwfTtgv,  it  i$  necessary  to  read  fotpm. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


g6'i  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

all  the  divisions  of  the  world.  For  what  is  it  which  primarily  connects 
things  ?  If,  as  some  say,  the  nature  of  spirit  and  local  motion,  body  it- 
self which  is  connective  of  other  things  will  require  connexion.  For  every 
body  according  to  its  own  composition  is  dissipable  and  divisible ;  which 
also  the  Elean  guest  indicating  to  those  who  make  corporeal  principles, 
says  that  the  essence  which  is  so  much  celebrated  by  them,  is  broken  and 
dissipated.  Body  therefore,  is  not  naturally  adapted  to  be  connective  of 
other  things,  nor  even  if  a  power  of  this  kind  pertained  to  bodies,  would 
spirit  be  able  to  afford  us  this  power,  because  it  is  always  defluous  and 
dissipated,  and  diffusing  itself  beyond  that  which  bounds  it  But  if  we 
suppose  that  habits  and  connective  forms  which  are  divided  about  bodies 
illuminate  their  subjects  with  connexion,  it  is  perfectly  necessary  that  they 
should  effect  this  by  being  present  with  them ;  but  how  will  these  habits 
and  forms  connect  themselves.'^  For  it  is  difficult  to  devise  how  this  can 
be  effected.  For  these  being  distributed  about  material  bulks,  and  di- 
vided together  with  their  subjects,  require  a  boundary  and  connexion. 
But  tliey  are  not  naturally  adapted  to  be  bounded  or  connected  from 
themselves;  because  they  have  not  an  essence  self-begotten  and  self- 
subsistent.  That  however,  which  neither  produces  nor  perfects  itself, 
cannot  connect  itself.  And  moreover,  every  habit,  and  every  material 
form  is  alter- motive,  and  depends  on  another  more  ancient  cause,  and  on 
this  account  is  inseparable  from  subjects,  not  being  able  to  verge  to  itself. 
But  if  abandoning  these,  we  should  assert  that  souls  which  are  incor- 
poreal and  self-begotten,  are  the  first  efficient  causes  of  connexion,  where 
shall  we  place  the  partible  and  at  the  same  time  impartible  nature  of  souls, 
that  which  is  mixed  from  the  partible  and  impartible,  that  which  partici- 
pates of  the  genera  of  being,  and  that  which  is  divided  into  harmonic 
reasons  ?  For  souls  indeed,  connect  bodies  and  natures,  because  they 
participate  of  an  impartible  peculiarity ;  but  they  are  in  want  of  another 
connective  nature  which  may  impart  the  first  principle  of  mixture  to  the 
genera,  and  of  connexion  to  divided  reasons.  For  the  self-motive  nature 
of  souls  being  transitive,  and  extended  to  time,  requires  that  which  may 
connect  its  one  life,  and  may  render  it  total  and  indivisible.  For  the 
whole  which  is  connective  of  parts,  exists  prior  to  parts ;  since  the  whole 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIX.  OF  PLATO.  263 

which  consists  of  parts  receives  connexion  introduced  from  something 
diflferent  from  itself.  But  if  proceeding  with  the  reasoning  power  beyond 
souls,  we  survey  intellect,  whether  the  intellect  which  is  participated,  or  if 
you  are  willing,  that  which  is  imparticipable  and  divine,  and  in  short,  if 
we  survey  at  once  the  intellectual  genus  of  the  Gods,  if  this  is  primarily 
connective  of  beings,  we  shall  find  also  in  this  all-various  multitude,  divi- 
sions of  genera,  and  as  Socrates  says,  many  and  blessed  visions,  and  dis* 
cussive  energies.  For  the  separation  of  divine  natures,  and  the  variety 
of  forms,  present  themselves  to  the  view  in  intellectuals,  and  also  fabulous 
sections  and  generative  powers.  How  therefore,  can  that  which  connects 
be  primarily  here,  where  the  divisive  genus  shines  forth?  And  how  is  it 
possible  that  intellectual  multitude  should  not  refer  to  another  more  an- 
cient cause  the  participation  of  its  proper  connexion  ?  For  intellectual 
multitude  is  that  which  is  primarily  connected  (since  it  is  that  which  is 
primarily  divided,  and  that  which  requires  connexion  is  divisible,  but  the 
indivisible  itself  is  beyond  the  connective  hyparxis),  but  it  is  not  that 
which  primarily  connects.  For  every  thing  which  is  connected,  is  con* 
nected  by  another  thing  which  primarily  possesses  the  power  of  con- 
nexion. It  is  evident  therefore,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  the  con- 
nective order  of  beings  is  established  prior  to  the  intellectual  Gods. 

The  intelligible  indeed,  and  occult  hyparxis,  is  the  supplier  of  union 
to  all  things,  as  proximately  subsisting  after  the  one,  and  being  indivisible 
and  uniform.  But  connexion  is  the  contraction  of  multitude  into  impar- 
tible communion  ;  on  which  account  it  subsists  as  secondary  to  intelligi- 
bles.  For  the  medium  which  was  there  was  intelligible,  and  the  united 
primarily-efficient  cause  of  connexion.  The  connective  however,  of  in- 
telligibles  and  intellectuals,  imitates  the  unific  power  of  intelligibles.  For 
there  the  three  triadic  monads  were  the  unions  of  wholes ;  one  of  them 
indeed  according  to  transcendency;  another  according  to  the  middle 
centre ;  and  another  according  to  conversion.  But  in  the  intelligible  and 
at  the  same  time  intellectual  orders,  these  three  triads  are  the  second  after 
those  unions,  and  are  connascent  with  multitude.  Hence  one  of 
these  triads  is  collective ;  another  is  connective  of  multitude ;  and  another 
is  of  a  perfective  nature.     For  that  which  is  collected,  that  which  is  con- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


264  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

nected^ '  and  that  which  is  perfected,  is  multitude.  Whether  therefore  it 
is  intellectual,  or  supermundane,  or  mundane,  or  any  other  multitude,  it 
is  collected,  connected,  and  petfected  through  these  three  triads.  And 
when  cdlected  indeed,  it  is  elevated  to  the  union  of  intelligibles,  and  is 
firmly  established  in  them.  When  it  is  connected,  it  abides  impartible 
and  undissipated  in  its  progeny.  And  when  it  is  perfected,  it  receives 
completion  from  its  proper  parts  or  powers. 

Since  however,  it  is  necessary  that  beings  abiding,  proceeding  and 
returning  should  enjoy  this  triple  providence,  there  are  indeed  three 
preexistent  collective  monads,  three  connective,  and  three  perfective  . 
monads.  And  we  do  not  say  this,  that  on  account  of  the  good  of 
secondary  natures,  first  natures  are  thus  divided,  and  preside  over  so 
many  orders  and  powers;  but  they  indeed  are  always  the  primary 
causes  of  good  to  things  subordinate,  while  we  firom  inferior  natures  recur 
to  the  causes  of  wholes.  The  intelligible  therefore,  and  intellectual 
triads,  perfect  things  triadically,  and  always  connect  and  collect  them 
into  union.  But  the  intelligible  monads  generate  without  separation  and 
unically,  their  permanencies,  progressions  and  conversions.  With  respect 
to  other  things  however,  we  have  partly  spoken,  and  shall  again  partly 
speak  concerning  them. 


CHAPTER  XX, 


Let  us  therefore  speak  at  present  concerning  the  connective  triad. 
This  then,  Socrates,  in  the  Fhaedrus,  calls  the  celestial  circulation. 
Because  indeed,  it  possesses  the  middle  centre  of  imparticipable  life,  and 

^  '  For  0^y9p(ov,  it  i$  necessary  to  read  ^ir/fyjmf. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX.  OP  PLATO.  265 

is  that  which  is  piost  vital  itself  of  life,  he  calls  it  circulation,  as  compre- 
hending circularly,  and  on  all  sides  all  other  live?,  and  divine  intellections. 
For  on  account  of  this,  souls  also  which  are  elevated  to  it,  are  perfected 
according  to  intellection,  and  are  conjoined  with  intelligible  spectacles. 
The  circulation  of  the  heaven,  however,  is  alwaj^s  established  after  the  same 
manner.  For  it  is  an  eternal,  whole,  one,  and  united  intelligence.  But 
the  circulation  of  souls  is  effected  through  time,  subsists  in  a  tnore 
partial  manner,  and  is  not  an  at-onc^-collected  comprehension  of  intel- 
ligibles.  Souls,  therefore,  are  carried  round  in  a  circle,  and  are  restored 
to  their  pristine  state,  the  celestial  circulation  always  remaining  the  same. 
Because,  however,  it  gives  completion  to  the  bond  of  the  intelligible  and 
intellectual  Gods,  and  connects  all  the  orders  in  their  abiding,  pro- 
ceeding, and  returning,  Socrates  calls  it  celestial.  For  Timaeus  says, 
that  this  [sensible]  heaven  also,  compresses  on  all  sides  the  elements  that 
arq  under  it,  and  that  on  this  account,  no  place  is  left  for  a  vacuum! 
As,  therefore,  the  apparent  heaven  is  connective  of  all  things  that  are 
under  it,  and  is  the  cause  of  continuity,  coherence  and  sympathy,  (for 
the  intervention  of  a  vacuum  would  interrupt  the  continuity  of  things, 
and  the  subversion  of  this  continuity  would  destroy  the  sympathy  of 
bodies)  thus  also  that  intellectual  heaven,  binds  iall  the  multitudes  of 
beings  into  an  impartible  communion,  illuminating  each  with  an  appro^ 
priate  portion  of  connexion.  For  intellect  participates  of  the  connective 
cause  in  one  way,  the  nature'of  soul  in  another,  and  a  corporeal  state  of 
being  in  another.  For  through  the  highest  participation  of  connexion, 
intellect  is  impartible;  but  through  second  measures  of  participation, 
soul  is  partible  and  impartible,  according  to  one  mixture ;  and  through 
an  ultimate  diminution,  bodies  possessing  a  partible  hypostasis,  at  the 
same  time  remain  connected,  .and  do  not  in  consequence  of  being  dissi- 
pated perish,  but  enjoy  their  own  division  and  imbecility.  The  whole 
of  the  connective  triad  therefore,  is  denominated  heaven  according  to  the 
hyparxes  of  itself;  but  the  breadth  of  life  which  is  spread  under  it  is 
called  circulation.  For  in  things  apparent  to  sense,  the  period  of  the 
heavens  is  motion,  and  is  as  it  were  the  life  of  body. 

Proc.  Vol.  J.  2  L 


Digitized  by 


Google 


$66  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 


CHAPTER  XXL 


If  however  it  be  requisite  to  discover  the  triadic  nature  of  it  from 
what  has  been  laid  down,  we  must  employ  the  mode  of  analogy.  Since 
therefore  Plato  himself  calls  the  back  of  the  heaven  one  thing,  and  its 
profundity  another,  it  is  evident  that  the  celestial  arch  is  the  third  thing ; 
for  the  arch  which  is  under  this,  he  directly  calls  subcelestiaL  But  as 
we  say  that  the  supercelestial  place  is  established  above  the  back  of  the 
heaven,  so  likewise  we  must  grant  that  the  subcelestial  is  diflferent  from 
the  celestial  arch.  For  the  heaven  is  bounded,  supernally  indeed  by  the 
back,  but  beneath  by  the  arch.  And  it  is  comprehended  indeed  by  the 
supercelestial  place,  but  it  comprehends  the  subcelestial  arch.  It  is 
evident  therefore  from  these  things,  that  the  heaven  presents  itself  to  our 
view  as  triadic,  according  to  its  back  indeed,  connectedly  containing  all 
things  in  one  simpUcity ;  but  according  to  its  arch  bounding  the  whole 
triad ;  and  according  to  its  profundity,  itself  proceeding  into  itself,  and 
constituting  the  middle  breadth  of  connexion  and  coherence.  The  back 
however,  of  the  whole  celestial  order,  is  an  intelligible  deity,  being 
perhaps  allotted  from  hence  this  appellation.  But  it  is  intelligible  as  in 
the  connective  triad,  externally  compressing,  and  connectedly  compre- 
hending all  the  kingdom  of  the  heaven.  It  likewise  imparts  to  all  the 
Gods  by  illumination  a  uniform  and  simple  comprehension  of  secondary 
natures,  and  is  supernally  filled  with  intelligible  union.  Hence  also, 
divine  souls  being  led  through  all  the  celestial  profundity,  stand  indeed 
on  the  back  of  the  heaven,  but  the  circulation  carries  them  round  as  they 
stand ;  and  thus  they  survey  what  is  called  the  supercelestial  place. 
The  station  therefore,  is  the  establishment  of  souls  in  the  intelligible 
watch  tower  of  the  heaven,  extending  to  souls  sameness,  undefiled  power, 
and  uodeviating  intellection.  But  the  circumduction  is  the  participation 
of  a  life  full  of  vigour,  and  the  most  acute  energy.     And  the  common 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  XXI.  OF  PLATO.  267 

presence  of  both  these,  comprehends  the  prolific  energy,  the  quiet  mo- 
tion^  and  the  stable  intellection  of  intelligibles.  But  the  celestial  pro- 
fundity, is  the  one  continuity  of  the  whole  triad,  and  the  middle  deity 
which  conjoins  the  whole*  celestial  order,  proceeding  indeed  from  the 
intelligible  comprehension,  but  ending  in  the  celestial  arch,  which  defines 
the  boundary  of  the  whole  of  the  heaven.  There  is  therefore,  one  union 
and  connexion  of  all  this  triad,  and  an  indissoluble  progression  from  the 
bacjk  as  far  as  to  the  arch,  through  this  middle  deity  which  is  connascent 
with  both  the  extremes,  and  which  unfolds  indeed  the  connective  mul- 
titude, but  on  each  side  is  bounded  by  the  extremes ;  one  of  which 
comprehends  it  supernally,  but  the  other  from  beneath  bounds  its  pro- 
gression. 

The  celestial  arch  therefore  remains,  which  is  the  boundary  beneath 
of  the  triad,  and  this  is  also  the  case  with  the  intellect  which  is  in  it, 
being  filled  indeed  by  life,  but  imited  by  the  intelligible,  and  converting 
all  the  triad  to  its  principle.  For  the  arch  also  is  similar  to  the  back  of 
the  heaven,  though  according  to  interval  it  is  less.  Through  subjection 
therefore  it  is  diminished  ;  but  through  similitude  it  is  converted  to  the 
celestial  summit.  And  this  is  the  celestial  intellect  which  is  the  proxi- 
mate sunocheus^  of  the  subcelestial  arch.  Hence  each'  arch  is  called  the 
intellectual  boundary  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods.  The 
whole  connective  triad  therefore,  is  allotted  such  a  division  as  this ;  the 
back  (to  varrov)  according  to  the  intelligible  (xara  ra  wn^roif) ;  the  profun- 
dity according  to  life ;  and  the  arch  according  to  intellect.  But  the 
whole  of  it  is  one  and  continued,  because  that  which  connects  all  other 
things,  ought  much  .more  to  be  connective  of  itself.  For  each 
peculiarity  of  the  Gods  begins  its  energy  from  itself;  the  peculiarity 
indeed,  which  is  collective,  fixing  itself  collectively  in  the  highest  union ; 
that  vhich  is  convertive  of  wholes,  converting  itself  to  the  principle ; 
and  that  which  is  undefiled  preserving  itself  prior  to  other  things  pure 
from  matter.     Hence  the  connective  peculiarity  also,  prior  to  its  parti- 

'  For  rm  oXtov  it  is  necessary  to  read  niv  oAi)y. 

*  i.  e.  That  which  connectedly  contains. 

'  for  iKctTifov  I  read  txctnga,  in  order  that  it  may  agree  with  xiftg. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


908  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

cipants,  connects  itself  intelligibly  and  intellectually,  and  through  this 
connexion  the  nature  of  the  heaven  is  asserted  to  be  one  and  continued. 
For  all  the  triad  converges  to  itself,  and  preserves  its  proper  wholeness 
united,  and  most  similar  to  itself  according  to  nature.     And  the  arch 
indeed,  proximately  connects  all  intellectuals,  and  compresses  them  on 
aU  sides.     But  prior  to  this,  the  celestial  profundity  itself,  which  also 
comprehends  the  arch,  binds  together  the  whole  orders.     And  prior  to 
these,  the  celestial  back  uniformly  comprehends  according  to  one  ambit 
of  simplicity,  all  the  celestial  kingdom  itself,  and  all  things  that  are  con^ 
tained  under  it,  and  binds  them  to  themselves,  by  connective  power  and 
hyparxis.     For  in  the  things  also  that  are  apparent  to  sense,  the  concave 
circumference  of  the  heavens^  proximately  compresses  the  elements,  and 
does  not  suffer  them  in   their  indefinite  motions  on  all  sides,   to  be 
dissipated  and  blown  away.     And  still  prior  to  these,  the  celestial  bulk 
strongly  compresses  and  impels  all  things  to  the  middle,  and  leaves  no 
void  place.     But  there  is  one  comprehension  of  all  these,  viz.  the  back 
of  the  heavens,  which  is  the  cause  to  the  heavens  of  similitude,  and  to 
the  elements  of  contact  with  the  heavens.     For  the  smooth  and  equable 
nature  of  the  back  of  the  heavens  as  Timaeus  says,  makes  the  whole  of 
heaven  similar  to   itself;   and  always   the  natures    which   comprehend 
are  connective  of  the  natures  that  are  comprehended.     It  is  necessary 
therefore  from  things  that  are  apparent,  to  transfer  the  similitude  to  the 
father  of  the  intdlectual  Gods,  Heaven,  and  to  survey  how  he  is  both 
one  and  triple,  supemally  indeed,  and  beneath,  possessing  the  intelligible 
and  intellect ;  but  according  to  the  middle  possessing  life,  which  being 
the  cause  of  progressions  and  intervals,  and  generative  powers,  we  have 
properly  arranged  according  to  interval  under  the  celestial  profundity ; " 
since  Plato  himself  also  calls  the  summit  the  back.     ^^  For  those,'"  says 
he,  "  that  are  called  immortals,  when  proceeding  beyond  the  heaven 
they  arrive  at  the  summit,  stand  on  the  back  of  the  heaven.""     He  calls 
therefore,  the  summit  of  the  celestial  order,  and  beyond,  the  back  of  the 
heaven ;    which  things  are  in  a  remarkable  manner  the  prerogatives  of 

^  Viz.  aaibmiing  tke  oeleatial  pvofundkj. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXII.  OF  PLATO.  269 

the  first  of  the  Synoches.     For  connectedly  containing  all  things  in  the 
one  summit  of  his  hyparxis,  according  to  the  Oracle,  he  wholly  exists 
beyond,  and  is  united  to  the  supercelestial  place,  and  to  the  inefiaUe 
power  of  it,  being  enclosed  on  all  sides  by  it,  and  shutting  himself  in  the 
uniform  comprehension  of  intelligibles.      For  what  difference  is  there 
between  saying  that  the  first  of  the  Synoches  is  shut  in  the  intelligible 
place  of  survey,  and  evincing  that  it  is  proximatdy  comprehended  by 
the  supercelestial  place,  which  was  intelligible,  but  expanded  in  intel- 
lectuals ?    If  however,  that  which  is  beyond  is  the  first,  the  summit  is 
evidently  coarranged  with  the  rest,  and  is  exempt  from  them.     But  if 
the  first  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  being  established   according  to  the 
intelligible  summit,  and  imparting  by  illumination  to  the  other  Gods, 
contact  with  the  intelligible,  and   with  the  paternal  port,  it  is  indeed 
necessary  that  there  should  be  a  middle  and  an  extremity,   the  one 
according  to  the  celestial  profundity,  but  the  other  according  to  the 
termination  of  the  whole  circulation.     If  however  the  circulation  of  the 
whole  of  the  heaven  is  one  and  continued,  the  peculiarity  of  this  order 
must  be  assigned  as  the  cause  of  this.    For  being  connective  of  the  whole 
orders  of  the  Gods,  and  prior  to  other  things  of  itself,  and  being  as  it 
were  the  centre  and  bond  of  the  divine  genera,  it  in  the  first  place  binds 
and  connects  itself,  and  extends  itself  to  one  life.     The  heaven  therefore 
is  one  and  at  the  same  time  triple,  and  proceeds  into  three  monads, 
being  both  unapparent  and  apparent,  and  that  which  is  between  these, 
and  imitating  the  intelligible  Gods  who  subside  into  h^telligible  triads. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


If  you  are  willing  hoMcver  from  what  is  written  in  the  Cratylus,  to 
see  the  peculiarity  of  this  order,  in  the  first  place^  let  this  be  considered 


Digitized  by 


Google 


270  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV- 

by  you  as  an  argument  of  the  Synoche  established  in  the  middle,  that  a 
twofold  habitude  of  it  is  delivered,  one,  towards  intelligibles,  but  the 
other  towards  intellectuals.  For  it  is  said  to  see  the  things  above,  and 
to  generate  a  pure  intellect  Hence,  of  intelligibles  it  is  the  intelligence, 
but  of  intellectuals  the  intelligible.  For  the  cause  of  intellect  subsists 
prior  to  an  intellectual  cause,  and  that  which  is  at  once  both  these, 
especially  gives  completion  to  the  middle  order  of  intelligibles  and 
intellectuals.  For  the  collective  deity,  perceiving  intelligibles,  or  rather 
being  united  to  them,  does  not  primarily  give  subsistence  to  a  divine 
intellect.  And  the  perfective  deity,  producing  together  with  the  middle 
divinity  intellectuals,  proximately  perceives  intellectually  the  celestial 
order,  and  not  the  intelligibles  prior  to  the  heaven.  But  the  middle 
divinity  alone,  occupying  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  centre,  equally 
indeed  extends  to  both,  but  perceiving  inteUigibles  intellectually,  it  is 
the  cause  of  intellectuals  intelligibly.  Since  however,  habitude  to  its 
causes  precedes  the  power'  in  it  which  is  generative  of  intellectuals, 
Socrates  beginning  from  this  habitude,  delivers  also  a  second  power  as 
suspended  from  it.  But  sight  directed  to  things  above  is  very  prop^ly 
assigned  the  appellation  of  celestial^  as  seeing  the  things  above.  Thi^ 
therefore,  perfectly  defines  for  us  a  habitude  more  ancient  than  the 
connectedly-containing  order,  jointly  assuming  it  to  be  intellectual  as 
with  reference  to  intelligibles,  and  sight  as  with  reference  to  the  objects 
of  sight,  though  it  intellectually  perceives  itself,  and  is  intelligible  in 
itself.  But  the  intelligible  of  it,  as  with  reference  to  that  which  is  primarily 
intelligible,  is  allotted  an  intellectual  order.  What  follows  however, 
unfolds  the  habitude  of  this  middle  to  intellectuals.  (For  Socrates  adds,) 
**  Whence  also,  O  Hc^rmogenes,  those  who  are  conversant  with  things  on 
high  say  that  Heaven  generates  a  pure  intellect,  and  that  this  name  is 
properly  assigned  to  it."  The  order  therefore,  of  the  Heaven  is  expanded 
as  a  middle  in  the  middle  intellectual  and  intelligible  Gods,  compre* 
bending  at  once  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  in  one  impartible 
connexion,  subsisting  similarly  with  respect  to  each  of  these,  and  being 

■  for  iw^iM»¥  it  is  necetsarjr  to  read  iwofiwi. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.   XXII.  OF  PLATO.  371 

equally  distant  from  the  first  intellectuals,  and  the  unical  intelligibles. 
Hence  it  is  said  to  perceive  intellectually  the  things  above,  and  thus  to 
produce  (a  pure)  intdlect. 

Assuming  this  therefore,  in  the  first  place  from  what  has  been  laid 
down,  in  the  next  place  we  should  attend  to  this,  that  the  celestial  order 
being  triple,  and  the  whole  of  it  intellectually  perceiving  intelligibles, 
and  producing  intellectuals,  the  first  monad  indeed  in  an  eminent 
manner  intellectually  perceives  intelligibles.  For  it  mingles  itself  with 
intelligibles,  knows  intelligible  intellect,  is  united  to  the  natures  prior  to 
itself,  and  is  impartible  as  in  impartibles,  super-expanding  itself  towards 
intelligible  simplicity.  But  the  third  monad  is  especially  generative  of 
intellectuals;  since  it  is  the  intellect  of  the  whole  connective  triad. 
And  with  the  Orphic  theologists  also.  Heaven  the  father  of  Saturn  is  the 
third.  But  the  middle  monad  produces  together  with  the  third  the 
intellectual  order  of  the  Gods ;  but  is  conjoined  together  with  the  first 
to  intelligibles,  and  is  filled  indeed  with  intelligible  union  from  the  first, 
but  fills  the  third  *  with  prolific  powers.  Do  you  not  see  therefore,  how 
Plato  through  the  peculiarity  of  the  extremes,  unfolds  to  us  the  whole 
celestial  order?  Conjoining  indeed,  the  intelligible  hyparxis  of  it  to 
intelligibles ;  but  its  intellectual  hyparxis  to  intellectuals ;  and  affording 
us  the  means  of  collecting  its  hyparxis  which  is  the  middle  of  both  these, 
and  which  proceeds  according  to  a  common  peculiarity.  For  if  you 
likewise  wish  to  assume  this  from  what  has  been  said,  the  celestial  light 
is  conjoined  to  the  light  of  intelligibles.  For  sight  is  nothing  else  than 
light.  The  middle  order  therefore,  by  its  own  light,  and  by  the  divine 
summit  of  itself  is  conjoined  to  the  first  natures ;  but  by  an  intellectual 
nature,  and  the  boundary  of  the  whole  triad,  it  generates  intellect, 
and  all  the  unpolluted  deity  of  intellectuals.  For  it  does  not  produce 
intellect  by  itself,  but  in  conjunction  with  purity.  For  this  Socrates 
himself  asserts :  **  Whence  also,  they  say,  that  a  pure  intellect  is  gene- 
rated by  it.*'  Hence  the  celestial  order  is  the  first-eflficient  cause  of  the 
intellectual  hyparxis,  and  of  undefiled  power.     If  however  it  is  necessary 

'  For  ir^omiy  it  is  necetiarj  to  read  r;»Ti9y. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S7S 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 


that  purity  should  not  be  inherent  in  intellect  from  accident,  it  is  thfi 
deity  of  those  beings  that  are  exempt  from  secondary  natures,  and  is  the 
supplier  of  immutable  power,  which  the  mighty  Heaven  producing  in 
conjunction  with  intellect,  is  at  the  same  time  the  'efficient  cause  of  the 
Gods  who  are  the  sources  of  purity,  and  of  the  intellectual  fathers. 
These  indications  therefore  of  the  truth  concerning  the  connectire  Gods, 
may  also  be  assumed  from  the  Cratylus. 


CHAPTER  XXm. 


It  remains  therefore  that  in  conformity  to  what  is  written  in  the 
Phaedrus,  we  should  survey  the  subcelestial  arch,  and  the  pecuharity  of 
the  Gods  that  are  there.  Before  however  we  begin  the  doctrine  con- 
cerning it,  I  wish  to  premise  thus  much,  that  some  of  the  most  celebrated 
of  the  interpreters  prior  to  us,  conceiving  that  this  subcelestial  arch  is  a 
divine  order  arranged  under  the  heaven,  have  thought  fit  to  rank  it 
immediately  after  the  first  God,  caUing  the  first  God  Heaven.  But 
others  have  arranged  both  the  heaven,  and  the  subcelestial  arch  in  the 
breadth  of  intelligibles.  For  the  Asinaean  philosopher  indeed  [Theodorus] 
being  persuaded  by  Plotinus,  calls  that  which  proximately  prdceeds  from 
the  inefiable,  the  subcelestial  arch,  as  in  his  treatise  concerning  names  he 
philosophizes  about  these  things.  But  the  great  lamblichus  conceiving 
the  mighty  heaven  to  be  a  certain  order  of  the  intelligible  Gods,  (and  in 
one  place  he  considers  it  to  be  the  same  with  the  demiurgus,)  asserts 
that  the  order  proximately  established  under  the  heaven,  and  as  it  were 
begirding  it,  is  the  subcelestial  arch.  And  these  things  he  has  written  in 
his  Commentaries  on  the  Phaedrus,  Let  ho  one  therefore  think  that  we 
make  any  innovation  concerning  the  theology  of  this  order,  and  that  we 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CMAP.  XXIII.  OF  PLATO.  273 

are  the  ^rst  wlio  divide  tlie  subceleBtial  arch  from  the  heavea;  but  tliat 
we  are  principalij  persuaded  by  Plato,  idio  -dutiiiguislies  these  thiee 
orders,  the  «upercelestial  place,  the  celestial  circulation,  and  the  subce- 
lestial  arch;  and  that  after  Plato,  we  are  peraoftdfed  by  those  who 
investigate  his  theory  in  a  divinely-inspired  manner,  viz.  by  lamblichus 
and  Theodorus.  For  why  is  it  necessary  to  speak  of  our  leader 
{Syrianus,]  who  was  truly  a  Bacchus,  [i.  e.  one  agitated  with  divine  fiiry,] 
and  who  in  a  remarkable  manner  was  full  of  deity  about  Plato,  and 
caused  as  far  as  to  us  the  admirable  nature  of  the  Platonic  theory,  and 
the  astonishment  with  which  it  is  attended,  to  shine  forth? 

He  therefore  in  his  treatise  on  the  concord  [of  Orpheus,  Pythagoras, 
ai>d  Plato,  has  most  perfectly  unfolded  the  peculiarity  of  this  order,  the 
suboeiestiad  arch.]  The  two  dbove-mentioned  wise  men,  however,  difier 
very  moch  from  eadb  oUier  in  their  theory.  For  Theodoras,  in  caRing 
the  first  cause  Heaven,  does  not  any  longer  permit  Heaven  to  be  sight 
perceiving  the  things  ^ote,  as  Socrates  in  the  Cratylus  etymologises  it 
to  be.  For  the  fiist  God  aehber  sees,  nor  is  si^t,  nor  is  inferior  to  any 
thing.  Neither  tfaerefope  does  Hieodorus  admit  this  explanation  of  the 
name,  nor  iloes  he  celebrate  tbe  supercelestial  place,  as  Socrates  does 
mider  the  influence  of  divine  inspiration.  For  there  is  neither  any  place, 
nor  hrteWgible  of  tkc  oncy  nor  any  multitude  of  forms,  nor  does  the  gent» 
of  sonls  ascend  beyond  the  first  God;  since  there  is  not  any  thing  beyond 
him.  But  the  divine  Itunblichus,  as  he  supposes  that  Heaven  subsists 
indefioibely  after  tbe  first  cause,  and  a»  he  has  not  delivered  the  peculiarity 
of  its  hyparxis,  he  is  indeed  pure  (torn  the  above-mentioned  doubts,  but 
he  should  teadh  us  what  the  celestial  order  is,  hmv  it  subsists,  and  wfot 
genus  of  Gods  prior  to  tbe  denmrgm  f^vm  completion  to  it.  He 
however  who  has  perfected  every  thing  [on  this  subject,]  and  has 
confirmed  aii  that'  he  has  said  by  invincible  arguments,  is  our  preceptor 
[Syriaoos,]  who  has  surveyed  all  the  orders  between  the  first  God, 
and  the  kingdom  of  tbe  heaven,  and  who  has  intellectually  beheld  the 
peculiarity  of  this  order,  and  has  delivered  to  us  his  mystics  the  acctrrate 
truth  concerning  it.  In  this  way  therefore,  our  fatiierB  and  grandfathers 
Pr^.  Vol.  I.  2  M 


Digitized  by 


Google 


274  ^^  'T^^  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

differ  from  each  other;    but  all  of  them  in  common' distinguish  the 
subcelestial  arch  from  the  celestial  circulation. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


This  therefore  must  also  be  supposed  by  us,  and  likewise  in  additum 
to  this,  that  this  order  of  Gods  (the  subcelestial  arch,)  is  proximately 
arranged  under  the  heaven.  Hence,  since  the  heaven  being  one  and 
triple,  is  allotted  the  connective  order,  but  the  supercelestial  place 
is  allotted  the  highest  order  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time 
intellectual  Gods,  it  is  undoubtedly  necessary  that  the  subcelestial 
arch  should  terminate  the  middle  progression  of  the  Gods,  should  close 
this  whole  order,  and  convert  it  to  its  principle,  and  that  it  should 
receive  an  order  which  is  secondary  indeed  to  the  heaven,  but  which  it 
convolves  to  the  highest  union,  and  should  be  connascently  conjoined 
with  the  middle  genera,  but  exist ,  prior  to  intellectuals.  For  these 
indeed  separate  their  kingdom  from  the  celestial  power;  but  the 
subcelestial  arch  is  united  to  the  heaven,  and  is  comprehended  by  the 
celestial  order.  Whence  also  it  is  denominated  subcelestial.  As  it  is 
conjoined  therefore,  to  the  celestial  circulation,  and  subsists  proximately 
from  it,  it  converts  all  secondary  natures  to  intelligibles,  and  perfects 
them  according  to  the  intellectual  place  of  survey.  For  since  the 
intellectual  Gods  are  generated  according  to  conversion,  and  are  con-* 
volved  to  themselves  according  to  one  spherical  union,  it  is  necessary 
that  the  perfective  empire  should  be  proximately  established  above 
them. 

Hence,  I  am  led  to  wonder  at  those  who  are  ignorant  of  this  divine 
order,  and  do  not  maintain  the  whole  fountain  of  perfection;  but  some 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIV.  OF  PLATO.  3175 

of  them  betake  themselves  to  entelechiasy  of  whom  we  admit  thus .  mxxdti 
alone,  that  they  also  conjoin  the  perfect  with  the  forai  of  connexion. 
They  are  ignorant  therefore,  of  the  perfection  which  is  Separate  from 
subjects,  willingly  embrace  the  resemblances  of  true  perfections,  and  are 
conversant  with  these.  Others  again  assign  soul  as  the  cause  of  per- 
fection, who  are  ignorant  that  they  do  not  vindicate  to  themselves  a 
perfection  preexisting  in  eternity,  and  who  begin  from  the  life  which 
energizes  according  to  time,  and  possesses  its  perfection  iri  periods.  It. 
is  necessary,  however,  that  a  perfection  the  whole  of  which  subsists  at 
once,  should  be  prior  to  that  which  is  divided,  and  that  stable  perfection 
should  be  prior  to  that  which  is  moved.  For  the  motion  itself  which  is 
according  to  time,  is  indigent  of  end,  and  of  the  desirable,  and  is  evolved 
about  it  according  to  parts.  In  the  third  place,  after  these,  others  recur  to 
intellect,  and  suppose  the  first  perfection  to  be  intellectual.  For  intellect 
indeed,  is  energy  and  intellectual  perfection ;  but  it  aspires  after  divine 
perfection,  subsists  about  it,  and  is  converted  to  itself  through  it.  It  in 
necessary  therefore^  that  the  cause  of  conversion  should  exist  prior  to  liie 
intdllectual  genera  which  are  converted  to  divine  perfection,  and  that 
the  leader  of  the  perfection  which  is  one,  should  be  expanded  above  the 
natures  which  are  perfected. 

Deservedly  therefore,  does  the  subcdestial  arch  prior  to  all  intellectual 
natures,  preestablish  an  order  of  Gods  convcrtive  and  perfective  of  all 
the  secondary  divine  genera.  And  on  this  account,  Plato  elevates  the 
Gods  and  dmmons  that  follow  Jupiter,  to  this  arch,  and  through  this  to 
the  heaven,  and  the  supercelestial  place.  For  when  they  proceed  to  the 
banquet,  and  delicious  food,  they  ascend  to  the  subcelestial  arch.  Hence 
through  this  they  are  perfected,  participate  of  the  circulation  of  the 
heaven,  and  are  extended  to  the  intelligible.  For  the  intelligible  is  that 
which  nourishes  and  fills  all  things.  The  perfective  therefore  is  esta- 
blished under  the  connective  order.  And  it  perfects  indeed  all  the 
natures  that  ascend  to  the  intelligible,  dilates  souls  to  the  reception  of 
divine  goods,  and  illuminates  intellectual  light.  But  comprehending  in 
the  bosoms  of  itself,  the  second  genera  of  the  Gods,  it  establishes  all 
things  in  the  connective  circulation  of  wholes. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J7(>  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  VT^ 

Tbroii^  tbese  tilings  tbrrefbre,  Socrates  alsi>  shortly  after  sajt^  that 
the  mob  that  are  elevated  together  with  the  twelve  Gods^  to  iotellii^ble 
beauty,  are  initiated  [viz.  rendered  perfect]  in  the  most  blessed  of  the 
mysteries^  and  through  this  initiation^  receive  the  mysteries  with  a  pvure 
soul,  and  become  established  in,,  and  spectators  of  things  ineffable. 
Hence  the  initiation  of  the  Gods  is  there;  the  first  mysteries  are  there* 
Nor  is  it  at  all  wonderful,  if  Plato  also  tolerates  us  in  caliii^  the  Gods 
[of  this  order}  Teletareh$j,  since  he  says,  that  the  souls  that  are  there  are 
imtiaied^  the  Gods  themselves  indeed  initiating  them.  But  bow  is  it 
poisible  otherwise  to  denominate  those  who  are  the  primafy  sources  of 
Ulete  or  initkttwn^  than  Teletarchsf  For  I  indeed,  perceiving  so  gii^at  ai^ 
eoefgy  even  as  far  as  to  the  names  themselves,  do  not  see  how  they  can 
be  called  differently.  Inltiatioa  however,  being  one  and  tri|^  (for  the 
perfective  are  ooNdirided  with  the  connective  Gods,)  Pkto  caBs  the  one 
imion  of  it  the  suboekstial  arch,  ia  the  tssaoke  manner  as  he  calls  the 
eoimective  curder  Heaven.  But  the  deptk  which  is  in  it  is  indicated  by 
his  admitting  that  there  is  in  it  an  extreme  s^bjectiont.  and  a  steep  path 
to  the  summit  oi  the  arch,  ^s  therefore,  in  the  oider  prior  to  this,  we 
thought  it  proper  to  arrange  the  inteUigible  according  to  the  sunmiit,  the 
vital  according  to  the  profundity,  and  the  intellectual  according  to*  the 
exlramity,  which  defines  the  whole  celestial  circulation,^  sa  likewise  in 
this  perfective  order,  we  must  considei:  the  intelligible  of  the  arch  as  its 
sammit,  dencMttinating  it  after  the  same  manner  as  the  back  of  the 
heaven,  because  these  are  coordinate  to  each  other;  but  we  must 
eonsider  the  profundity  as  coordinate  to  life,  through  which  souk  proceed 
to  the  summit;  and  the  extremity  which  closes  the  whole  arch^  as 
coordinate  to  intellect 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXV.  OFFLATO.  2iJ 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


This  whole  order  however,  which  fe  united  to  the  order  priof  to  itr 
we  must  analogously  divide.  For  the  perfective  Gods  are  spread  uoder 
all  the  connective  triad.  And  one  of  these  indeed^  is  the  supplier  to  the 
Gods  of  stable ""  perfection^  establishing  aU  the  Gods  in,  and  uniting  thrai 
to  themselves.  But  another  is  the  primary  source  of  a  perfection 
generative  of  wholes^  eliciting  things  which  precede  according  ta  essence^ 
to  the  providence  of  secondary  natures^  And  a  third  is  the  leader  of 
conversion  to  causes,  convolving  every  thing  wfaick  has  proceeded^  to  its^ 
IMToper  principle.  For  through  this  triad  every  thing  whick  is  perfect  is^ 
seH^ufficient^  and  subsists  ki  itself;  every  thing  wludi  gjonerates,  is^ 
perfect,  and  generates  full  of  vigour;  and  e^ery  thing  whidi  aspires  afler 
its  proper  principle,^  is  conjoined  to  it,  through  its  own  perfection. 
Whether  therefore,  you  assume  the  power  of  nature  which  is  perfective 
of  things  that  are  generated,  or  the  perfect  number  of  the  restitutions  of 
the  soul  to  its  pristine  state,  or  the  perfection  of  intdlect  which  is* 
established  according  to  energy  in  one,  all  these  are  suspiended  from  the 
one  perfectioii  of  the  Gods,  and  being  referred  to  it^  some  are  alloitted  a 
greater,  but  others  a  less  portion  of  a  perfect  hyparxis;  and  every 
perfection  proceeds  from  thence.  But  in  short,  perfection  is  triple;  one 
indeed  being  prior  to  parts,  such  as  is  the  perfection  of  the  Gods.  For 
tins  has  its  subsistence  in  unity,  preexisting  self-perfectly,  prior  to  all 
multitude.  For  such  indeed  is  ike  one  of  the  Gods,^  not  being  such  as 
the  one  of  souls,  or  of  bodies;  since  these  indeed  are  in  a  kindced  manner 
conjoined  with  multitude,  and  are  co-mingled  with  essences^  But  the 
unities  of   the  Gods  are  sdf-perfect,  and  subsist  prior  to  essences,. 

'  Fos  yoiNjbMv  k  XI  utotmoetj  to  read  fMinf^u. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


878  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

generating  multitudes,  and  not  being  generated  together  with  them. 
But  another  perfection  is  that  which  consists  of  parts,  and  which  derives 
its  completion  through  parts,  such  as  is  the  perfection  of  the  world ; 
for  it  possesses  the  all-perfect  from  its  plenitudes.  And  a  third  other 
perfection,  b  that  which  is  in  parts.  But  thus  also  each  part  of  the 
world  is  perfect.  For  as  this  universe  is  a  whole  consisting  of  wholes, 
so  likewise  it  is  perfect  from  the  perfect  parts  that  are  in  it,  according  to 
Timseus.  And  in  short,  perfection  is  divided  after  the  same  manner  as 
wholeness ;  for,  as  Timaeus  sajrs,  they  are  conjoined  with  each  other. 

Hence  also  the  perfective  genus  is  connascent  with  the  connective, 
and  the  perfective  monad  is  arranged  under  all  the  connective  genera. 
And  as  the  wholeness  of  the  heaven  which  connectedly  contains  parts  is 
triple,  so  likewise  perfection  is  triple.  And  if  it  be  requisite  to  deliver 
roy  own  opinion,  all  the  perfections  are  derived  from  all  the  leaders ;  but 
the  perfection  which  is  prior  to  parts,  pertains  in  a  greater  degree  to  the 
first  leader;  that  which  consists  of  parts,  to  the  middle;  and  that  which 
is  in  a  part,  to  the  third  leader.  But  prior  to  this  triad,  is  the  intelligible 
triad,  which  is  uniform  perfection,  and  an  all-perfect  hypan^is,  and 
which  Timseus  also  denominates  perfect  according  to  ^11  things.  There, 
however,  the  three  perfections  pre-existed  unitedly,  or  rather,  there  was 
one  fountain  of  every  perfection.  As  therefore  the  connective'  triad,  is 
the  evolution  of  the  intelligible  connexion,  and  the  collective  triad  of  the 
unific,  and  that  which  is  the  first  in  intelligibles,  so  likewise  the  per- 
fective triad  is  the  image  of  the  all-perfect  triad.  For  the  intelligible 
and  intellectual  proceed  analogous  to  the  intelligible  triads.  Perfection 
therefore  is  triple,  prior  to  parts,  from  parts,  in  a  part.  According  to 
another  mode  also,  perfection  is  stable,  generative,  convertive.  And 
according  to  another  conception,  there  is  on&  perfection  of  intellectual 
and  impartible  essences,  another  of  psychical  essences,  and  another  of 
the  natures  which  are.  divisible  about  bodies.  Very  properly  therefore, 
there  are  three  leaders  of  perfection  prior  to  the  intellectual  Gods,  who 
constitute  one  order  under  the  celestial  circulation,  who  elevate  through 

'  Fqt  ^Kiivn  it  is  iiecessarjr  to  read  <rvyfwriMi]. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVI.  OF  PLATO.  279 

themselves  all  secondary  natures  to  the  intelligible,  perfect  them  by 
intelligible  light,  convert  and  conjoin  them  to  the  kingdom  of  the  heaven^ 
impart  an  unsluggish  energy  to  the  natures  that  are  perfected^  and  are 
the  guardians  of  their  undefiled  perfection. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


Such  are  the  conceptions  which  may  be  assumed  from  Plato  con- 
cerning the  third  triad  of  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
orders,  which  at  one  time  he  denominates  the  subcelestial  arch,  possessing 
a  summit,  middle,  and  extremity,  but  at  another  a  blessed  mystery,  and  of 
all  mysteries  the  most  ancient  and  august,  through  which  he  elevates  souls 
and  conjoins  them  to  the  mystic  plenitude  of  intelligibles.  For  this  triM 
opens  the  celestial  paths,  being  established  under  the  celestial  circulation, 
and  exhibits  the  self-splendid  appearances  of  the  Gods,  which  are  both 
entire  and  firm,  and  expand  to  the  mystic  inspection  of  intelligible 
spectacles,  as  Socrates  says  in  the  Phaedrus.  For  telete  precedes  muesis, 
and  muesis^  epopteia.  Hence  we  are  initiated  [^teleioumetha]  in  ascending^ 
by  the  perfective  Gods.  But  we  view  with  closed  eyes  [i.  e.  with  the 
pure  soul  itself,  muaumethd]  entire  and  stable  appearances,  through  the 
connective  Gods,  with  whom  there  is  the  intellectual  wholeness,  and  the 
firm  establishment  of  souls.  And  we  become  fixed  in,  and  spectatoi^  of 
[epopteuomen]  the  intelligible  watch  tower,  through  the  Gods  who  are 
the  collectors  of  wholes.  We  speak  indeed  of  all  these  things  as  with 
reference  to  the  intelligible,  but  we  obtain  a  different  thing  according  to 
a  different  order.  For  the  perfective  Gods  initiate  us  in  the  intelligible 
through  themselves.  And  the  collective  monads  are  through  themselves 
the  leaders  of  the  inspection  of  intelligibles.    And  there  are  indeed  many 


Digitized  by 


Google 


aeO  ON  THE  ^mEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

Bteps  of  ascefit^  li«t  all  of  them  extend  to  tke  paternal  port,  and  the 
pat^tial  initiation,  in  which  maj  the  teletarchs,  who  are  the  leaders  of 
all  good,  likewise  estaMish  us,  illuminating  us  not  by  words,  but  by 
deeds.  May  they  also  think  us  worthy  of  being  fitted  with  intelligible 
beauty  under  the  mighty  Jupiter,  and  perfectly  free  us  from  those  evils 
about  generation  with  which  we  are  now  surrounded  as  with  a  waJL 
May  they  likewise  impart  to  us  by  illumination  this  most  beautiful  fruit 
of  the  present  theory,  which,  following  the  divine  Plato,  we  have 
^sufficiently  delivered  to  those  who  love  the  contemplation  of  truth. 


CHAPTER   XXVII. 


•  Let  OS  now  therefore  again  ibllow  Parmenides  in  another  way,  who 
after  the  intelligible  triads  gencfates  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same 
time,  inteHectual  orders,  and  uaibkh  the  continued  progression  of  divine 
natures,  through  successive  conchisions.  For  the  connexion  of  the 
words,  and  their  dependance  on  each  other,  imitates  the  indissolnbie 
order  of  things,  which  always  conjoins  middles  to  extremes,  and  proceeds 
through  middle  genera  to  the  last  progressions  of  beings.  "Jliis  therefore 
we  must  survey  prior  to  the  several  intellectual  conceptions,  how  the 
intelligible,  and  at  tiie  same  time,  intellectual  triads,  proceed  analogous 
to  tfee  intelfigible  triads,  that  we  may  comprehend  by  a  reasoning  process 
the  welt-arrafnged  order  of  things.  There  were  three  intelligible  triads 
therefore,  viz.  the  one  being,  whole,  and  infinite  mnltitude.  And  tlrree 
intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time,  intellectnal  triads,  have  also  presented 
themselves  to  our  view,  viz.  number,  whole,  and  the  perfect.  Hence  from 
the  one  being,  nnmber  is  derived ;  from  the  intelligible  whole,  the  whole 
that  is  in  these;  and  from  infinite  multitude,  the  perfect.     For  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


IJHAP.  XXVII.  OF  PLATO.  Sgl 

infinite  which  is  there  was  all-powerfal,  and  all-perfect,  comprehending 
indeed  all  things,  but  being  itself  incomprehensible.  To  the  all-powerful 
therefore  and  all-perfect,  the  perfect  is  analogous,  possessing  a  perfection 
which  is  intellectual,  and  secondary  to  the  first  efiective  and  intelligible 
perfection.  The  ^hole  also  which  is  both  inleUigible  and  intellectual-  is 
allied  to  the  intelligible  whole,  but  it  difiers  from  it,  so  far  as  the  latter 
possesses  wholeness  according  to  the  one  union  of  the  one  being ;  but 
the  one  of  the  former  appears  to  be  itself  by  itself  a  whole,  consisting  of 
unical  parts,  and  being  appears  to  consist  of  many  beings.  These 
wholenesses  therefore,  being  divided,  diflfer  from  the  wholeness  which 
precedes  according  to  union  and  is  intelligible.  For  the  wholenesses  of 
tliis  whole  are  parts  of  the  intelligible  wholeness. 

In  the  third  place  therefore,  we  must  consider  number  as  analogous 
to  the  one  being.  For  the  one  being  is  there  indeed  occultly,  intelligibly, 
and  paternally;  but  here  in  cpnjuncti<)n  with  difference  it  generates 
number,  which  constitutes  the  separation  of  forms  and  reasons.'  For 
difference  itself  first  shines  forth  in  this  order,  being  power  indeed,  and 
the  duad  in  intelligibles  r4)ut  here  it  is  maternal,  and  a  prolific  fountain. 
For  there  power  was  collective  of  the  one^  and  the  one  being ;  on  which 
account  also  it  was  inefiable,  as  existing  occultly  in  the  one  and  in 
hyparxis.  But  here  difference  separates  indeed  being  and  the  dne. 
After  this  likewise,  it  multiplies  the  one  proceeding  genera tively,  and 
calls  forth  being  into  second  and  third  progressions ;  breaking  indeed 
being  into  many  beings,  and  dividing  the  one  into  more  partial  unities. 
But  according  to  each  of  these  completing  the  decrements,  the  wholes 
remaining.  Very  properly  therefore  does  Plato  make  the  negations  of 
the  one  from  this.  For  here  the  many  subsist,  through  difference  which 
divides  being  and  the  one ;  since  the  whole  also  which  is  denied  of  the 
oney  is  intellectual  and  not  intelligible.  The  negation  therefore  says  that 
the  one  is  not  a  whole,  so  that  the  affirmation  is,  the  one  is  a  whole* 
This  whole  however  is  intellectual  and  hot  intelligible.  Parmenides  also 
denies  the  many  as  follows :  "  The  one  is  not  many  ;**   but  the  opposite 

'  For  k^ov  it  ift  necessary  to  read  Aoyivy. 

Troc.  ,  Vol.  I.  2  N 


Digitized  by 


Google 


4^  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IF, 

to  th«3  is,  the  6ne  is  many.  The  multitude  of  kitelli^bles,  however,  does 
not  make  the  one  to  be  many,  but  causes  the  one  being  to  be  many.. 
And  in  short,  every  intelligible  is  characterized  by  the  one  being.  For 
m  the  intelligible  beiog  and  the  one  are  comphtated,  and  are  connascent 
with  each  other;  and  being  is  most  unicah  But  when  each  of  these 
proceeds  into  multitude,  they  are  separated  from  each  other,  and  evince 
a  greater  diflference  with  respect  to  each  other.  Eack  of  these  also  is 
divided  into  multitude  through  the  prolific  nature  of  difference.  Fronk 
these  things  therefore,  it  is  evident  that  the  intelligible  and  intellectual 
orders,  being  analogous  to  the  intelligible  ordeiSs,  proceed  in  conjimcticmi 
Inth  diminution^ 


CHAPTER  XXVIir. 


After  this  however,  let  us  discuss  each  of  them,  beginnrng  accordm^^ 
to  nature.  First,  therefore,  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time^  intel^ 
lectual  number  presents  itself  to  our  view ;  and  which  is  connected  with 
Hf altitude.  For  every  number  is  multitude;  But  with  respect  to 
multitude,  one  kind  subsists  unitedly,  and  another  kind  with  separation. 
Kumber,  however,  is  separate  multitude;  for  there  is  diflerenee  in  it. 
For  in  the  intelligible  tliere  was  power,,  and  not  diffierence,  and  this 
power  generated  multitude,  and  conjoined  it  to  the  monads.  Number 
therefore  is  in  continuity  with  intelligible  multitude ;  and  this  is  neces- 
sary. For  the  monad  was  there,  and  also  the  duad ;  since  whole  alsQ 
was  there,  and  was  always  monadic;  and  becoming  to  be  two,  has  n& 
cessation.  Hence  the  monad  and  the  duad  were  there,  which  are  th^ 
first  and  exempt  principles  of  numbers.  And  in  these  multitude  was 
unitedly ;  since  the  monad  which  is  the  fountain  of  numb^xs,  and  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


6HAP,  XXVIir.  OP  PLATO.  $8^ 

duad  possess  all  multitude  according  to  cause ;  the  former  paternally,  but 
the  latter  maternally.  And  on  this  account  intelligible  multitude  is  not 
yet  number,  but  is  intelligibly  established  in  the  uniform  principles,  I 
mean  the  monad  and  the  duad ;  generatively  indeed,  in  the  duad^  but 
paternally  in  the  monad.  For  the  third  God  was  father  and  mother; 
since  if  animal  itself  is  in  it,  it  is  also  necessary  that  the  cause  of  the 
male  and  the  female  should  there  primarily  preexist*  For  these  are  itf 
animals.  Hence  according  to  Tiraseus,  and  according  to  Parmenides,  the 
maternal  and  the  paternal  cause  are  there.  And  in  these,  intelligible 
animals,  and  intelligible  multitudes  are  comprehended.  From  these  first 
principles  also  number  together  with  difference  proceed,  and  they  generate 
the  monads  and  the  duads  which  are  in  number,  and  all  numbers*  For 
both  the  generative  and  the  paternal  subsist  in  these  in  a  feminine 
manner* 

All  the  monads  likewise  of  this  triad  are  paternal.  Hence  prior  to 
other  things  they  participate  of  the  monadic  cause,  but  according  to  the 
power  of  difference^  For  there  indeed,  I  mean  in  the  intelligible,  thte 
maternal  was  paternally ;  but  here  the  paternal  subsists  maternally ;  just 
as  there,  the  intellectual  subsists  intelligibly,  but  here  the  intelligible,  in« 
tellectually.  From  that  order  therefore,  the  first  number  subsists  proxi* 
tnately,  but  being  geneiated  analogous  to  the  first  triad  of  intelligibles,  it 
also -evidently  proceeds  from  it.  Hence  also,  Parmenides  beginning  his 
discourse  about  number,  reminds  us  of  the  first  hypothesis  through  which 
he  generates  the  one  being,  asserting  that  the  one  participates  of  essence, 
and  essence  of  the  one^  in  consequence  of  this  subsisting  according  to  that 
triad.  And  this  very  properly.  For  being  intellioible  and  intellectual, 
6o  far  indeed,  as  it  is  allotted  an  intelligible  order  in  intellectuals,  it  pro- 
ceeds from  the  summit  of  intelligibles,  but  so  far  as  it  precedes  the  intel« 
lectual  orders,  it  proceeds  from  the  intellectual  of  intelligibles.  In  that 
intelligible  triad,  however,  the  one  Avas  of  being,  and  being  of  the  one^ 
through  the  ineffable  and  occult  union  of  these  two,  and  their  subsistence 
in  each  other.  But  in  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
triad,  difference  presenting  itself  to  the  view,  which  is  thfe  image  of  the 
concealed  and  ineffable  power  in  the  first  triad  of  intelligibles,  and  lumi- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


<B84  O"*  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV.. 

nously  exerting  its  own  energy,  separates  ike  one  from  being,  and  being 
from  the  one^  leads  each  into  divided  multitude,  and  thus  generates  tota^ 
number.  For  numl)er,  as  we  have  frequently  said,  is  divided  and  not 
united  multitude,  and  subsists  from  the  principles  according  to  a  second 
progression,  but  is  not  occultly  established  in  the  principles.  Hence  also, 
it  is  simply  different  from  multitude.  And  in  intelligibles  indeed,  there 
is  multitude;  but  in  intellectuals  number.  For  there  indeed,  number  is 
according  to  cause ;  but  here  multitude  is  according  to  participation. 
For  there  indeed,  division  subsists  intelligibly ;  but  here  union  has  an  in- 
teU^ctual  subsistence.  If  therefore  number  proceeds  from  these,  and  i% 
allotted  such  an  order,  Parmenides  very  properly  especially  mentions 
these  triads,  asserting  that  the  one  participates  of  essence,  and  essence  of 
the  one^  '  and  that  through  these  the  many  become  apparent.  For  one 
of  these  indeed,  is  the  illustrious  property  of  the  first  triad,  but  the  other,, 
of  the  third  triad.  And  in  the  first  triad  indeed,  participation  V  was  the 
presubsistence  of  the  union  of  the  one  and  being ;  but  in  the  third  triad 
stany  intelligibles  present  themselves  to  the  view,  Plato  all  but  proclaim* 
lug  that  the  most  splendid  of  intelligibles  subsists  according  to  intelligible 
multitude,  though  multitude  is  there  occult,  and  uniformly.  For  accord- 
ing to  each  order  of  divine  natures,  multitude  is  appropriately  generate^ 
in  the  extremities^ 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Tbe  intelligible  number  therefore  of  the  intellectual  genera,  proceeds 
from  these,  and  through  these.    And  it  possesses  indeed  properties  in* 

'  It  ia  here  necesaary  to  supjdy  xai  Ti)y  ouvtuv  rov  tvof . 
*  laatead  of  Ij  fbtff^i^,  I  read  ^  /atii^if. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIX.  OF  PLATa  j|85 

Qomprehensible  by  human  reasonings^  but  which  aredivided  into  two  first 
effective  powers,  viz.  the  power  generative  of  wholes,  and  the  power 
which  collects  into  union  all  progressions.  For  according  to  the  monad 
indeed,  it  collects  intellectual  multitude,  and  conjoins  it  to  intelligibles ; 
but  according  to  the  duad  it  produces  multitude,  and  separates  it  accord- 
ing to  difference.  And  according  to  the  odd  number  indeed,  it  collects 
the  many  orders  into  indivisible  union ;  but  according  to  the  even  num* 
ber,  it  prolifically  produces  into  light  all  the  genera  of  the  Gods.  For 
being  established  as  the  middle  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods, 
and  giving  completion  to  the  one  bond  of  them,  it  is  carried  in  its  summit 
indeed,  in  intellectuals  as  in  a  vehicle,  but  being  united  to  intelligibles,  it 
evolves  intdligible  multitude,  and  calls  forth  its  occult  and  unical  nature 
into  separation,  and  prolific  generation.  It  also  collects  that  which  is  in- 
tellectual into  union  and  impartible  communion.  And  not  this  only,  but 
generating  all  tilings  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  according  to  the  in- 
comprehensible cause  of  the  duad  and  the  nature  of  the  even  number,  it 
again  unites  the  proceeding  natures  and  convolves  them^  according  to  the 
monad,  and  the  sameness  of  the  odd  number.  Through  unity  indeed^  and 
the  duad,  it  produces, '  collects  and  binds  all  things  intelligibly,  occultly, 
and  in  an  unknown  manner  to  the  intelligible,  and  effects  this  even  in  the 
last  matter  and  the  vestigies  of  forms  which  it  contains.  But  through  the 
even  and  odd  number  it  constitutes  the  two  coordinations,  viz.  the 
vivific  and  the  immutable,  the  prolific  and  the  effective,  all  the  impartible 
genera  of  fabricating  and  animal-producing  powers,  those  powers  that 
preside  over  a  partible  life,  or  partible  production,  the  more  intellectual 
and  singular  mundane  natures,  and  which  belong  to  the  better  coordina- 
tion, and  those  natures  that  are  more  irrational  and  multiplied,  and  which 
give  completion  to  the  subordinate  series.  And  again,  through  this 
divided  generation  we  may  see  that  each  of  the  proceeding  natures,  is 
united  and  at  the  same  time  multiplied,  is  indivisible  and  divided  in  its 
causes,  and  through  diminution  is  separated  from  them.  And  we  attri- 
bute indeed  things  that  are  more  excellent  and  more  simple  to  the  nature 

'  It  appears  to  me  that  the  word  wpoayti  is  wanting  in  the  original,  and  I  hare  therefore  suj^ lied 
it  in  the  translation. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


236  ^N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

of  the  odd  B«imber^  but  things  that  are  less  excellent  and  more  various^  to 
the  nature  of  the  even  number.  For  every  where  indeed,  the  odd  number 
is  the  leader  of  impartible,  simple,  and  unical  goods;  but  the  even  num- 
ber is  the  cause  of  divided,  various,  and  generative  progressions.  And 
thus  we  may  see  all  the  orders  of  beings  woven  together  according  to  di- 
vine number  which  is  most  ancient,  intellectual,  and  exempt  from  all 
the  dinumerated  genera.  For  it  is  necessary  that  number  should  exist 
prior  to  the  things  that  are  numbered,  and  that  prior  to  things  which  are 
separated  there  should  be  the  cause  of  all  separation,  according  to  which 
the  genera  of  the  Gods  are  divided,  and  are  distinguished  in  an  orderly 
manner  by  appropriate  numbers. 

If  therefore  in  intellectuals  there  are  divisions,  contacts,  and  separa* 
Uons  of  the  proceeding  natures,  and  likewise  communications  of  coordi^ 
nate  natures,  it  is  necessary  that  number  should  be  prior  to  intellectuals, 
which  divides  and  collects  all  things  intelligibly  by  the  powers  of  itself. 
And  if  all  things  subsist  occultly,  intelligibly,  in  an  unknown  mamner  and 
exemptly  in  this  summit, '  there  is  a  number  of  them,  and  a  peculiarity 
unical  and  without  separation.  Number  therefore  subsists  according  to 
the  middle  bond  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals,  being  indeed  expanded 
above  intellectuals  through  intelligible  goods,  but  subordinate  to  intelligi- 
bles through  intellectual  separations.  And  it  is  assimilated  indeed  to 
intelligibles  according  to  the  power  which  is  collective  of  many  things 
into  union,  but  to  intellectuals  according  to  the  power  which  is  generative 
of  the  many  from  the  one.  But  from  this  highest  place  of  survey  of  the 
intellectual  Go<ls,  it  constitutes  the  first  intellectual  numbers  themselves 
which  have  the  nature  of  forms,  are  universal,  and  preside  over  the  whole 
of  generation  and  production.  It  likewise  constitutes  the  second  num«- 
bers,  which  are  supermundane,  and  vivific,  and  measure  the  Gods  that 
are  in  the  world.  But  it  constitutes  as  the  third  numbers,  these  celestial 
governors  of  the  perpetual  circulations,  and  who  convolve  all  the  orbs 
according  to  the  intellectual  causes  of  them.  And  it  constitutes  as  the 
last  numbers  those  powers  that  in  the  sublunary  region  connect  and 

*  It  w  rcquiiitc  to  suj^ljr  in  tbia  place  ly  tjj  otK^vrf^Ti  Tptvrjj, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIX.  OF  PLAtO.  gg^ 

bound  the  infinity  and  unstat^  nature  of  matter  by  forms,  and  numbers 
and  reasons,  tbroi^  which  both  the  wholes  and  parts  of  all  mortal  na«> 
tures  are  variegated  with  proper  numbers.  But  it  every  where  connects^ 
the  precedaneous  and  more  perfect  genera  of  the  Gods  by  the  odd  num« 
bcr^  but  the  subordinate  and  secondary  genera,  by  the  even  number, 
llius  for  instance,  in  the  intellectual  orders,  it  produces  the  female  and 
the  prolific  according  to  the  even  number,  but  the  male  and  the  paternal 
according  to  the  odd  number.  But  in  the  supermundane  orders,  it  cha«» 
racterizes  similitude  and  the  immutable  according  to  the  odd  number^ 
but  dissimilitude  and  a  progression  into  secondary  natures,  according  to 
the  even  number.  For  thus  the  Athenian  guest  also,  orders  that  in  sacred 
worship  odd  things  should  be  distributed  to  the  celestial,  but  even  to  the 
terrestriaf  powers.  And  according  to  each  of  these  genera  that  which  is^ 
of  a  more  ruling  nature  must  be  referred  to  the  odd  number,  but  that 
which  is  subordinate,  to  the  even  number. 

The  nature  of  number,  therefore,  pervades  from  on  high,  as  far  as  to  the 
fast  of  things,  adorning  all  things,  and  connecting  them  by  appropriate 
forms.  For  how  could  a  perfect  number  comprehend  the  period  of  ^he 
wliole  world,  as  tlie  Muses  in  Plato  assert  that  it  does?  Or  how  could 
numbers,  some  of  which  are  productive  of  fertility,  and  others  of  sterility, 
comprehend  the  descents  of  souls?  Or  how  could  some  of  them  define 
the  ascents  of  souls  in  less,  but  others  in  greater  periods,  as  Socrates  says^ 
in  the  Pliadrus,  where  he  delivers  to  us  restitutions  consisting  of  three 
thousand  and  ten  thousand  years  ?  Or  how  could  time  itself  which  is 
nnically  comprehensive  of  the  psychical  measures,  proceed  according  to 
number,  as  Timaus  says  it  does,  unless  divine  number  exists  prior  to  all 
these,  which  imparts  to  all  things  a  principal  cause  of  order  according  to 
numbers?  Since  all  things  therefore  subsist  through  numbers  and  forms, 
numbers  are  allotted  a  progression,  from  the  intellectual  summit.  But 
forms  have  their  generation  from  intelligible'  forms.  For  forms  subsist 
primarily  in  the  third  triad  of  intelligibles.  But  numbers  are  primarily 
in  the  first  triad  of  intellectuals ;  since  also  in  the  effects  of  these,  every^ 
number  indeed  is  form^,  but  not  every  form  is  number. 

*  ?br  voiftov,  it  is  necessary  to  read  yo^rra-v. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


288  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOBC  IV. 

If»  however,  it  be.  requisite  clearly  to  unfold  the  truth,  numbers  are  also 
prior  to  forms.  For  there  are  indeed  superessential  numbers,  but  there 
are  not  superessential  forms.  -And  according  to  this  reasoning  every  form 
is  number,  as  also  the  Pythagoreans  said.  For  Timaeus  being  a  Pytha- 
gorean, not  only  asserts  that  there  are  intelligible  forms,  but  also  intelli- 
gible numbers;  for  he  says  that  the  intelligible  forms  are  four.  There 
however,  number  is  intelligibly,  and  monadically  according  to  cause.  For 
intelligible  animal  is  a  monad,  occultly  containing  the  whole  of  number. 
But  in  the  summit  of  intellectuals,  number  subsists  separately,  evolving 
the  number  which  preexists  in  the  monad  according  to  cause  and  uni- 
formly. For  there  is  a  difference,  I  think,  between  saying  multitude  in 
its  cause,  and  multitude  from  its  cause,  and  between  saying  united,  and 
saying  separated  multitude.  And  the  one  indeed  is  prior  to  number, 
but  the  other  is  number.  So  that  according  to  Timaeus  there  are  intelli- 
gible numbers  together  with  forms,  and  prior  to  forms.  And  according 
to  Parmenides,  number  is  after  multitude*  For  Timaeus  calls  uniform 
and  occult  multitude  the  number  of  forms.  But  since  number  is  prima- 
ril^  in  the  Gods,  but  forms  participate  of  the  divine  unities,  he  denomi- 
nates the  first  ideas  four.  For  monad  and  triad,  were  primarily  indeed  in 
the  Gods  themselves,  but  secondarily  in  intellectuals ;  and  superessentially 
indeed  in  the  former,  but  formally  in  the  latter.  In  intelligibles  therefore, 
multitude  was  unically ;  but  in  intellectuals  it  subsists  separately.  But 
where  there  is  separation  there  also  there  is  number,  as  we  have  frequently 
observed.  Hence  likewise  all  the  genera  of  the  Gods  are  from  hence 
generated.  And  they  are  divided,  the  paternal  indeed  and  generative 
among  intelligibles  and  intellectuals;  but  the  demiurgic  and  vivific, 
among  intellectuals.  And  the  genera  indeed,  that  bind  through  simili- 
tude, are  divided  among  supermundane  natures ;  but  those  that  are 
both  exempt  and  distributed,  are  divided  among  the  liberated  Gods. 
And  the  celestial '  and  sublunary  genera,  are  divided  among  the  mundane 
Gods.  And  in  short,  all  the  coordinations  of  beings  receive  their  dis- 
tinction and  separation  from  this  order.     From  these  things  therefore,  it 

is  evident  what  the  peculiarities  are  which  intelligible  and  at  the  same 

« 

'  For  uTotipavM,  it  seema  to  be  nqctwxj  tlut  we  should  read  oofavuL. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXX.  OF  PLATO.  339 

time  intellectual  number  possesses^  and  of  what  it  is  the  cause  to  the 
Gods. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


Iir  the  next  place,  we  must  likewise  assert  that  the  first  number  '  is  of 
a  feminine  nature.  For  in  this,  difference  first  shines  forth,  separating  the 
one  from  being,  and  dividing  the  one  into  many  unities,  and  being  into 
many  beings.  What  therefore  is  the  difference  which  is  the  cause  of  these 
tilings  to  the  Gods  ?  For  if  we  should  call  it  a  genus  of  being,  in  the  first 
place  indeed,  how  is  it  prior  to  being  ?  For  separating  being  and  the  one^ 
it  is  arranged  between  both  of  them.  But  existing  as  a  middle,  it  calls 
forth  indeed  the  one  into  generations,  but  it  fills  being  with  generative  cause. 
If  therefore,  it  is  prior  to  being,  how  will  it  be  one  certain  genus  of  being  ? 
And  [in  the  second  place,  after  this,  the  different  which  is  a  genus  of 
being,  is  every  where  essential,  and  is  by  no  means  inherent  in  superes- 
sential  natures.  But  difference  itself  is  primarily  present  with  the  uni- 
ties themselves,  and  separates  and  produces  many  unities  from  one.  How 
therefore,  can  superessential  difference  ever  come  to  be  the  same  with 
the  difterence  which  gives  completion  to  essences? 

In  the  third  place,  that  different  [[which  is  a  genus  of  being,]  presents 
itself  to  the  view  in  intellectuals,  according  to  the  demiurgic  order.  But 
*  difference  itself  is  the  intelligible  summit  of  intellectuals.  Andthefor^ 
mer  indeed,  subsists  together  with  sameness;  but  the  latter  has  by  itself 
a  subsistence  in  the  intelligibles  of  intellectuals.  To  which  also  may  be 
added,  that  in  what  follows,  Plato  as  he  proceeds  makes  mention  of  dif- 
ference, and  generates  it  in  conjunction  with  sameness.  How  therefore, 
does  he  effect  the  same  conclusion  twice  ?     For  he  does  not  employ  such 

*  In  the  origlhal  a^it/xo^  ii  omitted* 

Proc.  Vol.1.  !  i  ^    :   <>  2  0 


Digitized  by 


Google 


290  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

a  repetitioit  as  this  in  any  one  of  the  other  conckisiCMMit  For  wbole^^ 
which  he  seems  to  assume  twice,  is  not  the  same  whole,  vi^.  the  intd* 
lectual  is  not  the  same  with  the  intelligible ;  but  these,  as  we  have  said,> 
diflfer  from  each  other.  For  how  could  he  unfold  to  us  the  difierent 
progressions  of  divine  natures,,  if  he  collected  the  same  conclusions  ^ 
According  to  all  these  conceptions,  therefore,  we  must  separate  the* 
diffi^renee  which  is  generative  of  numbers  from  the  genus  of  beings^ 
'  But  if  difference  itself  is  not  the  nature  of  the  different,  but  a  power 
generative  of  beings,  it  will  be  collective  of  being  and  the  one.  For 
every  where  power  is  allotted  an  hyparxis  of  this  kind.  Fur  through 
power  the  one  participates  of  being,  and  being  of  the  one.  Power 
therefore  was  the  cause,  not  of  division,  but  of  communion,  of  contact 
without  separation,  and  of  the  habitude  ef  the  one  to  being,  and  of  being, 
to  the  ofie.  Hence  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  neither  be  arranged 
according  to  intelligible  power,  nor  according  to  the  intellectual  differ- 
ence of  beings ;  but  that  being  the  middle  of  both,  it  should  subsist 
analogous  to  intelligible  power,  but  should  generate  in  the  extremities  of 
intellectuals  the  portion  of  the  different.  What  else  therefore  is  it  than* 
the  feminine  nature  of  the  Gods?  Hence  also  it  imitates  intelligible- 
power,  and  is  prolific  of  many  unities,  and  of  many  beings.  And  how 
could  it  otherwise  separate  number  from  itself,  and  the  forms  and  powers- 
of  number,  unless  it  was  the  cause  of  the  divine  progressions  in  a 
feminine  manner.  Multitude  therefore  is  paternally  in  intelligibles,  but 
maternally  in  intellectuals.  Hence,  in  the  former  indeed,  it  subsists 
monadically,  but  in  the  latter  according  to  number.  Very  properly 
therefore,  in  the  second  genera  of  the  Gods  also,  union  is  derived  from' 
the  male,  but  separation  from  the  female  divinities.  And  bound  indeed 
proceeds  from  the  males,  but  infinity  from  the  females.  For  the  male  is 
analogous  to  bound,  but  the  female  to  infinity.  The  female,  however,, 
differs  from  infinite  power,  so  far  as  power  indeed,  is  united  to  the  father, 
and  is  in  him  ;  but  the  female  is  divided  from  the  paternal  cause.  For 
power  is  not  only  in  the  female  divinities,  but  is  also  prior  to  them,  since 
the  intelligible  powers  are  in  the  male  divinities,  according  to  Timaeus, 
who  says  that  the  power  of  the  demiu^us  is  the  cause  of  the  generation 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXL  OF  PLATO.  gpi 

of  perpetual  natures.  Far  [the  demiurgus  ^lyrs  to  the  juobr  Gods] 
**  imitating  my  power,  produce  and  generate  animals/'  Power  therefore, 
is  prior  to  the  male  and  the  female,  and  i*  in  both,  and  postmor  to  both. 
For  it  perirades  through  all  beings,  and  every  being  participates  of 
pow^,  as  the  Elean  guest  says.  For  power  is  every  where.  But  the 
female  participates  in  a  greater  degree  of  its  peculiarity,  and  th&male 
of  union  according  to  bound.  That  the  first  number  therefore,  which 
presents  itself  to  die  view  from  intelligibles,  is  of  a  feminine  nature,  is 
through  these  things  evjident 


m^  m 


CHAPTER  XXXL 


It  remains  then^  that  we  should  speak  concerning  the  triadic  division 
of  it,  following  Parmenides.  These  three  things  therefore,  have  app^red 
to  us  from  the  b^inning,  according  to  the  separation  of  the  one  from 
being,  viz.  the  one^  difierence,  and  being ;  di£ference  not  being  the  same 
either  with  the  one  or  being.  For  though  the  one  and  being  were  ih 
intelligibles,  yet  difference  first  subsists  here.  Since  however  power 
abo\^  [i.  e.  in  intelligibles]  was  collective,  but  here  is  the  separator  of  the 
GftvemeSf  there  are  not  only  three  monadsi,  but  also  three  duads,  vig.  the 
ooe  in  conjunotion  with  difference,  difference  in  conjunction  with  beiu^, 
and  the  one  in  conjunction  with  being.  For  difference  also  is  the  cause 
of  A  reparation  of  this  kind,  not  preserving  the  union  of  the  one  being 
with  ^nuine  purity.  There  are  therefore  three  monads,  and  three 
diMuis.  But  these  likewise  may  become  three  triads,  when  we  begin,  at 
of^  time  from  the  one^  at  another  time  from  being,  and  at  another  from 
diffidrence.  Hence  this  tma4  subsists  monadicaHy^  and  triadically.  But 
this  is  the  same  thing  as  to  assert  that  diflerence  and  the  first  feminine 
nature  generates  in  itself^  monadt,  duads,  and  triads.    For  the  divided 


Digitized  by 


Google 


29J  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IF. 

assumption,  generates  for  us  different  monads;  but  the  conjoined 
assumption,  duads,  and  triads,  some^  indeed  being  vanquished  by  the  one^ 
others  by  difference,  and  others  by  being.  And  thus  far  the  first  deity 
presents  itself  to  the  view,  being  proHficof  the  first  numbers;  according, 
to  the  one  indeed,  of  unical  numbers,  but  according  to  difference  of 
generative,  and  according  to  being,  of  essential  numbers. 

Since  however,  from  this  deity  which  is  intelHgible,  that  which  i» 
posterior  to  it  proceeds,  it  is  evidently  necessary  that  the  moaad,  duad, 
aad  triad,  shoula  several Ij^  have  prolific  pow^r.  These  powers  therefore^ 
Parmenides  calls  once,,  twice,  thrice.  For  each  of  these  is  a  power 
which  is  the  cause  of  the  above-mentioned  essences  that  produce  either 
separately,  or  connectedly.  For  ttiere  with  respect  to  the  generations  of 
them,  some  of  them  are  entirely  peculiar,  but  others  are  common  to^ 
secondary  natures.  The  progeny  therefore  of  these  are,  the  oddly*odd, 
the  evenly-even  and  the  evenJy-odd/  And  of  these,  the  oddly-odd> 
indeed,  as  we  have  before  observed,  is  collective  into  union  of  Tiie  divine 
progressions.  But  the  evenly-even  is  generative  of  wholes,  and  proceeds 
as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things.  The  evenly-odd  however,  is  mixed,  having 
its  subsistence  from  both  the  even  and  the  odd.  Hence  we  must 
establish  the  first  as  analogous  to  bound,  but  the  second  as  analogous  to 
power,  and  the  third  as  analogous  to  being.  And  you  may  see,  how 
indeed  in  the  first  order  all  things  had  a  primary  subsistence,  viz.  monad, 
duad,  triad;  but  how  in  this  order,  all  things  are  secondarily  and  subordi^ 
nately.  And  the  mixture  which  is  the  triad,  subsisted  there  indeed  in 
one  way,  but  here  the  evenly-odd  subsists  in  another  way.  For  there 
the  extremes  were  odd,  because  they  were  intelligible;  but  here  the  even 
is  more  abundant,  and  the  intelligible  summit  only  is  odd.  For  the 
middle  of  the  triad  is  analogous  to  power.  And  there  indeed,  is  the 
monad,  which  has  all  the  forms  of  odd  numbers  according  to  cause,  and 
the  duad  is  there,  which  is  occultly  all  the  forms  of  even  numbers, 
and  also  the  triad,  which  is  number  primarily.  But  here  both  the  odd 
and  the  even  number  now  subsist  in  a  twofold  respect,  in  one  place  in 

*  T«  tf^fOfffjiro'oy  is  omitted  in  the  original.. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXI.  OF  PLATO.  >    295 

an  unmiogled,  and  in  another  in  a  mingled  manner.  All  things  there- 
fore, are  here  prolifically,  but  there,  paternally  and  intelligibly.  But  that 
monad  does  not  proceed  from  intelligibles,  but  subsists-  in  them  in 
unproceeding  union.  Hence,  after  these,  and  from  these,  we  may  survey 
the  whole  of  number  subsisting  according  to  a  third  progression.  •*Fbr 
these  things,""  says  Parmenides,  "  preexisting,  no  number  will  be  absent.** 
Every  number  therefore,  is  generated  through  these  in  the  third  monad, 
and  both  the  one  and  being  become  many,  difference  separating  each  of 
them.  And  every  part  indeed  of  being  participates  of  the  one;  but 
every  unity  is  carried  as  in  a  vehicle  in  a  certain  portion  of  being* 
Each  of  these  however,  is  mtiltiplied,  intellectually  separated,  divided 
into  minute  parts,  and  proceeds  to  infinity.  For  as  in  intelhgibles,  we 
attribute  infinite  multitude  ta  the  third  triad,  so  here,^  in  this  triad  we 
assign  infinite  number  to  the  third  part  of  the  triad.  For  in  short  every 
where,  the  infinite  is  the  extremity,  as^  proceeding  in  an  all-perfect 
manner,  and  comprehending  indeed  all  secondary  natures,,  but  being 
itself  participated  by  none  of  them.  In  xthe  first  monad  therefore,  thera 
were  powers,  but  intelligibly.  In  the  second,,  there  were  progressions 
and  generations^  but  both  intelligibly  and  intellectually.  And  in  the 
third,  there  was  all-powerful  number,  unfolding  the  whole  of  itself  into 
light;  and  which  also  Parmenides  denominates  infinite.  It  is  likewise 
especially  manifest  that  it  is  not  proper  to  transfer  this  infinity  to 
quantity.  For  how  can  there  be  an  infinite  number,  since  infinity  i»* 
hostile  to  the  nature  of  number?  And  how  are  the  parts  of  the  one  equal 
to  the  minute  parts  of  being?  For  in  infinites  there  is  not  the  equal.  But 
this  indeed  has  been  thought  worthy  of  attention  by  those  who  were^ 
prior  to  us,. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


294  ON  THE  THEOLOGV  BOOK  IV. 


CHAPTER  XXXIL 


Thb  division  therefore  into  three^  having  been  demonstrated  by  us,  we 
.€ha11  briefly  observe,  that  the  one  appears  to  be  many  according  to  this 
•Order^  ihe  one  itseif  proceeding  into  a  multitude  of  unities^  and  being  in 
A  similar  manner  becoming  generated  in  conjunclion  with  the  one.  For 
those  three  monads  are  the  intelligible  compn^ensions  of  all  orders^  and 
they  at  once  preside  over  all  the  progressions  froni  intelligibles^  produce 
idi  6f  them  in  an  ex<empt  manlier^  and  collect  them  to  liie  intelligible 
JCAases.  Since  howevter,  Plotinus  admits  that  number  is  prior  to  animal 
itself^  and  says  that  the  first  being  produces  froin  itself  number^  and  that 
this  is  estaUished  as  a  medium  between  the  one  bdng^  and  animal  itad^ 
but  is  the  basis  and  place  of  beings,  it  k  worth  while  to  speak  likewise 
concisely  about  this.  For  if  he  says  that  animal  itself  has  intdligibie 
and  occult  number,  as  comprehended  in  the  mx)nad,  he  speaks  rightly, 
find  accords  with  Plato.  But  if  he  says  that  animal  itself  comprehends 
number,  now  separated,  or  which  has  a  multiform  subsistence,  and  is  the 
fA-Qgeny  of  diflferettce,  intelligible  multitude  is  not  a  thing  of  this  kind. 
For  there  indeed^  the  on^  is  being,  and  being  is  the  one.  Hence  animal 
itself  is  according  to  all  things  perfect.  But  in  number,  the  one  is 
separated  from  being,  and  being  from  the  one^  and  each  of  the  parts  is  no 
longer  an  rntelKgible  whole,  as  an  animal  itself.  For  that  is  a  whole  of 
wholes:;  and  every  where  the  one  was  with  being  in  the  parts  of  it,  and 
animal  itself  was  only-begotten.  But  number  proceeded  after  the  two- 
fold coordinations^  I  mean  the  monad  and  duad,  the  odd  and  the  even 
number.  How  therefore,  can  we  place  in  animal  itself  the  first  number  ? 
If  however,  some  one  should  say  that  number  exists  there,  it  is  according 
to  cause  and  intelligibly.  But  it  is  intellectually  separated  by  difference. 
And  farthej:  still,  in  addition  to  these  things,  if  anii;nal  itself  is  surveyed 
by  some  one  in  the  demiurgic  order,  and  he  denominates  it  the  plenitude 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXII.  OF  PLATO.  295 

of  forms,  and  the  intdligible  of  the  jdemiurgic  intellect,  it  wiU  thus  have 
mtelleotual  number,  as  beiog  arranged  near  the  intellectual  end.     But  if 
he  should  call  intelli^ble  animal  number,  in  this  case  there  will  l^e 
separation  and  difference  in  the  Gods,  whom  we  have  asserted  to  be 
established  above  the  whole  of  things,  according  to  supreme  union.     For* 
all  section  and  division  originate  from  the  intellectual  Gods;  since  here* 
difference   proceeds,  adorning  things  in  conjunction  with  the  one  and^ 
being.     How  therefore,  does  the  division  of  the  unities  into  minute  parts^> 
or  the  multiform  nature  of  beings  pertain  to  intelllgibles?  And  how  can 
the  multitude  of  all  forms  accord  with  the  first  animal  itself?   For  the* 
tetrad  was  there,  divided  by  the  monad  and  triad,  a  division  of  this  kind; 
being  adapted,  to  the  third  order  of  intelligible  forms.     For  as  the  OQe* 
Being  is  a  monad,  but  eternity  is  a  monad  and  duad,  (for  to  be  is  con« 
joined  with  the  ever)  so  animal  itself  is  a  monad  and  triads     Since^ 
however,  it  comprehends  in  itself  tk^d,  cause  of  all  number^  Timseus^ 
denominates  it  the  tetrad  which  is   comprehensive  of  the  four  firsts 
effective  causes.     For  the  tetrad  itself  preexists  as  the  fountain  of  all  the^ 
production  of  fbrms.     But  in  intelligibles  the  monad,  duad  and  triads 
subsist  unically ;  but  in  intellectuals  in  a  divided  manner. 

Difference  therefore  necessarily  generates  all  these  for  us  with  sepa-- 
ration.  For  every  where,  the  first  of  subordinate  natures  have  the  peculiar 
form  of  the  natures  that  exist  prior  to  them/  Hence,  the  first  multitudes- 
proceed  indeed  from  the  one^  but  they  are  unical,  without  separation,^ 
and  without  number,  imitating  the  one  principle  of  the  whole  of  things.- 
Very  properly  therefore,  does  Parmenides  constitute  multitude  in  intelli- 
gibles, according  to  the  end  [of  the  intelligible  order];  but  number  in^ 
intellectuals  according  to  the  beginning  [of  the  intelligible  and  at  the* 
same  time  intellectual  order.]  And  these  are  conjoined  with  each  other.. 
Parmenides  also  pre-establishes  unical  and  intelligible  multitude,  as  the 
cause  of  intellectual  4iumbers.  And  Timaeus  shows  that  animal  itself  is- 
only-begotten,  because  it  was  monadically  the  cause  of  the  whole  of? 

*  Bittead  of  wamtxov  yotf  ra  rgwrtrroi  tm  v^rreifuvm,  njv  ihav  i^u  /togfijv,  it  U  necessary  tO  tead^ 
^dirr^^t;  y^  ret  wfwrirwt  rm  vfM^fuvm,  rm  rfoS^irrai/ifivm,  tv  i8my  a^'i  l^ffn** 


Digitized  by 


Google 


296  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV- 

things,  and  not  dyadically,  nor  according  to  divine  diflFerenCc.  That 
number  however,  is  the  first  thing  in  intellectuals,  we  have  abundantly 
shown. 


CHAPTER  XXXIIL 


But  Parmenides  begins  to  speak  about  it  as  follows:    *^  Proceed 

therefore,  and  still  farther  consider  this.    What?  We  have  said  dmt 

ihe  one  participates  of  essence,  so  far  as  it  is  being.     We  have  said  bo. 

And  on  this  account  the  one  being  appears  to  be  many.''     But  he 

completes  his  discourse  about  the  first  monad  thus  :   ^^  Are  not  three 

(things  odd,  and  two  even  ?    How  should  they  not  ?*'    And  about  the 

second  monad,  as  follows :  "  Hence  there  will  be  the  evenly-even,  and 

the  oddly-odd,  and   the   oddly-even,  and  the  evenly-odd.''      But   he 

^completes  his  discourse  about  the  third  and  all  the  succeeding  triad,  as 

follows  :  **  The  one  being  therefore,  is  not  only  many,  but  it  is  likewise 

necessary  that  the  one  which  is  distributed  by  being  should  be  many. 

Entirely  so."    The  first  triad,  therefore,  of  the  intelligible,  and  at  the 

same  time,  intellectual  Gods,  is  through  these  things  unfolded  to  us  by 

Plato,  and  which  possesses  indeed,  according  to  the  first  monad  'the 

first  powers  of  numbers^  I  mean  the  odd  and  the  even,  and  is  completed 

through  these  principles  which  were  in  intelligibles  occultly,  viz.  monad, 

duad,  triad.    But  according  to  the  second  monad  it  possesses  the  second 

powers  of  numbers  which  subsist  from  these  [i.  e.  from  the  first  powers]. 

For  the  section  of  the  forms  of  the  even  number,  is  allotted  a  second 

order.     And  the  oddly-odd  is  subordinate  to  the  first  odd  numbers. 

But  according  to  the  third  monad,  it  possesses  the  more  partial  causes  of 

divine  numbers.     Hence  also,  a  separation  into  minute  parts,  infinity. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXTV.  OF  PLATO-  2^7 

^U-perfect  division)  and  unical  and  essential  number  are  here;  receiving 
indeed)  the  unical  and  the  essential  from  unity  and  being,  but  the  sepa- 
ration of  number  from  difference.  For  every  where  difference  is  in  the 
three  monads,  but  it  particularly  unfolds  the  multitudes  of  numbers, 
according  to  the  third  monad,  generates  more  partial  Gods,  and  divides 
being  in  conjunction  with  the  Gods.  For  neither  is  deity  in  these 
imparticipable,  because  unity  is  not  separate  from  being,  nor  is  essence 
destitute  of  deity,  because  neither  is  being  deprived  of  the  one. 

Since  however,  all  things  are  in  each  of  the  monads,  but  unically  and 
intelligibly  in  the  first,  generatively,  and  acc<H*ding  to  the  peculiarity  of 
difference  in  the  second,  and  intellectually,  and  according  to  being  in  the 
third ; — this  being  the  case,  Plato  when  unfolding  to  us  the  first  monad^ 
very  properly  begins  from  the  monad,  and  proceeds  as  far  as  to  the  triad; 
but  when  teaching  about  the  second,  be  begins  from  evenly-even  num- 
bers, and  proceeds  as  far  as  to  those  that  are  evenly-odd,  both  which 
belong  to  the  nature  of  the  even  number.  And  when  he  adds  the  third 
monadt  he  begins  from  being,  and  recurs  through  difference  to  the  one. 
For  having  shown  that  being  participates  of  number,  he  from  hence  leads 
us  round  to  unical  number,  employing  the  mode  of  conversion  iq  the 
conception  of  this  monad. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


If,  however,  it  be  requisite  to  survey  the  unknown  pecuKarity  of  divine 
numbers,  and  how  the  first  order  of  intelligibles  and  intelledtuals,  and 
number  which  subsists  according  to  this  order,  is  the  most  ancient  of  all 
numbers,  in  the  first  place,  we  should  consider  the  infinity  mentioned  by 
Parmenides,  and  see  whether  he  does  not  say  that  intelligible  multitude 
is  infinite  on  account  of  this  number,  in  consequence  of  its  being  unknown 
Froc.  Vol.  I-  2  P 


Digitized  by 


Google 


29fi  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

and  incomprehensible  by  pdrti^l  conceptions.  For  the  all-pef*fect^  and 
all-powerful  peculiarity  of  divine  numbers  is  exempt  from  the  compre* 
tension  of  partible  natures,  [such  as  ours].  They  are  therefore  unknown, 
and  on  this  account  ar^  said  to  be  inexplicable,  and  not  to  be  investigated. 
,  For  number  also  in  the  last  of  things,  and  multitude,  together  with  the 
knotrn  have  likewise  the  unknown.  And  we  are  notable  to  comprehend 
the  progression  of  every  number  in  consequence  of  being  vanquished  by 
infinity.  The  incomprehensibility  therefore,  of  thjs  power^which  is  un- 
known according  to  a  discursive  energy,  is  comprehended  according  to 
eau9e,  in  intelligible  numbers  and  inultitudes.  For  there  would  not  be  a 
thing  of  this  kiiKi  in  the  last  of  numbers,  unless  the  unknown  preexisted 
in  intelligible  numbers,  and  unless  the  former  were  ultimate  imitations  of 
the  exempt  incomprehensibility  of  the  latter. 

In  the  second  place,  after  this,  we  may  also  add,  that  unical  lumbers 
ar^  likewise  of  themselves  unknown.  For  they  are  more  ancient  tbaA 
beings,  more  single  than  forms,  and  being  generative  of,  exist  prior  to  the 
forms  which  we  call  intelligible.  But  the  most  venerable  of  divine  ope^ 
rations  manifest  this,  since  they  emj>loy  numbers,  as  possessing  an  inefJai^ 
ble  efficacy,  and  through  these  effect  the  greatest,  and  most  arcane  of 
works.  And  prior  to  these  nature  ineffably,  according  to  sympathy,  im* 
parts  different  powers  to  different "  things,  to  some  solar,  but  to  others 
lunar  powers,  and  renders  the  productions  of  these  concordant  with 
numbers.  For  in  these  monadic  numbers  also,  the  forms  of  numbers, 
such  as  the  triad^  the  pentad,  and  the  heptad,  are  one  thing,  but  the 
unions  of  the  forms  another  thing.  For  each  of  these  forms  is  both  one, 
and  multitude.     Hence  form  is  unknown  according  to  the  highest  union. 

If  therefore,  monadic  number  participates  of  a  certain  unknown  power, 
much  naore  must  the  first  number  possess  this  peculiarity  unically  exempt 
from  the  whole  of  things.  And  besides  this,  we  may  also  assume  the 
anagogic  power  of  numbers,  not  only  because  they  define  the  periods  of  the 
physical  restitutions,  circumscribing  our  indefinite  lation  by  appropriate 
measures,  perfecting  us  according  to  these  measures,  and  conjoining  us 

stead  of  aAX^^oi^^  I  read  MhXo^s. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  OP  PLATO.  299 

to  our  first  mues,  imt  becmise  Jikeviae/number  in  a  renarkable  manner 
possesses  a  certain  power  of  attracting  to  tnUh^  as  Socrates  says  ia  the 
Republic,  leading  us  to  intelligibles  from  a  sensible  nature* '  As  there- 
fore,  the  last  number  is  allotted  this  peculiarity,  what  ought  we  to  say 
about  the  first  number  .^^  Is  it  not  this,  that  it  unfolds  intelligible  light, 
especially  persuades  to  an  establishment  in  intelligibles,  and  through  its 
own  order  announces  to  us  the  uniform  power  of  principles?  If  there- 
fore, we  rightly  assert  these  things,  we  shall  in  a  greater  degree  admire 
Timaeus,  who  having  placed  time  over  the  perfections  of  souls,  and  the 
whole  world,  through  which  it  would  become  more  similar  to  animal 
itself  says,  that  tiiae  proceeds  accocdictg  to  nuiobert  mod  by  Bimber  nea- 
mre$  the  «iuiitwoe  ^f  total  souls.  Aad  as  in  inteNeetufite,  nMiber  10 
^staWsbed  above  the  i^elestial  circulation,  coUectiag  aod  caoaiof  it  to  be 
o»e,  ithiis  also  ia  wawbleB  Timse^  i«y«t  t^at  time  baH^  luimlwr  MoeMMwref 
•die  celestial  period«»  aed  compreheads  in  iteelf  tbe  fieilb  causf^  «f  tfa<^  per?- 
fectkm  lOf  tbe  perimk.  If  also,  Socrates  ia  tbe  IU^Mibl«c»  in  Ihe  ifwecb  of 
Uie  M«iseB,  apeajcs  about  die  one  and  entipe  period  of  the  uiuvene»  whkek 
he  tays  a  perli^t  jiu«ber  ooeiprcAiendit  <1oe9  it  not  tfarough  tbeae  ihiags 
appear  cbait  dtviee  number  is  perfective  of  wbdefi*  *xkd  mstores  ihua  to 
their  priatiBe  state,  and  that  it  measures  all  periods?  The  power  Jiiieivisa 
of  collecting  things  imperfect  to  the  perfect,  accedes  to  all  things  fhom 
number,  wihich  elevates  souls  from  ihings  apparent  to  those  that  Bjoe  un- 
appanent,  illuminates  the  whole  world  with  the  pesfecticMD  of  motion^  and 
^defines  to  aU  thifigs  measures,  and  the  order  ^f  periods^  But  if  not  only^ 
a  perfect  number  contains  the  period  of  a  divine  generated  *  nature,  bul; 
another  eecoo^^nmiiber  after  this  is  the  Ira'd  of  better  and  worse  genecar 
tiooSt  as  the  si^e  Socrates  says,  dunbar  will  not  only  restore  things  to 
their  pristine  state,  but  wiU  also  be  of  a  generative  natur^.  And  it  is  evid^Mit 
thatibese  things  subsist  in  a  divided  manner,  s^ccording  to  the  second  and 
thiiHl  periods  of  numbers;  but  at  once,  and  conkactedly  in  the  first  of 

'  ImtMl  9I  mmmfm  iiii^f  mm  rw  frnfrm  vwi  t^fi  tuv^ifnuif  foo^i^,  it  it  nectMsry  to  find  ttsnym  ^itMs 
*£T«y  i^erpetuallf  tircvlitiiiigbody  kcsUed  by  PJi|td» « $Unae  gNWiited  mtuit. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


500  ^N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOQK  IV. 

numbers.    The  first  number  therefore,  is  generative,,  mensuratlve,  and^ 
perfective  of  generated  natures. 


CHAPTER. XXXV. 


The  first  order  therefore  of  intelligibles  and  intelliectuals  i&  thus  sur^^ 
Teyed  by  Parmenides.  But  after  this  the  order  which  possesses  the- 
middle  place  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals^  and  which  &  little  before  we- 
called  connective,  presents  itself  to  the  view.  It  is  however  denominated 
in  a  three^fbld  respect^  viz.  one,  many,  whole,  parts,  finite,  infinite.  For 
since  the  separation  of  unities  and  beings  from  number,  extends  to  it,  the 
^ne  and  being,  which  we  have  said  difier^nce  divides,  become  wholes^ 
But  the  things  proceeding  from  these,  are  the  parts^  of  these;  And 
wholeness  indeed  connectedly  contains  parts,  but  these  are  contained  by 
their  wholeness,  in  one  way  indeed,  by  the  one^  but  in  another  by  being. 
Vor  there  indeed,  I  mean  in  the  summit  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  unity 
was  the  cause  of  multitude,  at  the  san>e  time  being  exempt  from  multi^ 
tude,  and  generative  of  the  many.  But  here  unity  is  coarranged  with 
multitude.  Hence  also  it  is  a  whole  which  has  reference  to  n^ny  unities 
as  to  parts.  Since  however,  the  connective  order  is  triple,  one  division 
of  it  being  intelligibJe^  another  intelligibte  and  intellectual,  and  another 
intellectual,  the  first  monad  indeed  subsists  according  to  <Ae  one  and  the 
many  ;  but  the  second^  according  to  whole  and  parts ;  and  the  third,  ac- 
cording to  the  finite  and  the  infinite.  For  where  the  first  triad  ends^ 
there  the  second  has  its  beginning.  Hence,  in  the  triad  prior  to- thi&, 
Parmenides  infers  that  the  one  is  many.  And  in  this  triad,  he  concludes 
the  same  thing  together  with  what  remains.  There  however,  the  one  was 
generative  of  infinites;  but  here  the  one  is  comprehensive  of  many^  the 
whole  of  parts,  and  the  finite  of  infinites.    Hence,  there  indeed^  unity  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXV.  OP  PLATO.  30I 

exempt  from  the  many ;  but  here  it  is  coarranged  with  muTtitude.  Hence 
also,  the  first  coarrangement  generates  whole  together  with  parts;  but  thft 
subsistence  of  whole  and  parts  produces  the  finite  and  at  the  same  time 
infinite.  For  these  are  successive  to  each  other,  viz.  the  one,  the  whple, 
the  finite,  and  the  things  which  are  as  it  were  in  an  opposite  arrangement 
to  these,  the  many,  parts,  infinites.  And  the  one  itself  is  indeed  the  prin^ 
eiple  of  the  rest.  But  whole  has  now  a  habitude  with  respect  to  parts, 
and  a  representation  of  the  duad,  and  proceeds  into  a  coarrangement  with 
reference  to  the  parts^  The  finite  however,  is  now  multitude,  participating 
of  bound  and  the  one,  and  is  as  i^  were  a  triad.  For  it  is  neither  bound 
alone,  as  the  monad,  nor  infinite  alone,  as  the  duad,  but  it  participates  of 
bounds  which  is  primarily  a  triad;  Every  thing  finite  therefore,  is  a 
whole,  but  not  every  whole  is  finite.  For  the  infinite  is  a  whole,  wheUier 
it  is  multitude,  or  magnitude.  And  every  whole  indeed,  is  one,  but  not 
every  one  is  a  whole.  For  that  which  is  without  habitude  to  multitude 
is  not  a  whole.  The  one  therefore,  is  beyond  whcde ;  but  whole  is  beyond 
the  finite; 

'  After  the  same  manner  alto,  infinite  partis  are  said  to  be  the  parts' of 
that  which  is  finite.  For  the  infinite  of  itself  has  no  subsistence;  by 
;which  also  it  is  evident  that  the  infinite  is  not  in  quantity  in  energy,'  but^ 
in  eapmcity.  All  parts  however  are  not  infinite.  For  according  to  bound 
they  are  characterized  by  one  of  the  part».  And  again,  parts  indeed  are 
many,  but  the  many  are  not  entirely  parts.  The  many  therefore,  are 
prior  to  parts:  and  parts  are  prior  to  infinites.  Hence,  as  the  many  are 
to  the  one^  so  are  parts  to  whole,  aadso  are  infinites  to  the  finite.  And 
these  three  connectedly-containing  monads,  give  completion  to  the  middle 
order  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals.  For  unity  indeed,  is  the  suppher 
of  stable  and  intelligible  connection  to  all  the  secondary  orders.  But 
wholeness  connects  the  progressions  of  divine  natures,  and  produces  one 
habitude  of  the  orderly  distribution  of  wholes^  And  the  finite  monad 
imparts  by  illumination  to  the  conversions  of  second  natures,  connection 
.with  the  natures  prior  to  them.    And  one  of  these  indeed  is  analogous 

.'  o  Tf  mufY^if  28  'GDUtted  in  the  origunU* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


502  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV. 

to  the  ooe  beingt  <^  which  accouBi  ako  it  is  iDteUigiye.  But  aocrtber  is 
^^nalq^us  to  the  third  order,  io  which  thene  was  the  vn^^  aad  the  duad 
which  g€»erates  iufinite  multitude.  Such  is  iJie  connective  triad,  whach 
Panueaides  cKhihits  to  us  through  these  thiugs.  The  m^t  therefore,  is 
ooe  aod  many,  whole  and  parts,  fiaite  and  vo&mt^  multitude.  Let  no 
one  however,  be  disturbed  that  Plato  calls  the  wt  or  beiog  iofioite  mul- 
titude. For  he  calls  the  one  and  bang  wheu  they  have  proceeded  and 
are  divided,  infifiite  iu  multitude.  F<)r  aU  radititude  iodeed,  is  lefetred 
to  the  intelligible  mfiaity.  But  divided  multitude,  and  which  has  pro- 
ceeded perfectly,  is  most  signally  infinite. 

Since  therefore,  all  the  primary  causes  of  intellectuals  are  in  this  triad, 
and  all  things  are  disseoiiiis^bed  in  its  bosoms,  the  first  Synodheus  indeed, 
conapr^ends  these  causes  as  multitude,  being  himsdf  aA  mtelligihle  unity, 
and  the  floww  as  it  were  of  the  triad.  But  the  secend  comprehends 
indeed  tecondaarily  these  causes,  but  co-airanged  and  co-multiplMd  with 
tiieni.  And  t^  tihird,  together  with  all^perfect  ^vision,  coaaects  the 
multitude  comprehended  in  himself.  Each  of  them  also  is  connective, 
but  one  as  bounding  another  as  gii^ng  completion  to  a  whole*  and  ano- 
ther as  uniting.  Plato  ther^re  made^  and  makes  as  he  pr<x;eeds  his 
demonstrations  of  the  one.  For  the  whc^  theory  is  concerning  the  one. 
But  it  is  evident  that  being  is  co-divided  with  the  one.  For  universally, 
it  has  been  before  observed,  that  every  deity  proceeding  dience  is  parti- 
cipable,  and  that  every  portion  of  being  participates  of  deity.  It  is  ne* 
cessary  however,  not  to  stop  in  the  one  alone,  but  to  consider  the  same 
peculiarity  '  as  imparted  to  beii^  in  a  secondary  degree,  since  Plato  ako 
produces  the  one  itself  by  itself  according  to  the  diflferences  of  the  divine 
orders ;  which  occasions  me  to  wonder  at  those  who  think  that  all  the 
conclusions  of  the  second  hypothesis  are  concerning  intellect,  and  do  not 
perceive  that  Plato  omitting  being  surveys  the  one  itse^  by  itself,  as  pro- 
ceeding and  generated,  and  receiving  different  peculiarities.  For  how  in 
discoursing  concerning  intellect  could  he  omit  being,  according  to  which 
intellect  has  ite  subsistence,  power,  and  energy.    For  the  one  is  beyond 

'  For  dB»rnf«f ,  k  k  WHiltrf  to  Ksd  iSi»Ti|roi« 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP-  XXXVI-  OF  PLATO.  v  303 

the  nature  of  intellect ;  but  bekig  gives  hyparxis  M  intellect^  aa^  mteltect 
is  nothing  ebe  than  being.  This  opinion  however  of  these  men  may  be 
confuted  by  many  other  arguments.  But  if  the  three  connective  Go4b 
are  divided  after  the  above-mentioned  manner,  and  the  intelligible  c«at- 
nective  deity  is  one  many,  but  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intel- 
lectual deity  is  whole  and  parts,  and  the  intellectual  is  finite  and  infinite, 
each  of  them  is  very  properly  called  much.  For  each  of  the  Synoches 
according  to  his  own  peculiarity  is  a  multitude.  For  the  first  about  the 
many,  receives  many  Synoches  of  a  more  partial  nature.  The  second 
receives  these  according  to  parts.  And  the  third,  according  to  infinites* 
If  therefore,  there  are  certain  partial  Gods  who  are  allotted  this  peculia- 
rity, they  are  comprehended  in  this  first  triad. 


CHAPTER  XXXVL 

Moreover,  it  is  easy  for  every  one  to  see  how  these  things  accord 
with  what  is  written  in  the  Phaedrus.  for  the  connective  one  accords 
with  the  back  of  the  heaven  that  comprehends  these.  For  the  one  and 
the  back  are  the  same,  comprehending  according  to  one  simplicity  the 
whole  circulation.  But  whole  is  the  same  with  the  profundity  of  the 
beaven,  and  with  as  it  were  the  bulk  of  it.  For  the  celestial  profundity 
is  a  whole  extended  from  the  back  as  far  as  to  the  arch.  And  end  is 
the  same  with  the  arch.  This  therefore,  is  evident  beyond  every  thing, 
3tnd  each  of  the  other  conclusions,  is  to  be  referred  to  the  same  concep- 
tions. Hence  from  what  has  been  said,  it  may  be  collected,  that  these 
three  things  pertain  in  a  remarkable  degree  to  the  Synoches,  viz.  the  oney 
whole,  and  the  end  [or  the  finite].  For  what  is  so  able  to  connect  multi- 
tude as  the  one  which  is  co-arranged  with  it  ?  What  is  so  connectedly- 
comprehensive  of  parts  as  whole?    And  how  is  it  possible  that  the  end 


Digitized  by 


Google 


304  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IT. 

[or  bound,]  should  not  be  the  cause  of  binding  together  things  which  are 
borne  along  to  inOnity.  It  terminates  therefore,  their  progression,  and 
brings  back  their  dispersed  section  to  the  one  essence  of  connection*  And 
ihus  much  concerning  die  connective  triad. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIL 


Btrr  the  third,  as  they  say,  to  the  saviour,  and  let  us  also  following 
Plato  in  what  remains  celebrate  the  perfective  order  of  the  Gods. 
Because,  therefore,  the  end  of  the  connective  order  was  the  finite,  [or  the 
bounded]  the  perfective  order  has  extremes.  For  the  end  [or  bound]  is 
the  extremity*  There  however  indeed  the  one  was  said  to  be  the  finite, 
but  here  it  is  said  to  have  an  extremity,  as  receiving  according  to 
participation  that  which  has  the  power  of  terminating  many  things.  And 
there  indeed,  the  one  was  end  or  bound,  which  also  connectedly  contains 
the  infinite ;  but  here  having  an  extremity,  it  will  also  have  a  middle 
and  beginning,  and  will  be  perfect.  For  that  which  receives  its  com- 
pletion from  all  these,  is  perfect.  Here,  therefore,  the  perfection  which 
consists  of  parts  is  apparent.  For  the  consummation  of  the  parts, 
prtKluces  the  perfect.  Moreover,  because  such  a  one  as  this  has  a 
middle  and  extremes,  it  will  have  the  figure  of  a  circumference,  or  it  will 
be  rectilinear^  or  it  will  be  mixed  [from  the  right  and  circular  line]. 
For  all  these  require  a  middle  and  extremes ;  some  indeed  with  sim- 
plicity, but  others  with  connexion.  Three  peculiarities,  therefore,  again 
present  themselves  to  our  view ;  the  first,  indeed,  being  that  which  we 
fliaid  was  to  have  extremes ;  the  second,  being  according  to  the  perfect ; 
and  the  third,  according  to  figure.    And  there  are  also  three  perfective 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXVIII.  OF  PLATO.  SO5 

leaders  of  wholes ;  one  indeed  beiDg  intelligible ;  another,  intelligible  and 
intellectual;  and  the  third,  intellectuaL 

The  intelligible  leader,  therefore,  is  said  to  have  extremes,  as  being 
directly  arranged  under  the  end  of  the  connective  Gods,  and  in  the 
boundaries  of  himself  intelligibly  comprehending  all  the  intellectual 
orders.  But  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  leader,  is  defined  according 
to  the  perfect,  comprehending  in  himself  the  beginnings,  middles,  and 
ends  of  beings,  and  giving  completion  to  the  middle  bond  of  the  whole 
perfective  triad.  And  the  intellectual  leader  proceeds  according  to 
.triadic  figure,  being  the  cause  of  bound  and  divine  perfection;  and 
imparting  termination  to  things  indefinite,  but  intellectual  perfection  to 
things  imperfect  And  this  triad  indeed  is  produced  according  to  the 
connective  triad*  For  the  ^id  in  them  is  the  cause  of  the  possession  of' 
the  extremity.  But  it  is  also  produced  from  itself.  For  that  which  has 
extremes,  having  become  a  whole,  constitutes  the  perfect  through  end 
£ot  bound].  But  the  perfect  comprehending  b^nnings,  middles  and 
ends,  unfolds  figure.  And  thus  the  perfective  triad  proceeds  superaally^ 
as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  pervading  to  all  things,  and  perfecting 
ix>t|i  whole  and  partial  causes. 


CHAFfER  XXXVIIL 


And  do  you  not  see  how  each  of  the  triads  conjoins  the  summit  of 
itself  with  the  €nds  placed  above  it?  For  the  one  many  was  the  end  of 
the  collective  and  unknown  triad;  and  the  same  is  the  beginning  c^  the 
connective  triad.  The  end  of  the  connective  triad  was  the  finite;  and 
this  again  is  the  beginning  of  the  perfective  triads  For  to  have  extremes 
manifests  that  which  consists  of  ends  or  bounds.  And  thus  the  whde 
Froc.  Vol.  I.  2  Q 


Digitized  by 


Google 


306  t>N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  IV., 

mkldle  order  is  connected  with  and  united  to  itself,  and  is  truly  the  bond 
of  total  orders,  itself  establishing  an  admirable  communion  with  itself,, 
but  conjoining  intellectuals  to  intelligibles,  and  convolving  them  to  one 
impartible  union ;  above  indeed,  having  the  intelligible  and  unknown 
triad,  but  in  the  middle  producing  the  triad  which  is  connective  of 
progressions,  and  at  the  end,  the  convertive  empire,  through  which  it 
proximately  converts  the  intellectual  to  the  intelligible  Gods. 

For  on  what  account  does  intellect  look  to  itself^  and  is^in  itself?  Is 
it  not  because  it  is  on  all  sides  finite  or  bounded,  converges  to  itself,  and 
convolves  its  appropriate  energies  about  itself?   But  why  is  it  perfect, 
and  full  of  intellectual  goods  P   Is  it  not  because  it  first  participates  of 
the  perfection  [of  the  above  mentioned]  leaders,  and  subsists  according, 
to  tfa«m,  possessing  a  self-perfect  essence  and  intellectual  perception  P 
Ader  what  manner  likewise,  is  it  said  to  be  a  sphere,  both  by  Plato,, 
and  other  theologistsp   Is  it  not  because  it  is  Uie  fi»t  participant  of 
figure,  and  is  intellectually  figured  according  to  it?    All  conversion, 
therefore,  all  perfection,  and  every  intellectual  figure^  accede  to  the 
intellectual  Gods,. firom  the  perfective  triad.    For  the  intelligible  leader 
of  perfection,  gives  perfection  to  the  ends  and  summits  atid  hyparxet  of. 
wholes.     But  the  intelligible  and   intellectual   leader  terminates  their 
progressions  which  extead  from  on  high  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things.  ^ 
And  the  intellectual  leader  comprehends  in  his  own  perfection,  the 
conversions  of  all  the  Gods,  and  bounds  and  perfects  through  figures . 
their  progressions  to  infinity. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 


Looking  therefore  to  this  division,  we  may  be  able  to  survey  causally 
many  things  which  are  to  be  found  among  other  theologists.    For  why 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXIX.  OF  PLATO. '  307 

is  ooe  of  tbft  dmtm  of  the  unknowa  tiiad  carried  in  the  first  of  the 
world»»  but  aoatheF  m  the  middle  breadth^  acid  another  ia  the  extremity  ? 
It  is  hoBtuse  the  first  of  these  was  uniform^  but  the  second  proceeded 
aeeordiAg  to  difierence^  and  the  third,  according  to  the  infinite  number 
of  faeiap*  But  why  of  the  three  connective  Gods,  is  the  first  empyrean, 
the  leeood  etiierial,  and  the  third  material  ?  It  is  because  the  first  indeed 
mibskU  aofif^rding  to  the  one^  and  conqectedly  contains  the  one  world. 
S«t  tke  ffeeond  subsist^  according  to  whole,  and  divides  the  etherial 
world*  4Ad  the  third  according  to  the  finite,  and  rules  over  material 
iofinitjf«  But  w^y  again,  are  the  Tdetarchs  co-divided  with  the 
Sytiophfis  ?  Beeause  the  first  having  extremes  governs  like  a  charioteer 
tJM  wing  of  fire,  ^ut  the  middle  coiqpn^Qding  b^innioga,  ends  and 
fluddles,  perfects  isther»  which  is  also  itself  triple.  And  the  third,  which 
^^npreheods  according  to  one  unioa,  the  orbicular,  thp  rectilinear,  and  the 
imxed'  figiu», perfects  unfigu^ed  and  formlei^  matter;  ginng  fi^rm  indeed 
(fu^HUflotf^)  to  the  inerratic  Bpherct  aad  the  first  matter,  by  the  orbicular ; 
but  te  the  piaaetary  sphere,  and  the  second  matter,  by  the  mixed  figure. 
For  the  spiral  is  there.  And  it  ^ves  form  to  the  sublunary  region,  and 
ike  lasit  matter  by  the  rectilinear.  For  the  motions  according  to  a  right 
line  me  in  this  region.  Hence,  the  first  triad  is  uniformly  the  cause  of 
the  division  of  the  worlds.  But  the  second  has  a  more  abundant 
repK»entation  of  section,  and  of  progreission  into  parts ;  yet  does  not 
exhibit  to  us  the  multitude  of  the  worlds.  And  the  third  unfolds  the 
seven  worlds,  and  the  monad  together  with  two  triads.  So  great  is  the 
divine  conception  of  Plato,  that  from  these  things  we  may  survey  the 
causes  of  what  after  his  time  became  apparent. 

For  <i>is,  indeed,  from  what  has  been  said  appears  to  be  very  admir- 
able, that  according  to  each  of  the  triads,  the  middle  is  characteristic  of 
the  vho\e  triad.  Thus  for  instance,  in  the  unknown  triad,  difference 
is  established  as  the  middle  between  the  one  and  being.  But  in  the 
connective  triad  whole  is  the  characteristic,  which  is  the  middle  of 
the  oncy  and  the  finite.    And  in  the  perfective  triad,  the  perfect  is  the 

'  V  [itKTov  is  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


308  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  1560^  IK 

clWiract eristic,  which  is  itself  established  as  the  middle  of  that  which  has^^ 
extremes,  and  of  figure*  For  difference  is  the  feminine  itself/ and  the 
prolific  nature  of  the  Gods.  And  whole  is  itself  the  form  of  connected 
comprehension,  binding  together  many  parts.  And  the  perfect  is  itself 
the  good  of  perfection,  possessing  a  beginning,  middle,  and  end,  mxd 
conjoining  the  end  to  the  beginning,  according  to  the  peculiarity  of 
conversion.  Being  also  nothing  else  than  a  perfect  governor  it  is  the 
cause  of  the  peculiarity  of  these  Gods  subsisting  every  where  according 
to  the  middle  centres.  Hence  the  whole  order  of  the  intelligible,  and 
at  the  same  time,  intellectual  Gods,  may  be  surveyed  as  having  its 
subsistence  in  the  middle.  For  the  intelligible  Gods,  indeed,  are 
especially  defined  according  to  hyparxes  and  summits ;  on  which  account 
also,  they  are  called  fathers,  and  unical  Gods.  For  the  one  and  father 
are  in  them  the  same.  But  the  intellectual  Gods  are  defined  according 
to  ends  or  extremities ;  and  on  this  account,  all  of  them  are  denominated 
intellects  and  intellectual.  The  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time» 
intellectual  Gods,  however,  being  middles,  especially  present  themselves 
to  the  view  according  to  the  middles  of  the  triads. 

Farther  still,  this  also  may  be  considered  in  common  about  all  these 
triads,  that  each  accoixling  to  the  end  proceeds  to  infinity.  For  the 
end  of  the  first  triad  is  number;  of  the  second,  th^e  infinite  in  multitude; 
and  of  the  third,  the  rectilinear,  which  itself  participates  of  the  nature  of 
the  infinite.  And  of  this  the  cause  is,  that  each  of  the  triads  according 
to  its  extremity  is  carried  as  in  a  vehicle  in  the  material  worlds,  and 
comprehends  according  to  one  cause  the  infinity  of  the  natures  that  are 
generated  in  them.  In  addition,  likewise,  to  what  has  been  said,  we 
may  survey  the  order  of  the  triads,  from  the  ends  that  are  in  them.  For 
the  end  of  the  first  triad  is  number :  but  of  the  second,  tiie  finite  and  the 
infinite;  and  of  the  third,  the  orbicular,  the  mixed  figure,  and  the 
rectilinear.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  first  triad  is  monadic ;  but 
the  second  dyadic ;  and  the  third  triadic.  And  the  first  of  these  indeed 
is  analogous  to  the  one  being ;  but  the  second  to  the  intelligible  whole  ; 
and  the  third,  to  the  all-perfect  whole.  But  that  these  have  this  order 
with  respect  to  each  oth^r,  has  been  before  observed.     In  shorty  there- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP,  XXXIX.  OP  Pl.ATO«  sog 

fore,  every  intelligiUe,  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  triads  is  according 
to  its  summit  indeed  conjoined  to  the  intelligible;  but  according  to  its 
middle,  unfolds  its  proper  power;  and  according  to  its  termination^ 
comprehends  the  infinity  of  secondary  natures.  And  here  we  shall  end 
the  doctrine  concerning  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


$10  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 


BOOK    V. 


CHAPTER  L 


In  the  next  place,  let  us  survey  another  order  of  Gods,  which  is  called 
intellectual,  being  indeed  conjoined  to  the  orders  prior  to  it,  but  termi- 
nating the  total  progressions  of  the  Gods,  converting  them  to  their 
principle,  and  producing  one  circle  of  the  primarily-efficient  and  all« 
perfect  orders.  Let  us  also  extend  the  intellect  that  is  in  us  to  the 
imparticipable  and  divine  intellect,  and  distinguish  the  orders  and 
diminutions  of  essence  that  are  in  it,^  according  to  the  narration  of 
Plato. 

This  intellectual  hypostasis  therefore  of  the  Gods,  is  suspended  indeed 
from  more  ancient  causes,  and  is  filled  from  them  with  total  goodness 
and  self-sufficiency.  But  after  these  causes,  it  establishes  an  illustrious 
empire  over  all  secondary  natures,  binding  to  its  dominion  all  the  partial 
progressions  of  the  Gods.  And  it  is  denominated  indeed  intellectual, 
because  it  generates  an  impartible  and  divine  intellect.  But  it  is  filled 
from  intelligibles,  not  as  from  those  intelligibles  which  are  co-arranged 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  r..  OF  PLATO.  311 

with  intellect^  nor  as  with  those  which  are  alone  divided  from  intellect* 
by  the  conception  of  the  mind,  but  as  establishing  in  itself  unically  all 
multitudes^  and  occultly  containing  the  evolutions  of  the  Gods  into  li^t,^ 
and  the  hyparxes  of  intelligibles.    It  is  likewise  allotted  the  toted  intellect 
of  intellectuals,  the  variety  of  beings^  and  the  multiform  orders  of  divine 
natures;    and  it  convolves  the  end-  of  the  whole  progression'  [of  the 
Gods]  to  the  one  intelligible  principle.     For  intellectuals  are  converted 
to  intelligibles.     And  some  intellectuals  indeed  are  united  and*  firmly 
established  prior  to  the  divided  Gods;    but  others  are  multiplied  and 
through  conversion   are  conjoined  to  primarily-efficient  causes.     The^ 
intellectual  Gods  however  proceed  from  all  the  Gods  prior  to   them,^ 
receiving  indeed  unions  from  the  one  that  is  prior  to  intelligibles;   but 
essences  from  intelligibles;  and  being  allotted  lives  all-perfect,  connective- 
and  generative  of  divine  natures,  from  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same 
time  intellectual  Gods;  but  Uie  intellectual  peculiarity  from  themselves. • 
They  likewise  convert  to  themselves  all  the  divided  orders,  but  establish 
themselves  in  intelligibles,  existing  wholly  through  the  whofe,  pure  and  ^ 
imknown  knowledges,  and  fervid  lives.     Besides  these  things  also,  they- 
are  all-perfect  essences,  producing  all  secondary  natures  through  sub- 
sisting from  themselves,  and  being  neither  diminished  by  their  progres-- 
sion,  nor  receiving  an  addition  by  their  progeny;   but  through  their  own ^ 
never-faiUng  and  infinite  powers,  being  the  fathers,  causes,  and  leaders  c^ 
all  things*.    Nov  are  they  co-divided  with  their  progeny,  nor  do  they 
depart  from  themselves  in  their  progressions;   but  at  once,  and  according: 
to  union  they  govern  total  multitudes,  and  all  orders,. and  convolve  them: 
to  the  intelligible,  and  to  occult  good. 

Whether  therefore  I  may  speak  of  life,  it  is  not  proper  to  think  that  it 
is^  such  a  life  as  we  surveyed  a  little  before.     For  that  was  impartici- 
pable,  but  this  is  participated.     And  that  indeed,  was  generative,  but 
this  is  vivific.     But  it  is  not  immanifest  that  these  differ  from  each  othei*.  - 
For  the  vivific  cause  indeed,  is   also  evidently  generative;    but  the* 
generative  cause  is  not  entirely  vivific.    For  it  imparts  figure  to  things  > 

'  For  irfjioSov  it  is  necessary  to  read  wgcoiov. 

*  After  x«i  it  is  necessarj  to  supply  ta  fny  mvTM  xcu. . 


Digitized  by 


Google 


312  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

unBgurcd,  bound  ta  things  indefinite,  and  perfection  to  things  imperfect 
X)r  whether  I  may  denominate  the  cause  in  intellectuals  intelligible^  it 
must  not  immediately  be  conceived  to  be  such  an  intelligible,  as  that  of 
which  we  have  before  spoken.  For  that  was  imparticipable,  and  prior 
to  intellectuals,  itself  pre-existing  by  itself,  and  exempt  from  wholes;  not 
being  denominated  intelligible,  as  the  plenitude  of  intellect,  but  as  the 
prior-cause  of  it,  and  the  object  of  desire  and  love  to  it,  subsisting 
uniformly  uncoordinaled  with  it  The  intelligible  however  which  is  now 
the  subject  of  consideration,  is  participated,  and  co-arranged  with 
intellect,  is  multiform,  and  contains  in  itself  the  divided  causes  of  all 
things.  Or  whether  we  may  call  the  Gods  in  this  order  fathers  and 
fabricators,  it  must  be  admitted  that  this  paternal  and  fabricative 
t:haracteristic,  is  different  from  the  hyparxis  of  the  intelligible'  fathers. 
For  they  indeed  were  generative  of  whole  essences;  but  these  pre-exist 
^is  the  causes  of  divisible  emanations,  and  of  definite  productions  of  form* 
And  they  indeed  contained  in  themselves  powers  fabricative  of  the  divine 
progressions;  but  these  separate  from  themselves  prolific  causes,  and  are 
not  conjoined  to  them  according  to  union,  but  according  to  a  commu- 
nion subordinate  to  union.  For  the  marriages  which  are  celebrated  by 
fables,  and  the  concordant  conjunction  of  divine  natures,  are  in  the 
intellectual  Gods.  But  the  demiurgic  being  mingled  with  the  vivific 
^effluxions,  every  genus  of  the  Gods  is  unfolded  into  light,  both  the 
supermundane,  and  the  mundane.  This,  however,  will  be  hereafter 
^discussed. 

'  Por  vof  f  0^1  it  is  necoMdxy  td  read  yoijraxy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  II.  OF  PLATO.  313 


CHAPTER  II. 


Since  however,  we  have,  in  short,  surveyed  the  peculiarity  of  the 
iatellectual  Gods,  it  remains  that  we  should  deliver  an  appropriate  theory 
concerning  the  division  of  them.  For  the  intellectual  order  is  not  ^ne 
and  indivisible,  but  is  allotted  progressions  more  various  than  those  of 
the  more  elevated  genera.  There  will  therefore  be  here  also  three 
fathers,  who  divide  the  whole  intellectual  essence;  one  indeed,  being 
arranged  according  to  the  intelligible,  but  another  according  to  l\fe,  and 
another  according  to  intellects  They  also  imitate  the  intelligible  fathers, 
who  divide  the  intelligible  breadth  in  a  threefold  manner,  and  who  are 
allotted  a  diflPerence  of  this  kind  with  respect  to  each  other.  For  one  of 
these  intellectual  fathers  proceeds  analogous  to  the  first  [intelligible^ 
father,  and  is  intelligible.  But  another  proceeds  analogous  to  the  second 
[intelligible]  father,  and  binds  to  himself  the  whole  of  intellectual  life. 
And  another  proceeds  analogous  to  the  third  father,  and  closes  the 
whole  intellectual^  in  the  same  manner  as  he  closes  the  intielligible 
order. 

But  these  fathers  being  three,  and  the  first  indeed,  abiding  in  himself, 
but  the  second  proceeding  and  vivifying  all  things,  and  the  third  glit^ 
tering  with  fabricative  productions,  it  jis  evidently  necessary,  that  other 
triple  Gods  should  be  conjoined  with  them;  of  which,  one  indeed  will 
be  the  source  to  the  first  intellectual  God,  of  stable  purity;  but  another,, 
of  undefiled  progression,  to  the  second  God;  and  another  of  exempt. 
£ibrication,  to  the  third.  For  in  the  Gods  prior  to  these,  the  undefiJleA 
deities  were  according  to  cause,  through  union  without  separation,  and  a. 
sameness  collective  of  powers  which  are  not  in  want  of  the  communion 
of  these.  But  in  the  intellectual  Gods>  where  there  is  an  all-perfect 
Proc.  Vol.  L  2  R 


Digitized  by 


Google 


314  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

separation^  as  in  total  orders,  and  a  greater  habitude  to  secondary 
natures,  unpolluted  deity  or  power  is  necessary,  which  has  the  ratio  of 
sameness,  and  undeviating  subsistence,  to  the  paternal  cause,  and  which 
is  co-divided  with  the  fathers,  so  that  each  of  the  undefiled  Gods  is 
conjoined  with  a  peculiar  father. 

These  two  triads  therefore  have  presented  themselves  to  our  view,  one 
indeed,  of  the  intellectual  fathers,  but  the  other  of  the  undefiled  Gods. 
There  is  however,  besides  these  two,  a  third  other  triadic  monad,  which 
is  the  cause  of  separation  to  intellectuals,  and  which  subsists  together 
with  the  above  mentioned  triads.  For  the  fathers  indeed  are  the 
suppliers  of  all  essence;  but  the  inflexible  Gods,  of  sameness.  But  it  is 
«videndy  fit  that  there  should  be  also  the  cause  of  separation,  and  that 
this  should  be  one  and  at  the  same  time  triple,  separating  the  intdiectual 
Gods  from  the  above  mentioned  orders,  from  themselves,  and  from 
inSerior  natures.  For  why  are  they  the  leaders  of  another  order,  if  they 
ire  not  divided  from  the  first  orders?  Why  are  they  multiplied,  and  why 
do  they  differ  from  each  other  in  their  kingdoms,  unless  they  are 
separated?  Why  also  do  they  transcend  the  partial  [Gods]  unless  they 
are  also  separated  from  these?  Tlie  cause  of  separation  therefore,  will  be 
for  us  one  and  a  triple  monad.  But  the  paternal  and  nndefiled  causes  will 
be  each  of  them  a  uniform  triad.  And  what  is  most  paradoxical  of  all, 
the  separative  cause  is  more  monadic;  but  the  paternal  and  also  the 
undefiled  cause,  are  each  of  them  more  triadic.  For  the  separative 
monad  indeed,  is  the  cause  of  separation  to  the  other  monads;  but 
the  others  are  the  sources  of  communion  and  union  to  it.  Hence  each 
of  these,  being  separated,  becomes  triadic ;  but  the  separative  monad  is 
monadic,  in  consequence  of  being  united  by  these.  For  all  intellectuals 
pervade  through  each  other,  and  are  in  each  other,  according  to  a  certain 
admirable  communion,  imitating  the  union  of  intelligibles,  through  being 
present  and  mingled  with  each  other.  The  sphere  also  which  is  thefe,  is 
the  intellectual  order,  energizing  in  and  about  itself,  and  proceeding  into 
itsdf  hebdomatically,  being  a  monad  and  a  hebdomad,  the  image,  if  it 
be  lawful  so  to  speak,  of  the  all-perfect  intdligible  monad,  and  unfolding 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  n.  OF  PLATO.  gj^ 

its  occult  union^  through  progression  and  separation.  This  first  pro- 
gression therefore  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  which  is  separated  by  us  into> 
a  heptady  we  have  perfectly  celebrated. 

Other  secondary  seven  hebdomads,  however,  are  to  be  considered 
finder  this,  which  produce  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  the  monads  of 
this  heptad.  For  each  monad  is  the  leader  of  an  intellectual  hebdomad 
conjoined  with  it,  and  extends  this  hebdomad  from  on  high,  from  t}ie 
summit  of  Olympus,  as  far  as  to  the  last,  and  terrestrial  orders.  I  say, 
for  instance,  the  first  paternal  monad,  indeed,  constitutes  seven  such 
Bionads.  But  the  second  again  constitutes  seven  vivific  monads.  And^ 
the  third,  seven  demiurgic  monads.  Each  likewise  of  the  undefiled: 
monads  constitutes  a  number  equal  to  that  produced  by  the  fiEithers^ 
And  the  monad  of  separation  constitutes  seven  {^separative  monads]:. 
Fof  all  these  causes  proceed  in  conjunction  with  each  other.  And  ad 
the  first  triad  of  the  fathers  subsists  together  with  the  undefiled  triad,. 
^  and  the  divisive  monad,  after  the  sante  manner  also,  the  second  triads 
are  allotted  seven  coordinate  undefiled  triads,  and  separative  monads.. 
Whence,,  therefore,  doe&  so  great  a  number  of  intellectual  Gods  present 
itself  to  our  view  ?  It  is  evident,  indeed,  from  what  has  been  said.  For* 
the  first  hebdomad,  indeed,  the  cause^of  the  second  hebdomads,  and 
which  has  the  relation  of  a  monad  to  them,  and  which  a  little  before  we^ 
denominated  an  intellectual  sphere,  subsists  according  to  the  intelligible 
breadth,  imitating  the  paternal  nature  of  it  through  the  paternal  triad ;: 
but  the  eternity  of  its  power,  through  undefiled  sameness;  and  the 
multitude  shining  forth  in  its  extremities,  through  the  monad  which  is- 
divisive  of  wholes.  The  remaining  hebdomads,  however,  which  are 
derived  from  this,  proceed  according  to  the  intelligible  and  intellectual; 
genera.  For  each  monad,  conformably  to  the  summits  of  those  genera,, 
constitutes  a  monad  co^rranged  with  the  multitude  proceeding  from  it ;: 
since  every  summit  is  uniform  [i.  e.  has  the  form  of  the  one,]  as  we 
have  before  demonstrated.  But  according  to  the  middle  and  third 
pr<^rt;ssionH  of  those  genera,  each  monad  generates  two  triads.  For 
the  separation  of  them  was  apparent  in  the  middle  and  ultimate 
progressions^  as  we  have  before  observed.    As,,  therefore,  the  intelligible^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


316  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

and  at  the  same  time,  intellectual  genera,  produced  the  intelligible 
i)readth,  which  is  of  a  unical  nature,  into  a  triadic  multitude,  after  the 
same  manner  also  the  intellectual  monads  call  forth  the  intelligible,  and 
at  the  same  time  intellectual  triads,  into  intellectual  hebdomads.  And 
they  constitute  indeed  the  monads  which  are  coarranged  with  the 
hebdomads,  according  to  the  summits  of  the  triads ;  but  the  two  triads, 
.according  to  the  second  and  third  decrements  of  those  triads.  Hence 
every  hebdomad  has  the  first  monad  indeed  intelligible ;  but  the  second 
after  this,  and  which  is  triadic,  intelligible  and  intellectual ;  and  the 
third  triad,  which  is  the  next  in  order,  intellectual.  All  these  likewise 
subsist  as  in  intellectuals.  For  they  are  characterized  aca)rding  to  the 
peculiarity  of  tlie  constitutive  monad. 

In  short,  the  intellectual  powers  proceed  according  to  the  intelligible 
orders ;  but  they  constitute  these  seven  hebdomads  according  to  the  first 
intellectual  orders.  For  it  is  indeed  necessary  that  exempt  causes  should 
he  assimilated  to  the  intelligible  Gods;  but  that  co-arranged  causes;  and 
which  proceed  every  where,  should  be  assimilated  to  the  intelligible,  and 
at  the  same  time,  intellectual  Gods ;  sincb  these  also  are  the  first  that 
divide  the  worlds  triadically,  and  pervade  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things, 
connectedly  containing  and  perfecting  all  things.  But  the  intelligible 
Gods  contain  the  causes  of  wholes  uniformly,  and  occultly.  You  may 
also  say,  that  the  intelligible  Gods  produce  all  things  uniformly ;  for 
numbers  subsist  in  them  monadically.  But  the  intelligible  and  inteU 
lectual  Gods  produce  all  thing:»  triadically.  For  the  monads  in  these  are 
divided  according  to  number.  And  what  the  monad  was  in  the  former, 
that  number  is  in  the  latter.  And  the  intellectual  Gods  produce  all 
things  hebdomadically.  For  they  evolve  the  intelligible,  and  at  the 
same  time,  intellectual  triads,  into  intellectual  hebdomads,  and  expand 
their  contracted  powers  into  intellectual  variety ;  since  they  define 
multitude  itself  and  variety  by  numbers  which  are  nearest  to  the  monad, 
for  the  numbers  of  the  partial  are  different  from  the  numbers  of  the 
total  orders  in  the  Gods.  And  the  whole  of.  this  intellectual  number  is 
indeed  more  expanded  than  the  natures  prior.to  it,  and  is  divided  into 
more  various  progressions,  yet  it  does  not  desert  its  alliance  with  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  III.  OF  PLATO.  317 

monad.  For  hebdomadic  multitude  has  an  abundant  affinity  with  the 
nature  of  the  monad  j  since  it  is  measured  according  to  it,  and  primarily 
subsists  from  it.  And  the  Pythagoreans,  when  they  denominate  the 
heptad  light  according  to  intellect^  evidently  admit  its  hyparxis  to  Be 
intellectual,  and  on  this  account  suspended  from  the  monad.  For  the 
unioal^  which  light  manifests,  is  inherent  from  this  in  all  the  divine 
numbers.  And  thus  much  concerning  the  division  of  these  intellectual 
Gods'* 


CHAPTER  III. 


It  follows  in  the  next  place,  that  we  should  adapt  the  theory  of  Plato 
to  this  order,  and  show  that  he  does  not  dissent  from  any  of  the  theological 
dogmas  concerning  it.  Since,  therefore,  we  have  demonstrated,  that  the 
celestial  order,  which  we  find  in  the  Cratylus  perfectly  celebrated^ 
possesses  the  middle  bond  of  the  intellectual,  and  at  the  same  time, 
intelligible  Gods,  but  that  under  this  another  order  of  Gods  is  imme- 
diately arranged,  as  Socrates  shows  in  the  Phsedrus,  called  the  subce- 
lestial  arch,  and  which  we  have  considered  as  not  divided  from  the 
heaven, — ^this  being  the  case,  what  order  is  it  which  divides  itself  from 
the  kingdom  of  the  heaven,  but  is  the  leader  of  the  intellectual  order  of 
the  Gods,  and  is  primarily  the  supplier  of  intellect,  according  to  the 
doctrine  of  Plato,  as  Socrates  says  in  the  Cratylus,  except  that  which 
the  mi^ty  Saturn  comprehends?  For  he  calls  this  God  the  first  and 
piost  pui^  intellect.  This  God>  ther^ore,  is  the  summit  of  a  divine 
intellect,  and,  as  he  says,  the  purest  part  of  it ;  separating  himself  indeed 
from  the  celestial  order,  but  reigoing  over  all  the  intellectual  Gods ; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


313  ON  THE  THEOXiOGY  fiOOKiir^ 

because  be  is  full  of  intellect,  but  of  a  pure  intellect,  and  is  a  God 
extended  to  the  summit  of  the  intellectual  hypostasis.  Hence  also,  be 
is  the  father  of  the  mighty  Jupiter,  and  is  simply  father.  For  he  who  is 
the  father  of  the  father  of  all  things,  is  evidently  allotted  in  a  much 
greater  degree  the  paternal  dignity.  Saturn,  therefore,  ia  the  first 
intellect;  but  the  mighty  Jupiter  is  also  an  intellept,  containing,  as 
&x:rates  says  in  the  Philebus,  a  royal  souU  and  a  royal  intellect. 

And  these  Gods  are  two  intellects,  and  intellectual  fathers ;  the  ooe^ 
indeed^  being  intellectual;  but  the  other  intelligible,  in  intellectuals. 
Tot  the  Saturnian  bonds  which  Socrates  mentions  in  the  Cratyhis,  are 
Hnific  of  the  intelligence  of  Jupiter  about  the  intelligible  of  bis  &ther,. 
smd  fill  the  Jovian  intellect  with  the  alUperfect  intelligence  of  the 
Saturnian  intellect.  And  this  I  think  is  likewise  evident  from  the 
analogy  ci  souls  ta  Huto.  For  as  he  binds  souk  about  himself,  filling 
them  with  wisdom  and  intertigenoe,  thu»  also  Saturn  being  the  object  of 
desire  and  lore  to  Jupiter,  contains  him  in  himself  by  indissoluble  bonds^ 
And  these  things  Socrates  indicates  in  the  Cratylus,  jesting,  and  at  the- 
same  time  being  seriousr  in  what  he  says.  The  object  of  desire  therefore^ 
and  the  intdHgibb  ta  Jupiter,  is  Saturn.  But  the  mighty  Jupiter 
himself  is  a  divine  and  demimrgic  intellect.  Hence^  it  is  necessary  that 
there  should  be  a  third  other  intellectual  cause,  generative  of  life.  For 
Japicer  indeed  is  the  cause  of  life,  as  Socrates  says,  but  intellectually 
and  secondarily.  But  we  say  that  life  is  every  where  arranged  prior  to^ 
intellect.  Hence,  we  must  say  that  the  queen  Rhea,  being  the  mother 
ef  Jupiter,  but  subordinate  to  the  father  Saturn,,  gives  completion  to  this 
middle,  existing  as  a  vivific  wbrld,  and  .estabhshing  in  herself  the  causes 
of  the  whole  of  life.  I'hese  three  paternal  orders,  therefore,  have 
appeared  to  us  in  intellectuals :  one  of  them  indeed  subsisting  according 
to  the  intelligible  power  of  intellectuals;.'  but  another  according  to 
divine  and  intellectual  life;  and  aqother  according  to  intellectual 
intellect.  For  we  celebrate  the  middle  deity,  herself  by  herself,  as  the 
mother  of  the  demiurgus,  and  of  wholes.     When,  however,  we  survey 

*  It  appears  from  the  version  of  Portus,  that  the  words  o  /xtv  xara  r^v  wifnpf  hvofMv  r«y  voifuty, 
are  omitted  in  the  original.    Indeed,  the  sense  requires  that  they  should  be  inserted. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ni.  OF  PLATO.  3I9 

her  together  with  the  extremes,  we  deDominate  her  a  paternal  cause, 
as  being  comprehended  in  the  fathers ;  and  as  generating  some  things 
together  with  Saturn,  but  others  in  conjunction  with  Jupiter. 

Moreoyer,  Plato  following  Orpheus,  calls  the  inflexible  and  undefiled 
triad  of  the  intdlectual  Gods  Curetic,  as  is  evident  from  what  the  Athe- 
nian guest  sajrs  in  the  Laws,  celebrating  the  armed  sports  of  the  Curetes, 
and  their  rythmical  dance.  For  Orpheus  represents  the  Curetes  who  are 
three,  as  the  guards  of  Jupiter.  And  the  sacred  laws  of  the  Cretani^ 
and  all  the  Grecian  theology,  refer  a  pure  and  undefiled  life  and  energy 
to  this  order.  For  to  Hopt^w  to  koron^  indicates  nothing  dse  than  the  piMre 
and  tncorniptible.  Hence,  we  have  before  said,  that  the  mighty  Satkim^ 
as  being  essentially  united  to  the  cause  of  undefiled  purity,  is  a  piii|| 
intellect  The  paternal  Gods  therefore  are  three,  and  the  undefiled  Godb 
also  are  three.  Hence  it  remains  tlmt  we  should  survey  the  seventh 
monad. 

If,  therefore^  we  consider  the  febukras  elections^  both  the  Satumian 
and  the  Celestial,  of  which  Plato  makes  mention,  and  thisiks  tb«t  such 
like  narrations  should  always  be  concealed  in  ^lence,  that  the  arcane  tmth 
of  them  should  be  surveyed,  and  thnt  they  are  indicative  of  mystic  con^ 
ceptionA,  because  these  things  are  not  fit  fot*  young  men  to  hear,— [if  we 
consider  these]  w^  may  obtain  from  them  what  the  separative  deity  is, 
who  accomplishes  the  divisions,  and  segregates  the  Satumian  genera 
indeed  from  the  Celestial,  and  the  Jovian  from  the  Satumian,  and  who 
separates  the  whole  intellectual  order  from  the  natures  prior  and  posterior 
to  it,  disjoins  the  difierent  causes  in  it  from  each  other,  and  always  im-* 
parts  to  secondary  natures,  secondary  measures  of  dominion.  And  let 
not  any  one  be  disturbed,  or  oppose  me  on  hearing  these  things.  How 
therefore  does  Plato  reject  exections,  bonds,  and  the  tragical  apparatus 
of  fables  ?  For  he  thinks  that  all  such  particulars  will  be  condemned  by 
the  multitude  and  the  stupid,  through  ignorance  of  the  arcana  they  con* 
tain ;  but  that  they  will  exhibit  to  the  wise  certain  admirable  opinions. 
Hence,  he  indeed  does  not  admit  such  a  mode  of  fiction,  but  thinks  it 
proper  to  be  persuaded  by  the  ancients  who  were  the  o&pring  of  the 
Gods,  and  to  investi^te  their  arcane  conceptions*    A9  therefore  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SJO  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

rejects  the  Saturnian  fables^  when  they  are  narrated  to  Euthyprhon,  andi 
the  auditors  of  the  Republic,  yet  at  the  same  time*  admits  them  in  the 
Cratylus,  placing  about  the  mighty  Saturn  and  Pluto,  other  secondary 
bonds, — thus  also,  I  think  he  forbids  exections  to  be  introduced  ta  those 
who  know  only  the  apparent  meaning  of  what  is  said,  and  does  not  admit 
that  there  is  illegal  conduct  in  the  Gods,  and  nefarious  aggressions  of 
children  against  their  parents,  but  he  opposes,  and  confutes  as  mudi  as 
possible  such  like  opinions.  He  assents  however  to  their  being  narrated 
to  those  who  are  able  to  penetrate  into  the  mystic  truths  and  investigate 
the  concealed  meaning  of  fables,  and  admits  the  separation  of  wholes,, 
whether  [mythologists]  are  willing  to  denominate  them  exections  for  the. 
laupose  of  concealment,  or  in  whatever  other  way  they  may  think  fit  to^ 
call  them.  For  bonds  and  exections  are  symbols  of  conmiunion  and  se- 
paration, and  each  is  the  progeny  of  the  same  divine  mythology.  Nor  is^ 
there  any  occasion  to  wonder,  if  from  these  things  we  endeavour  to  confina 
the  opinion  of  Plato;  but  it  is  requisite  to  know  how  the  philosophy  of 
Plato  admits  all  such  particulars,  and  how  it  rejects  them,  and  in  what 
nianner  he  apprehends  they  may  be  the  causes  of  the  greatest  evils,  and 
of  an  impious  life  to  those  that  hear  them.  The  seven  intellectual  Gods 
therefore,  will  through  these  conceptions  appear  to  have  been  thought 
worthy  of  being  mentioned  by  Plato^ 


CHAPTER   IV. 


It  is,  however,  1  think,  necessary  syllogistically  to  collect  the  progres- 
sion of  them  according  to  hebdomads,  from  images.  The  demiurgus 
therefore,  [in  the  Timaeus^  fabricates  the  soul  of  the  universe  an  image  or 
all  the  divine  orders,  in  the  same  manner  as  he  fabricates  this  sensible 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  IV.  OF  PLATO.  331 

world  an  image  of  intelligibles.  And  in  the  first '  place  indeed,  he  consti- 
tutes the  whole  essence  of  the  soul,  and  afterwards  divides  it  into  numbers, 
binds  it  by  harmonies,  and  adonis  it  with  figures,  I  mean  the  rectilinear  and 
the  circular.  After  this  also,  he  divides  it  into  one  circle  and  seven  circles. 
Whence  therefore,  are  this  monad  and  hebdomad  derived,  except  from 
the  intellectual  Gods?  For  figure,  number,  and  true  being,  are  prior  to 
them.  And  as  in  the  fabrication  of  the  soul,  after  the  subsistence  of  the 
psychical  figure,  the  division  of  the  circles  according  to  the  monad  and 
hebdomad  follows,  thus  also  in  the  Gods,  after  intellectual  and  intelligible 
figure,  the  intellectual  breadth,  and  that  sphere  of  the  Gods  succeed. 
The  multitude  therefore  of  the  seven  hebdomads  subsist  from  the  divine 
intellectual  hebdomad  entering  into  itself.  And  on  this  account,  the 
demiurgus  thus  divides  the  circles  in  the  soul,  because  he,  and  every 
intellectual  order,  produce  an  intellectual  hebdomad  firom  each  monad. 
I  do  not  however  assert,  and  now  contend,  that  the  seven  circles  are 
allotted  an  hyparxis  similar  to  the  seven  Gods  that  proceed  from  the 
demiurgus,  but  that  the  demiurgus  dividing  the  soul  according  to  circles, 
introduces  number  to  the  sections  from  the  intellectual  Gods,  I  mean  the 
monadic  and  the  hebdomadic  number.  For  the  monad  indeed  subsists 
according  to  the  circle  of  sameness,  but  the  division,  according  to  the 
circle  of  diflference.  Shorly  after  however,  it  will  appear  that  same  and 
different  belong  to  the  demiurgic  order. 

Farther  still,  after  the  division  of  the  circles,  the  demiurgus  assumes  some 
things  which  are  symbols  of  the  assimilative,  and  others  which  are  sym- 
bols of  the  liberated  Gods,  and  through  these,  he  refers  the  soul  to  these 
orders  of  the  Gods.  If  therefore  figure  is  prior  to  the  intellectual  Gods, 
but  the  similar  and  dissimilar  are  posterior  to  them,  it  is  evidently  neces- 
sary that  the  monadic  and  at  the  same  time  hebdomadic,  should  be 
referred  to  this  order,  and  that  the  progression  from  the  monad  to  the 
hebdomad  should  pertain  to  this  order.  Each  therefore  of  the  seven 
intellectual  Gods,  is  the  leader  of  an  intellectual  hebdomad,  as  we  may 

*  For  T§oorri¥f  it  is  iiecessary  to  read  wpcwco^.    It  was  also  requisite  to  alter  the  punctuation  in 
the  preceding  sentence. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  S 


Digitized  by 


Google 


32a  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOO|[  V\ 

learn  fram  images.  There  however  indeed^  the  hebdomad  b  oae^  aod 
allied  to  itself.  But  in  souls,  the  circles  di£fer  from  each  other,  according 
to  the  divine  peculiarities.  \For  they  receive  number  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  preserve  the  proper  nature  which  they  are  allotted,  connectedly 
containing  mundane  natures,  and  convolving  the  apparent  by  their  own 
circles.  And  thus  much  concerning  these  particulars,  which  afford  argu^ 
ments  that  are  not  obscure  of  the  arrangement  of  them  by  Plato. 


CHAPTER  V. 


AoAXK  however,  making  another  beginning,  let  us  speak  about  each 
[\>f  the  intellectual  Gods,^  as  much  as  is  sufficient  to  the  present  theology. 
I^et  Saturn  therefore,  the  first  king  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  be  now  cele- 
brated by  us,  who  according  to  Socrates  in  the  Cratylus  illuminates  the 
pure  and  incorruptible  nature  of  intellect,  and  establishing  his  own  all^ 
perfect  power  in  his  own  summit  of  intellectuals,  abides  in,  and  at  the 
same  time  proceeds  from  his  father  (^Heaven^.  He  likewise  divides  the 
intellectual  government  from  the  connective,  and  estabhshes  the  tran^ 
icendency  of  the  other  intellectual  Gods  in  connexion  with  his  own; 
but  comprehends  in  himself  the  intelligible  of  the  demiurgic  intellect, 
and  the  plenitude  of  beings.  Hence  the  Saturnian  bonds,  mystically, 
and  obscurely  signify  the  comprehension  of  this  intelligible,  and  a  union 
with  it.     For  the  intelligible  is  comprehended  in  intellect. 

As  therefore,  the  intelligible  is  indeed  exempt  from  intellect,  but  intel- 
lect is  said  to  comprehend  it,  thus  also  Jupiter  is  said  to  bind  his  father. 
And  in  placing  bonds  about  his  father,  he  at  the  same  time  binds  himself 
f  to  him]}*  For  a  bond  is  the  comprehension  of  the  things  that  are  bound. 
But  the  truth  is  as  folk>ws :    Saturn  is  indeed  an  all-perfect  intellect ;  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  y.  OF  PLATO.  aw 

the  mighty  Jupiter  ts  likewise  an  intellect.  Each  tb^iefore  being  an 
iBtellect,  eadi  is  also  evidently  an  intelligible.  For  every  intellect  is 
converted  to  itself;  but  being  converted  ta  it  energises  towards  itself; 
Energizing  however  towards  itself,  and  not  towards  externals,  it  is  inteln 
ligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual ;  being  indeed  intellectual,  so 
far  as  it  intellectually  perceives,  but  intelligible,  so  far  as  it  is  intelleciu-» 
ally  perceived.  Hence  also  the  Jovian  intellect  is  to  itself  intellect,  and 
to  itself  intelligible.  And  in  a  similar  manner  the  Saturnian  intellect  is 
toitself  intelligible,  and  to  itself  intellect.  But  Jupiter  indeed  is  more 
intellect,  and  Saturn  is  more  intelUgible.  For  the  latter  is  established 
according  to  the  intellectual  summit,  but  the  former  according  to  the 
intellectual  end.  And  the  one  indeed  is  the  object  of  desire,  but  the 
other  desires.     And  the  one  fills,  but  the  other  is  filled. 

Saturn  therefore  being  intellect  and  intelligible,  JupiteV*  also  is  in  the 
second  place  intellect  and  intelligible.  The  intellectual  however  of  Sa- 
turn is  intelligible ;  but  the  intelligible  of  Jupiter  is  intellectual.  Jupiter 
therefore,  being  at  the  same  time  intellectual  and  intelligible,  intellectu- 
ally perceives* and  comprehends  himself,  and  binds  the  intelligible  in 
hknself.  But  binding  this  in  himself,  he  is  said  to  bind  the  intelligible 
prior  to  himself,  and  to  comprehend  it  on  all  sides.  For  entering  into 
himself,  he  proceeds  into  the  intelligible  prior  to  himself,  and  by  the 
intelligible  which  is  in  himself,  intellectually  perceives  that  which  is  prior 
to  himself.  And  thus  the  intelligible  is  not  external  to  intellect.  For 
every  intellect  possesses  that  which  is  in  itself  without  any  difierence 
with  respect  to  itself.  But  again^  it  intellectually  perceives  in  itself  that 
which  is  prior  to  itself.  For  every  thing  which  is  external  to  intellect,  is 
foreign  and  adventitious,  and  pertains  to  an  inferior  nature.  But  that 
which  is  pre-established  in  the  order  of  cause,  and  which  pre-exists  as  the 
object  of  desire,  is  in  the  desiring  natures  themselves.  For  being  con« 
verted  to,  and  verging  to  themselves,  they  discover  the  causes  of  them- 
selves, and  all  more  ancient  natures.  And  l>y  how  much  more  perfect 
and  uniform  the  conversion  of  the  desiring  natures  is  about  the  objects  of 
desire,  by  so  much  the  more  are  they  present  with  their  own  desirables. 
Hence  every  intellect,  by  intellectually   perceiving  itself,  intellectually 


Digitized  by 


Google 


324  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V* 

perceives  likewise^  all  the  natures  prior  to  itself.  And  by  how  much  the 
more  it  is  united  to  itself,  in  a  so  much  greater  degree  it  is  established  in 
the  intelligibles  prior  to  ilielf.  For  the  cause  of  any  being,  and  which 
is  the  source  of  essence  or  of  perfection  to  it,^  is  not  external  to  that 
being;  but  that  which  is  subordinate  to  any  being,  is  external  to  it,  and 
is  not  the  intelligible.  On  this  account  also,  each  of  the  divine  natures  is 
unconverted  to  that  which  is  inferior  to  itself,  but  is  converted  to  itself, 
and  through  itself  reverts  to  that  which  is  *more  excellent.  And  the  in- 
telligible indeed  is  not  inferior  to  any  intellect ;  but  every  intellect  ener- 
gizing towards  itself,  and  comprehending  the  intelligibles  prior  to  itself, 
intellectually  perceives  them. 

Some  intelligibles  likewise  are  such  as  are  conjcnned  with  intellect. 
But  others  are  such  as  are  proximately  participated  by  it.  And  others 
are  such  as  it  sees  more  remotely,  and  which  are  more  exempt  from  its 
nature.  On  this  account,  the  demiurgic  intellect  is  indeed  at  the  same 
time  intelligible  and  intellect,  but  has  the  intelligible  of  his  father,,  which 
he  binds  as  the  fable  says.  He  sees  however  animal  itself,  which  is^ 
according  to  Timaeus,  the  most  beautiful  of  all  intelligibles^  And  if  the 
illustrious  Amehus,  forming  such  conceptions  as  these,  said  that  in- 
tellect is  threefold,  one  being  that  which  w,  another  that  which  hdSj  and 
another  that  which  sees^  he  rightly  apprehends  the  conception  of  Plato, 
according  to  my  opinion.  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  second  intellect 
should  not  only  Aat;e  the  intelligible,  but  that  it  should  be  and  have  the 
intelligible;  that  it  should  be  indeed  the  intelligible  coordinate  with 
itself,  but  have  the  intelligible  prior  to  itself,  so  far  as  it  participates  of  it. 
And  it  is  necessary  that  the  third  intellect  should  see  the  intelligible,  and 
should  also  be  and  haw  it ;  that  it  should  see  indeed  the  first  intelligible ; 
but  have  that  which  is  proximately  beyond  itself;  and  that  it  should  be 
the  intelligible  which  is  in  itself,  and  which  is  conjoined  with  its  own  in- 
telligence, and  should  be  inseparable  from  it. 

If  therefore,  as  we  said  from  the  beginning,  Jupitefr  intellectually  per- 
ceives his  father  Saturn,  Saturn  is  indeed  intelligible,  but  Jupiter  is 
intellect;  being  one  intelligible  himself,  but  participating  of  another. 
Hence  also  Plato  does  not  simply  call  Saturn  intellect,  but  a  pure  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  VI.  OF  PLATO.  335 

iDcorruptible  intellect.  For  he '  in  the  intellectual  is  intelligible.  Since 
however,  he  is  not  simply  intelligible,  but  as  in'  intellectuals,  he  is 
intellect,  and  is  himself  paternally  so,  being  both  father  and  intellect,  and 
having  the  paternal  intellectually.  In  intelligibles  therefore,  intellect  is 
also  father ;  but  in  intellectuals  father  is  intellect.  Hence  Saturn  is  a 
pure,  immaterial  and  perfect  intellect,  established  above  fabrication  in 
the  order  of  the  desirable.  But  possessing  such  a  peculiarity  as  this,  he 
is  full  of  all  intelligibles  intellectually,  is  as  it  were  exuberant  with 
intellections,  and  establishes  twofold  genera  of  Gods,  some  indeed  in 
himself,  but  others  posterior  to  himself.  And  he  leads  forth,  indeed,  the 
prolific  powers  of  his  father  Heaven  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things ;  but 
fills  the  demiurgic  order  with  generative  goods. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


Saturn  however  is  the  only  one  of  the  Gods  who  is  said  both  to 
receive  and  give  the  royal  dignity  with  a  certain  necessity,  and  as  it 
were  violence,  cutting  off  the  genitals  of  his  father,  and  being  himself 
castrated  by  the  mighty  Jupiter.  For  he  bounds  the  kingdom  of  his 
father,  and  is  bounded  by  the  God  posterior  to  himself.  He  is  also  filled 
from  the  natures  placed  above  him,  but  fills  the  whole  fabrication  [of  the 
universe]  with  prolific  perfection.  But  separating  himself  from  his  father, 
he  is  exempt  from  his  progeny.  Being  however  one  all-perfect  intel- 
lect, he  contains  in  himself  the  multitude  of  total  intelligibles.  And  as 
he  deifies  the  intellectual  summit,  he  illuminates  all  things  with  intelli- 
gible light. 

'  For  TO  yotf  it  is  necessary  to  read  txuvog  yug. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


38g.  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  HOOKIL 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Very  properly  therefore,  has  this  universe  twofold  lives,  periods,  aod 
convolutions;  the  one  being  Saturnian,  but  the  other  Jovian,  as  the 
fable  in  the  Politicus  says.  And  according  to  one  of  the  periods  indeed, 
it  produces  all  goods  spontaneously,  and  possesses  an  innoxious  and 
univearied  life.  But  according  to  the  other  it  participates  of  material 
error,  and  a  very  mutable  nature.  For  the  life  in  the  world  being 
twofold,  the  one  unapparent,  and  more  intellectual,  but  the  other  more 
physical  and  apparent,  and  the  one  being  defined  according  to  provi- 
dence, but  the  other  proceeding  in  a  disorderly  manner  according  to 
fate  ; — this  being  the  case,  the  second  life  indeed,  which  is  multiform, 
and  perfected  through  nature,  is  suspended  from  the  Jovian  order ;  but 
the  more  simple,  intellectual,  and  unapparent  life,  is  suspended  from  the 
Saturnian  order/  And  these  things  the  Elean  guest  clearly  teaches, 
calling  one  of  the  circulations  Jovian,  but  the  other,  Saturnian ;  though 
Jupiter  also  is  the  cause  of  the  unapparent  life  of  the  universe,  is  the 
supplier  of  intellect,  and  the  leader  of  intellectual  perfection ;  but  he 
elevates  all  things  to  the  kingdom  of  Saturn,  and  being  a  leader  in 
conjunction  with  his  father^  constitutes  the  whole  mundane  intellect. 
And  if  it  be  requisite  to  speak  the  truth  clearly,  each  of  the  periods 
indeed,  I  mean  the  apparent,  and  the  unapparent,  participates  of  both 
these  Gods ;  but  the  one  indeed  is  more  Saturnian,  and  the  other  ia 
perfected  under  the  kingdom  of  Jupiter. 

That  the  mighty  Saturn  therefore  is  allotted  a  kingdom  different  from 
that  of  the  Gods  prior  to  him,  the  Elean  guest  clearly  manifests  in  what 
he  asserts  prior  to  the  fable.  For  he  says,  **  We  have  heard  from  many 
respecting  the  kingdom  of  which  Saturn  was  the  founder.  '^  According 
to  this  wise  man  therefore,  Saturn  is  one  of  the  royal  Gods.     Hence  also 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP;  YIL  OF  PLATO.  337 

he  presides  over  a  kingdom  different  from  that  of  his  father.  And  while 
his  father  connectedly  contains  the  middle  centres  of  the  intelligible  and 
intellectual  Gods,  he  is  the  leader  of  the  intellectual  orders  and  supplies 
all  intellectual  life^  first  indeed,  to  the  Gods,  but  secondarily  to  -  the 
natures  more  excellent  than  ours,  and  in  the  last  place  to  partial  souls, 
when  they  are  able  to  be  extended  to  the  Saturnian  place  of  survey. 
For  this  universe,  and  all  the  mundane  Gods,  always  possess  this  two* 
fold  life,  and  imitate  the  Saturnian  intelligence  indeed  through  unapparent 
and  intellectual  energy,  but  the  demiurgic  intellect  of  Jupiter,  through 
a  providential  attention  to  secondary  natures,  and  in  short,  through  tie 
visible  fabrication.  But  partial  souls  at  one  time  energize  intellectually, 
and  consecrate  themselves  lo  Saturn,  but  at  another  time  after  a  Jovian 
manner,  and  pay  a  providential  attention  to  secondary  natures,  without 
restraint.  When  however  they  revolve  analogous  to  those'  deities 
[Saturn  and  Jupiter]  they  intellectually  perceive  intelligibles,  and  dispose 
sensibles  in  an  orderly  manner,  and  live  both  these  lives,  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  Gods  and  the  more  excellent  genera.  For  their  periods 
are  twofold ;  one  being  intellectual,  but  the  other  providential.  Their 
paradigms  also  are  twofold ;  the  Saturnian  intellect  being  the  paradigm 
of  the  one,  but  the  Jovian  intellect  of  the  other.  For  the  mighty  Jupiter 
himself  has  a  twofold  energy,  containing  indeed  intelligibles  in  intellect, 
but  adorning  sensibles  by  demiurgic  production. 

Since  however  the  circulations  are  twofold,  not  only  in  wholes,  but 
also  in  partial  souls,  the  Elean  guest  says  that  in  the  Saturnian  period, 
the  generation  of  these  souls  is  not  from  each  other,  ^s  in  men  which  are 
the  objects  of  sensible  inspection,  nor  as  the  first  man  with  us  is  alone 
earth-begotten,  so  in  partial  souls  one  first  soul  is  the  offspring  of  man, 
but  all  of  them  are  earth-begotten.  For  they  are  elevated  from  ultimate 
9nd  terrestrial  bodies,  and  embrace  an  unapparent,*  relinquishing  a  sen-^ 
sibfe  life.  He  also  says  that  neither  do  they  verge  to  old  age,  and  change 
from  being  younger  to  becoming  older;  but  on  the  contrary,  they  are 


For  iMweug,  it  is  necessary  to  read  ixtims. 
For  i^^ov^'it  is  aeeeesary  to  read  #^«yov^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


328  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V- 

rendered  more  vigorous,  proceed  intellectually  in  a  way  contrary  to 
generation,  and  as  it  were,  divest  themselves  of  the  variety  of  life  with 
which  in  descending  they  became  invested.  Hence  likewise  all  the 
symbols  which  are  adapted  to  youth  are  present  with  these  souls,  when 
they  pass  into  this  condition,  such  as  a  privation  of  hair,  and  a  smooth- 
ness of  the  cheek  instead  of  hoariness  and  beards.  For  they  lay  aside 
every  thing  which  adheres  to  them  from  generation.  But  being  situated 
there  with  Saturn,  and  living  the  life  which  is  there,  he  says  that  there 
are  abundance  of  fruits  from  trees,  and  many  other  [vegetable]  sub- 
stances, which  the  earth  spontaneously  produces.  Being  Ukewise  naked, 
and  without  coverlets,  they  are^for  the  most  part  fed  in  the  open  air;  for 
they  have  a  temperament  of  the  seasons  which  is  always  the  same.  But 
they  make  use  of  soft  beds,  grass  in  abundance  being  produced  for  them 
from  the  earth.  Souls  therefore  derive  these  and  such  like  goods  from 
this  mighty  God,  in  the  Saturnian  period.  For  they  are  thence  filled 
indeed  with  vivific  goods,  and  gather  intellectual  fruits  from. wholes;  but 
do  not  procure  for  themselves  perfection  and  blessedness,  from  partial 
energies.  For  doxastic  nutriment  indeed  has  divisible  and  material, 
conceptions ;  but  intellectual  nutriment  has  pure,  impartible,  and^  native 
conceptions,  which  the  spontaneous  obscurely  signifies. 

The  production  from  the  earth  also  signifies  the  prolific  intellect  of  the 
Gods,  which  imparts  to  souls  by  illumination  perfection  and  self- 
sufloiciency.  For  on  account  of  the  exuberant  abundance  of  good,  they 
are  able  to  impart  an  influx  of  it,  according  to  the  measure  of  felicity 
adapted  to  them.  Hence,  they  are  neither  covered  with  garments,  as 
when  they  proceeded  into  generation,  nor  have  they  superabundant 
additions  of  life,  but  they  are  purified  themselves  by  themselves  from  all 
composition  and  variety,  and  extending  their  intellect  to  total  good,  they 
participate  of  it  from  the  intellectual  father,  being  guarded  by  the 
intellectual  Gods,  and  receiving  from  them  the  measures  of  a  happy  life. 
They  likewise  pass  through  the  whole  of  their  existence  with  facility,  lead 
a  sleepless  and  pure  life,  being  established  in  the  generative  powers  of 
intelligibles ;  and  being  filled  witli  intellectual  goods,  and  nourished  with 
immaterial  and  divine  forms,  they  are  said  to  live  ahfe  under  Saturn, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  VIU.  or  PLATO. 


329 


CHAPTER  VIIL 


BbGause,  th^eforet  this  God  is  the  leader  of  all  intellectual  life,  and 
every  intellect  as  well  that  which  is  imparticipable,  as  that  which  is 
participable  proceeds  from  this  cause,  hence  it  belongs  to  this  mighty 
<jk)d  to  feed  in  a  distributed  manner,  and  to  nourish  soUls.  For  because 
i^bdeed  he  is  intelligible  in  intellectuals,  he  nourishes  souls,  and  souls  are 
called  the  nurselings  of  Saturn.  But  because  he  does  not  fill  them  with 
first,  and  unical  intelligibles,  but  with  those  that  are  multiplied  by  his 
own  cause  of  separation,  he  is  said  to  feed  them  distributedly,  and  as  it 
were  in  a  divided  manner.  And  do  you  not  see  how  through  these 
things,  this  God  appears  to  be  coordinate  to  the  first  triad  of  the 
intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods?  For  as  Socrates, in  the  Phsedrus,  says, 
that  souls  are  nourished  in  the  supercelestial  place,  and  in  the  intelligible 
meadow,  so  the  Elean  guest  asserts  that  the  souls  that  are  fed  under 
Satura,  are  filled  with  intelligible  goods.  And  it  is  not  at  all  wondei^ 
if  souls  are  perfected  by  Jx)th  these;  intellectually  indeed,  under  the 
kingdom  of  Saturn ;  but  intelligibly  under  the  order  of  the  first  intel- 
lectual Gods.  For  this  God  himself  is  nourished  by  that  order.  And 
on  this  account  he  is  allotted  a  leading  and  primary  transcendency  in 
intellectuals,  because  they  are  filled  firom  that  order  [through  him]  with 
occult  and  unapparent  powers.  And  he  is  that  among  the  intellectual 
fathi^s,  which  the  order  of  the  first  intellectual  Gods  is  in  the  intelligible 
and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  orders.  Hence  the  intelligible  every 
where  becomes  nutriment  to  ascending  soub,  but  the  connexion  with  it 
is  effected  through  the  second  and  third  Grods. 

As  therefore,  the  demiurgic  order  elevates  feouls  to  the  Satumian  [dace 
of  survey,  thus  also  the  Saturnian  order  elevates  them  to  the  subcelestial  * 

'  F«r.virs}dUf«KMiy  in  tins  pltce^  it  kMioiMj  fb  rmAAmwfm»ki». 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  2  T 


Digitized  by 


Google 


330  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

arch.  For  having  made  many  and  blessed  discursive  energies  in  the 
kingdom  of  Saturn^  they  are  again  extended  from  hence  to  the  per- 
fective, and  from  thence  to  the  celestial  triad,  from  which  contemplating 
the  supercelestial  place,  they  are  now  ineffably  conjoined  with  the 
supreme  goods  of  intelligibles.  And  after  this  manner  the  second  orders 
always  connect  souls  with  the  orders  prior  to  them.  Hence  also,  the 
theurgic  art  imitating  the  unapparent  periods  of  souls,  arranges  initiations 
in  the  mysteries  of  the  second  Gods,  prior  to  the  more  sublime  mysteries.. 
And  through  these,  it  causes  us  to  pass  to  the  intelligible  place  of  survey. 
These  things,  therefore,  Plato  indicates  concerning  the  Saturnian  life,  and 
the  polity  of  souls  under  Saturn,  not  in  the  Foliticus  only,  but  also  ia 
the  discourses  of  the  Athenian  guest.  For  in  the  fourth  book  of  the 
I^ws  he  celebrates  the  life  under  Saturn,  obscurely  signifying  the 
undefiled  naUire,  the  facility,  plenitude,^  and  self-sufficiency  of  that 
energy,  through  fabulous  fictions. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


If,  however,  it  be  requisite  from  these  things,  and  from  all  the  mystic 
discipline  concerning  this  God,  to  consider  and  discuss  the  orders  whiqh  ' 
he  constitutes  in  wholes,  in  the  first  place,  we  must  direct  our  attention 
to  the  three  kings  mentioned  in  the  Gorgias,  who  distributing  the 
kingdom  of  Saturn  were  produced  by  him,  as  being  allotted  in  a  divided 
manner  a  uniform  and  impartible^  dominion,  and  over  whom  he  places 
the  divine  law,  which  is  the  cause  of  distribution  according  to  intellectt 
both  to  the  Gods  themselves,  and  to  all  the  natures  posterior  to  the 
Gods.    In  the  second:  plac^  we  must  consider  the  rulers  and  ki&gs 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IX.  OF  PLATO.  331 

mentioned  in  the  Laws,  who  are  said  to  preside  over  the  different 
aJlotments  of  souls,  and  who  are  not  men^  but  daemons  of  a  more  divine 
and  excellent  genus,  wIk)  distribute  to  souls  the  measures  of  good,  cut 
off  their  generation-producing  lives,  restrain  their  disorderly  lation,  retain 
them  in  the  intelligible,  and  comprehend  them  in  the  kingdom  of  Saturn, 
In  the  third  place,  therefore,  we  must  direct  our  attention  to  the  daemon 
Gods,  who  preside  over  the  parts  of  the  world,  and  the  herds  [of  souls] 
that  are  in  it,  as  the  Elean  guest  says  in  the  Politicus,  and  who  at  one 
time  come  into  contact  with  the  objects  of  their  government,  and 
distribute  to  them  intellectual,  and  all  unapparent  goods,  but  at  another 
time  withdraw  themselves  from  the  physical  life  of  the  world,  recur  to 
their  own  place  of  survey,  and  imitate  the  exempt  transcendency  of  the 
demiurgus  and  father  of  the  universe. 

But  after  these  things,  we  must  survey  the  twofold  circulations  of  the 
mundane  Gods,  viz.  the  Satumian  and  the  Jovian;  for  these  Gods 
always  have  each  of  these,  as  the  fable  says  in  the  Politicus.  For  it  is 
evident  that  the  mutation  of  the  stars  and  the  sun  takes  place  in  each  of 
the,  revolutions.  This  period,  therefore,  being  twofold,  it  is  obvious  to 
every  one  that  the  periods  are  full  of  Saturnian  goods,  and  participate  of 
the  Saturnian  series.  And  not  only  the  mundane  Gods,  but  likewise  all 
the,  more  excellent  genera  that  follow  the  Gods,  energize  according  to 
both  these  energies,  and  revolve  according  to  the  twofold  circulations, 
through  which  souls  also  sometimes  participate  of  an  intellectual  life, 
apd  proceed  in  this  path,  exchanging  for  sense  intellect  as  the  leader  of 
their  motion  and  circulation.  Saturn,  therefore,  extends  his  kingdom 
supernally  from  the  first  Gods,  as  far  as  to  partial  souls,  perfects  all 
things,  and  fills  them  with  intellectual  goods,  distributing  to  different 
natures  different  measures  of  good.  For  on  account  of  this,  law  also 
subsists  with  him,  as  Socrates  says  in  the  Gorgias :  "  This  law  therefore 
was  in  the  time  of  Saturn,  and  always  was,  and  now  is,  among  the 
God^.'*  For  law  is  the  distribution  of  intellect ;  but  this  God  is  the 
first,  most  pure,  and  incorruptible  intellect. 

If,  however,  this  God  is  the  primary  leader  of  all  division,  and  is  the 
origin  of  intellectual  separation,  it  is  necessary  on  this  account,  that  law 


Digitized  by 


Google 


83S  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

should  be  with  him,  which  distinguishes  the  orders  of  beings,  divides 
the  intellectual  genera,  and  separates  all  forms  according  to  a  well- 
ordered  progression;  but  imparts  to  all  things  by  illumination  the 
measure  of  hyparxis,  connecting  the  order  which  is  in  them,  preserving 
the  boundaries  of  divine  distribution  immutable,  and  possessing  the  same 
dignity  in  the  kingdom  of  Satura,  and  in  intellectuals,  as  Adrastia  in  the 
supercelestial  place,  and  in  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time, 
intellectual  orders.  For  from  each  of  them  an  immutable  guard,  and  the 
prc^ression  of  order  to  all  things  are  generated.  But  they  differ  from 
each  other,  because  law  indeed  divides  the  one  into  multitude,. defines 
the  measures  of  intellectual  subsistence,  and  distributes  to  every  thing  an 
appropriate  good,  producing  the  different  measures  of  beings  from  the 
one  [Saturnian]  intellect  But  Adrastia  abiding  in  the  intelligibte, 
guards  all  things  uniformly,  and  preserves  total  order  in  a  firm  unde^ 
viating  manner,  exempt  from  all  division.  Law,  therefore,  is  a  certain 
God  which  divides  divine  forms,  and  definitely  imparts  to  every  thing 
that  which  is  adapted  to  it  according  to  the  plenitude  proceeding  from 
one  uniform  cause;  and  it  is  also  coexistent  with  the  Saturnian  order, 
in  which  the  separations  of  beings,  and  the  all-perfect  progression  tf 
forms  first  subsist.  Hence  the  demiurgus  likewise  looking  to  this 
conducts  all  things  according  to  law,  and  constitutes  mundane  provi* 
dence  an  image  of  the  union  of  the  father;  but  fate  and  the  fatal  laws, 
an  image  of  the  division  according  to  law.  Souls,  therefore,  live 
according  to  law;  in  the  Jovian  period  indeed  being  governed  con- 
formably to  the  laws  of  Fate;  but  in  the  Saturnian  period  living 
according  to  divine  law  tliey  are  subservient  to  the  multitude  [of  divine 
forms]  and  are  extended  to  the  one  cause  of  all ;  and  ascending  to  the 
intelligible  place  of  survey,  they  are  subjected  to  the  sacred  law  of 
Adrastia.  For  this  law  extends  from  on  high  as  far  as  to  the  last  of 
things,  and  defines  to  souls  the  measures  of  whole  periods,  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Phsedrus.  Who  therefore  this  greatest  God  is,  and  what  the 
goods  are  of  which  be  is  the  cause  to  souls,  and  prior  to  these,  to  Gods 
and  daemons,  the  leaders  of  souls,  let  it,  from  Ihese  things  be  manifest. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


€HAP,  X.  0«  PLATa  885 


CHAPTER  X- 


Sivcik  hpTv^iever,  tbeoloijgists  assert  that  aa  exeniptioi^  from  old  age 
pertains  to  this:Qrd^i  as  the  Barbariaps  saj^  and  Orpheus  the  theolpgUt 
of  the  Greeks,  (for  he  mystically  says  that  the  hairs  of  thp  face  of  Satii^i^ 
ar0  always  black,  ^pd  never  become  hoary)  J  admire  the  divinely-imping 
intellect  of  Plato  which  unfolds  the  same  things  coocernipg  this  God  ^ 
those  who  proceed  in  his  steps.  For  be  $ays  that  souls  in  the  Sajttini<« 
ian  period  abandon  old  age,  but  returq  to  youth,  and  reaiove  from  HiWh 
selves  hoaripess,  but  have  black  hair.  For  he  says  that  the  white  hairs  ^ 
of  the  more  elderly  become  black ;  but  the  cheeks  of  those  that  have 
beards  being  rendered  smooth,  they  are  restored  to  the  past  season  [of 
youth.3  These  things  indeed  aie  asserted  by  the  Elean  guest;  similar  to- 
whicli  are  the  assertions  of  Orpheus  concerning  this  God^ 


-under  Saturaian  Jove 


Men  liv'd  immortal ;  moist  and  fragrant  hair 
From  the  pore  chin  thea  sprouted,  nor  was  mix^d 
With  the  white  flower  Aat  marks  infirm  old  age ; 
But  in  its  stead,  a  florid  down  i^pqur'd. . 

In  these  verses  he  delivers  the  similitude  of  Satumian  souls  to  this  * 
G^od.    For  he  aays  that  tliey  retnove  from  the  view  the  old  age  which  * 
they  had  acquired  from  generaticn  aiid  abandon  material  imbecility ;  and  • 
tiiat  they  exert  the  juvenile  and  vigorous  life  of  intellect;    For  it  is  no 
otlierwise  lawful  for  tliem  to  be  assimilated  to  the  God  who  is  exempt < 
from  old  age»  than  through  intellectual  puberty,  and  undefiled  power; 
But  the  cause  of  this  is»  that  king  Saturn  himself  is  the  source  of  the  * 
unallured  Gods^  and  the  inflexible   triad.    Hence  be  is,  as   Socrates 
saysy  a  pure  intellect.    For  he  is  at  the  same  time  the  intellect  of  the  un^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


334  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  -  BOOK  V. 

defiled  order,  ranking  as  a  summit,  and  riding  as  in  a  vehicle  in  the  flou- 
rishing and  vigorous  '  Gods  that  govern  wholes.  The  souls  also  which  are 
sent  to  him,  wonderfully  advance,  in  conjunction  with  intellectual  energy, 
in  vigour,  and  in  a  power  undeviating,  and  free  from  any  tendency  to 
matter.  Partial  souls  therefore,  when  they  change  their  periods,  at  one 
time  proceed  to  a  more  juvenile,  and  at  another,  to  a  more  aged  condi- 
tion. But  whole  souls  always  live  according  to  both  these  periods,  and 
are  conversant  with  Saturn  according  to  the  unupparent  period,  but  go- 
vern the  universe  in  conjunction  with  Jupiter,  according  to  visible  pro- 
vidence, at  once  receiving  an  increase  according  to  both  these  periods, 
and  becoming  at  one  and  the  same  time  both  older  and  younger.  And 
this  is  what  Parmenides  indicates  when  he  says,  that  the  one  proceeding 
according  to  time  becomes  at  once  younger  and  older.  These  things 
however,  will  hereafter  be  more  manifest. 


CHAPTER  XI. 


Having  therefore  brought  to  an  end  the  information  concerning  the 
king  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  it  evidently  follows  that  we  should  in  the 
next  place  celebrate  the  queen  Rhea.  For  both  Plato  and  Orpheus  assert 
that  she  is  the  mother  of  the  demiurgus  of  wholes,  but  a  divinity  posterior 
to  Saturn.  Thus  therefore,  we  must  speak  concerning  her.  The  stable 
and  united  cause  of  all  intellectuals,  and  the  principal  and  original 
monad,  abiding  in  herself,  unfolding  into  light  all  intellectual  multitude, 
and  again  convolving  it  into  herself,  and  en&bosoming  her  progeny,  and 
the  causes  of  wholes  that  emerge  from  her,  analysing  as  it  were  after 

'  For  «xfi0uo^,  it  is  necessary  to  read  ax/muoi^. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 
i 

I 


CHAP.  XL  OF  PLATO.  335 

division  the  natures  that  are  divided,  and  being  paternally  allotted  the 
highest  kingdom  in  intellecti^als, — this  being  the  case,  the  vivific  Rhea 
proceeds  as  the  second  from  her  proper  principle,  being  allotted  a  ma* 
ternal  order  in  the  whole  paternal  orders,  and  producing  the  demiurgus. 
of  wholes,  prior  to  other  Gods,  and  the  immutable  guard  of  the  Gods,  For 
this  Goddess  is  the  middle  centre  of  the  paternal  intellectual  triad,  and  the 
receiving  bosom  of  the  generative  power  which  is  in  Saturn,  calling  forth 
indeed,  to  the  generation  of  wholes,  the  causes  which  abide  in  him,  but 
unfolding  definitely  all  the  genera  of  the  Gods.  And  being  filled  indeed 
from  the  father  prior  to  her  with  intelligible  and  prolific  power,  but  filling 
the  demiurgus  and  father  subsisting  from  her,  with  vivific  abundance. 
Whence  also  the  demiurgus  is  the  cause  of  hfe  to  all  things,  as  containing 
in  himself  the  plenitude  of  intellectual  life,  and  extending  to  all  things 
the  prolific  cause  of  his  mother.  For  as  the  middle  Goddess  multiplies 
the  uniform  powers  of  Saturn^  and  produces  and  causes  them  to  preside 
over  secondary  natures,  so  the  third  father,  at .  one  and  the  same  time 
unfolds,  divides,  and  produces  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  the  all- 
perfect  abundance  of  the  Saturnian  monad,  and  the  dyadic  generation 
of  the  mother  Rhea,  so  as  not  to  leave  the  most  material  and  disorderly 
part  of  the  universe  destitute  of  the  power  of  Saturn. 

This  Goddess  therefore,  being  the  middle  of  the  two  fathers,  one  of 
which  collects,  but  the  other  divides  intellectual  multitude,  and  the  one 
through  transcendency  desiring  to  abide  and  to  be  established  in  himself, 
but  the  other  hastening  to  produce,  generate  and  fabricate  all  things,  she 
educes  indeed  into  herself,  the  demiurgic  causes  of  wholes,  but  imparts 
her  own  proper  power  to  secondary  natures,  in  unenvying  abundance. 
Hence  also  Plato  assimilates  her  prolific  exuberance  to  streams,  as  So- 
crates says  in  the  Cratylus,  evinces  that  this  Goddess  is  a  certain  flux, 
and  in  what  he  asserts  of  her  obscurely  shows  nothing  else  than  her  fontal 
nature,  and  a  power  unically  comprehensive  of  the  divisible  rivers  of 
life.  For  the  first-efftctive  flux  is  fontal ;  which  also  Socrates  indicating 
in  this  Goddess,  shortly  after'  clearly  says  that  the  name  of  Tethys  is  the 
na^le  of  a  fountain.  Why  therefore,  is  it  any  longer  necessary  to  doubt 
about  these  things,  and  to  say  where  does  Plato  make  mention  of  fbntaL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


356  <^N  TUB  THEdLOGY  BOOK  V: 

Gods  ?  For  he  himself  denoihinaties  the  causes  of  the  subsistence  of  all 
the  Gods^  fontal  fiuxious.  And  besides  this,  if  he  admits  that  the  mun- 
dane s6ul  is  the  fountain  and  priilciple  of  life,  because  it  proceeds  both 
horn  an  impartible  and  partible  vivification,  hovr  is  it  possible  that  he 
should  not  in  a  much  greateir  degree  a^  more  truly  call  the  Goddess 
Who  comprehends  in  herself  all  life,  (bhlal? 

Concerning  names  however,  it  is  not,  I  think,  at  ail  proper  to  cobtend, 
but  we  should  survey  the  orders  themselves  of  the  first  effective  Gods, 
AAd  see  how  Plato  following  theologists  c^iously  unfolds  them  to  us, 
celebrating  after  the  Sattlrtaian  moniEul  the  kingdom  of  Rhea,  constituting 
€rom  these  the  demiurgus  of  %hde«,  ahd  all  the  multitude  of  Gods  which 
:ts  woven  together  with  him.  For  this  GoddisSB  binding  together  the  breadth 
^  intellectuals,  and  enibosoming  tot^d  iiie^  toiil^  all  the  intellectual 
powers  in  herself  of  tile  rivers  of  life ;  and  by  the  summit  of  herself 
indeed^  is  conjoined  to  the  first  father,  and  together  with  him  generates 
whales,  and  the  genera  c^  Gods  that  abide  in  him ;  but  by  her  extremity 
is  conoascent  with  fabrication,  and  according  to  a  kindred  conjunction 
with  imbrication,  constitutes  all  the  orders  of  Gods  that  are  prior  to  the 
world,  and  that  are  in  the  world.  Hence  there  also  the  causes  of  the 
^emiurgi  of  wholes  primarily  subsist,  and  the  more  partial  genera  of 
life :  and  the  union  and  total  deity  of  all  these,  is  at  once  exempt  from 
the  plenitudes  of  herself,  and  is  at  once  co-arranged  with  them. 

Thus  therefore,  she  is  both  uniform  and  multiform,  one  and  simple, 
thou^  being  self-perfect,  she  is  a  vivifife  world,  proceeding  from  on  high 
;as  far  as  to   the  last  of  things,  and  as  far  as  to  the  extremities  of  the 
^nivei'se,  giving  subsistence  to  the  vivific  powers  of  the  breadth  of  life. 
Hence  also  Plato  refers  the  vivific  Cause  of  wholes  to  this  Goddess,  and 
through  the  last  gifls  of  this  divinity,  indicates  her  total  energy ;  which 
primarily  indeed  fills  the  whole  deniiurgtks  with  intellectual  and  pro- 
lific power,  but  secondarily  perfects  all  the  genera  of.  the  Gods  with  the 
intellectual  fruits  of  hersdf.     According  to  a  third  order  also,  her  total 
energy  nourishes  the  souls  that  are  the  attendants  of  the  Gods,  with  the 
rivers  of  divine  perfection.     And  in  the  last  orders,  it  imparts  to  mortal 
animals  the  gift  of  nature.    This  thetefote  i*,  I  think,  more  known  than 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP-  XL  OF  PLATOv  ^7 

every  thing  to  those  wlio  admit  that  things  divine  are  beyond  the  works 
of  nature* 

That  however,  which  it  is  more  fit  the  lovers  of  the  contemplation  of 
<ruth  should  consider,  I  say,  is  this,  that  Plato  divides  Ceres  from  '  the 
whole  vivific  deity,  and  coarranges  her,  at  one  time  with  Proserpine,  at 
another  with  Juno,  and  at  another  with  the  progeny  of  Jupiter,  as  we 
may  learn  in  the  Cratylus.  In  which  dialogue  indeed,  he  co-arranges 
Rhea  with  Saturn,  but  connects  a  certain  common  investigation  and 
theory  about  Ceres,  Jupiter,  and .  Juno.  In  the  Laws  likewise  cekr 
brating  the  legislative  Goddesses,  he  refers  the  whole  of  a  legitimate  life 
to  the  union  of  .Ceres  and  Proserpine;  since  according  to  Orpheus  this 
jniddle  Goddess  being  conjoined  with  Saturn  by  her  summit,  is  called 
Rhea ;  but  producing  Jupiter,  and  together  with  Jupiter  unfolding  the 
whole  and  partial  orders  of  the  Gods,  she  is  called  Ceres.  And  all  tlie 
order  of  middle  life  is  comprehensive  of  the  other  Titanidae,  and  likewise 
of  Ceres.  For  it  preestablished  this  monad  as  a  middle  collective  of  all 
the  orders  in  it;  both  those  that  are  occult,  and  those  that  are  divided 
about  the  generative  powers  of  the  Goddess.  Each  of  these  powerst 
however,  are  triple.  And  this  monad  indeed  conjoins  the  superior  triad 
to  Saturn,  but  weaves  the  inferior,  together  with  the  demiurgic  order. 
It  also  evinces  that  the  Cerealian  monad  being  the  middle,  is  coarranged 
with,  and  is  at  the  same  time  exempt  from  the  demiurgus  of  wholes.  For 
in  conjunction  with  the  whole  order  it  constitutes,  and  together  with 
Jupiter  generates  Proserpine.  And  thus  we  have  celebrated  the  primo* 
genial  Goddess  who  is  the  middle  of  the  fathers. 

'  «iro  is  omitted  in  the  original 


Proc.  Vol*  I.  2  U 


Digitized  by 


Google 


336  Oir  THt  TJlttlOLOGT  *06lt  Vl 


CHAPTER  XIL 


Noir  however,  after  this  Goddess,  the  demiurgus  of  wholes  is  m  ^e 
third  place  to  be  celebrated^  according  to  the  order  which  he  is  allotted^ 
in  the  intellectual  Gods, peculiarly  unfoldingfor  this  purpose  all  the  trutk 
concerning  him.  And  in  the  first  place,  we  must  remember  that  it  is 
necessary  the  peculiarity  of  this  third  father  should  be  demiurgic;  and  thu» 
ih  the  next  place,  following  Plato,  we  must  direct  our  attention  to  other 
particulars  [respecting  this  GodJ  The  first  of  the  intellectual  Gods> 
therefore^  who  is  parturient  with  multitude,  who  is  the  leader  and  source- 
of  all  separation,  and  who  separates  himself  from  the  uniform  and  first 
Gods,  but  generates  the  divided  principles  of  wholes, — this  God  agaiti^ 
Converts  his  progeny  to  himself,  and  weaves  together  thcs^  parts  with  his^ 
own  sameness,  and  exhibits  himself  as  one  intelligible  world  in  iutellectu- 
als,  bringing  forth  in  himself,  and  retaining  with  himself  his  own  offspring.. 
But  the  second  of  the  intellectual  deities,  is  the  vlvific  Goddess,  who 
brings  forth  indeed  in  conjunction  with  the  first  intellectual  God,  occult 
Multitude,  (for  she  is  conjoined  to  him  according  to  supreme  transcen- 
dency) but  cannot  endure  to  remain  in  this  mode  of  generating,  and  in* 
'collecting  the  separation  of  wholes  into  unseparated  union*.  Hence  she 
separates  the  third  intellect  from  the  [first]  father;  but  produces  th& 
multitude  of  the  Gods,  and  of  intellectual  reasons,  and  fills  the  demiurgus 
with  generative  power.  If,  therefi>re,  the  first  intellectual  God  is  partu- 
rient with  the  generation  of  wholes;  but  the  prolific  vivification  of  the* 
intellectual  orders  causes  this  generation  to  shine  forth ;'— it  is  evident 
that  the  intellect  of  the  intellectual  fathers,,  according  to  his  own  order, 
produces  and  adorns  all  things,  and  calls  forth  indeed,,  the  occult  nature 
of  his  father,  into  separation  and  progression,  but  prepares  total  vivifica* 
tion  to  send  forth  the  rivers  of  itself,  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  thingsw  For  it  is 
every  where  the  peculiarity  of  intellect  to  divide  and  unfold  multitude,, 
the  plenitudes  of   life,  and  the  unions  of  intelligibles.     Intelligible 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIL  OP  MLATO,  339 

intellect  however  contains  multitude  uniformly,  or  according  to  the  form 
of  one;    for  multitude  preexists  in  the  intelligible  according  to  cause. 
But  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  sumo  timo,  intellectual  intellect,  has 
indeed  secondary  measures  of  union,  but  is  exempt  from  all  perfect 
iseparation,  abiding  in  the  first  principles  of  wholes.     And  intellectual , 
intellect  is  the  source  of  all  division,  and  of  the  subsistence  oi  partial 
natures ;  since  it  preestablishes  in  itself  all  the  multitude  of  formSi  »ii4 
this  not  tetradicaliy  only,  as  intelligible  intellect^  but  it  pQS9e9«e9  <m^ 
all-perfect  intellectual  cause  of  all  forms.    It  is  necessary  therefore  that 
the  whole  demiurgic  principles  should  pertain  to  this  intellect,  that  aU 
the  demiurgic  Gods  should  proceed  from  this  one  third  fitthert  and  thftt 
this  should  be  the  demiurgus  of  wholes.    For  as  the  first  of  parvdigim 
co-subsists  in  intelligible  intellect,  and  in  the  third  triad  aod  the  firpt 
father,  so  likewise  we  must  place  the  first  demiurgic  qkhmwI  ia  intdir 
lectual  intellect,  and  the  third  father  of  the  intdlectual  Gods*    For  «» 
this  account  also  the  demiurgic  is  conjoined  with  the  padradigmfttiQ  c»H9ft 
according  to  the  analogy  which  each  is  allotted  ajnong  the  AUh^rs;  00^ 
indeed  in  intelligibles,  but  the  other  in  intellectuals*    For  oae  is  tbp 
boundary  of  the  intelligible,  but  the  other  of  the  intellectual  order    But 
this  b  evident  firom  what  has  been  before  said. 

Farther  still,  fabrication  being  fourfold,  ^nd  one  indeed  adomiog 
whdes  totally,  another  adorning  wholes  but  partially,  another  adorning 
parts,  but  totally,  and  another  weaving  parts  together  with  wbi^, 
partially, — liiis  being  the  case,  it  is  evident  that  the  cause  of  wholes 
which  is  the  cause  of  them  uniformly  and  indivisibly,  is  the  moiart  fmciQiit 
of  all  the  causes.  It  is  necessary  however,  that  this  cause  should  ^ther 
be  prior  to,  oc  in,  or  posterior  to  the  intellectual  Gods.  Where  therefore 
aheli  we  place  it?  For  all  the  parts  which  are  constituted  by  intsiUi3Citu«Jls 
are  more  partial  than  the  one  and  total  fabricatioB.  For  ike  division  of 
wholes  into  three,  and  the  leaders  of  divisible  produotion^  preseot  tbw)- 
selves  to  the  view  in  these  orders.  The  natures  therefore,  that  are  prior 
to  intellectuals,  are  defined  according  to  other  peculiarities  of  tiiie  Gjod^t 
as  was  before  «hown,  and  in  short,  they  rabsist  according  to  usuoOf  And 
are  expanded  abov€  the  separatioDjcf  iateU«o]bu»l  form?* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


340 


ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOO  K  V 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


It  remains  therefore  that  the  one  demiurgiB  of  wholes  must  be  arranged 
in  intellectuals.  But  if  indeed,  he  is  the  first  father,  he  will  be  intelligible, 
wiH  contain  his  progeny  in  himself,  and  will  be  the  collector  of  separation. 
How  therefore,  does  he  divide  the  wwlds?  How  does  he  generate  the 
multitudes  of  mundane  natures  ?  How  does  he  speak  to-  all  the  junior 
demiurgi  at  once?  For  the  first  father  is  imcoordinated  with  the  whole 
number  of  mundane  natures,  and  also  converts  his  first  progeny  to< 
himself,  flying  as  it  were  from  multitude  to  union,  and .  hastily  with- 
drawing himself  firom  all-various  separation  into  intelligible  transcen- 
dency. But  if  the  one  demiurgus  of  wholes  is  the  vivific  order>  all  thin^ 
indeed,  will  be  full  of  life,  on  account  of  the  whole  demiurgus.  And  the 
cause  of  souls,  according  to  a  probable  reason  will  here  become  apparent 
subsisting  prior  to  multitude.  But  how  will  he  convert  all  things  to 
himself?  ^How  is  he  called  demiurgus  and  father?  For  the  vivific  deity, 
herself  by  herself,  has  a  maternal  dignity  among  the  Gods,  and  is  the 
supplier  of  progression  to  all  things.  But  to  produce  forms,  and  to 
convert,  are  the.  illustrious  and  peculiar  good  of  intellect.  Neither 
therefore,  is  the  demiurgus  of  wholes  in  the  supermundane  order.  For 
«ll  the  natures  there  are  partial,  and  either  partially  preside  over  wholes, 
or  comprehend  the  productions  of  parts  totally.  Nor  is  he  in  intelU- 
gibles.  For  all  the  Gods  there  are  fathers;  and  no  one  there  is  called  ' 
demiurgus  and  father.  But  the  divine  orders  antecedently  comprehend 
fill  things  in  a  manner  perfectly  occult  and  unical.  Nor  is  he  in  the 
intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual  order.  For  to  collect, 
-connect,  and  perfect  multitudes,  is  not  the  province  of  the  demiurgic 
peculiarity.  For  this  is  the  source  of  separation,  and  the  production  of 
forms,  glittering  with  inteUectual  sections.  But  the  intelligible  and  at 
the  same  time  intellectual  Gods,  extend  intellectual  multitudes  to  the 
*  For  t^f>ftr»h  >t  t^pextt  to  me  thst  we  should  read  tx»  of  qrw.. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  XIV.  OF  PLATO.  S41 

union  of  intelligibles.  Nor  again,  is  it  possible  to  admit  that  the  demp- 
urgic  cause  is  in  the  first  or  second  order  of  intellectuals.  For  the 
summit  of  intellectuals  is  imparticipable  by  mundane  natures,  and  is 
rather  proposed  to  them  in  the  order  of  the  desirable;  but  is  not 
productive  of  them.  Hence,  all  the  Gods  in  the  world  are  elevated  to 
the  Saturnian  place  of  survey;  but  proceed  from  another  secondary 
principle,  and  through  it  are  converted  and  conjoined  to  the  exempt 
kingdom.  And  the  middle  centre  being  vivific,  is  not  defined  according 
to  the  paternal  characteristic.  For  the  generative  very  much  differs  froin 
the  paternal,  and  the  vivific  from  the  demiurgic  genus ;  so  far,  I  thizUc^ 
as  the  principles  of  the  whole  orders,  I  mean  bound  and  infinity,  differ 
from  each  other.  For  the  demiurgic  and  paternal  order  is  referred  to 
bound ;  but  all  vivific  and  generative  power,  to  infinity. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

I  WONDER  therefore,  at  those  interpreters  of  Plato,  who  do  not  mak^ 
one  fabrication  but  many,  who  assert  that  there  are  three  demiurgi.of 
wholes,  and  pass  at  one  time  to  the  second,  and  at  another  to  the  third 
demiurgus ;  and  who  divide  what  is  said  in  the  Timseus,  and  think  fit  to 
refer  some  of  the  assertions  to  one,  but  others  to  aiwther  cause.  For  that 
there  is  a  demiurgic  triad,  and  another  multitude  of  Gods  characterized 
according  to  the  producing  cause,  I  also  admit,  and  think  it  will  be 
granted  by  Plato.  It  is  necessary  however  in  each  order  prior  to  the 
triad,  and  prior  to  every  multitude,  that  there  should  be  a  preexisteirt 
monad.  For  all  the  orders  of  the  Gods  originate  from  a  monad ; 
because  each  of  the  whole  orders  is  assimilated  to  the  whole  progression 
of  the  Gods.  As  therefore  the  subsistence  of  the  Gods  has  the  cause  of 
its  generation  from  the  im participate  one,  thus  also  it  is  necessary  that 
the  perfect  orders  in  the  Gods,  should  have  a  preexistent  monad,  and  a 
first-effective  principle.    According  to  the  same  reasonings  all  the  vivific 


Digitized  by 


Google 


542  OT^  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V* 

-progressions  are  suspended  from  one  vivification,  and  the  demiurgic 
ordars  are  extended  to  one  fabrication^  And  it  is  not  proper  that  there 
should  be  multitude  without  tJbe  monad*  For,  there  will  neither  be 
co^arrangement,  nor  a  division  of  multitude  according  to  intellect^  unless 
the  one  and  whde  preexist.  For  on  this  account  prior  to  all  the  divine 
progressions,  the  order  of  wholeness  subsists,  in  order  that  it  may  compre- 
hend parts,  and  may  define  them  iji»  and  about  itself. 

How  therefore  neglecting  whole  in  fabrication,  can  we  survey  demiur^ 
divided  according  to  parts?  Though  Plato  himself  thinks  with  respect  to 
the  paradigm  of  the  universe,  that  the  world  should  not  be  assimilated  to 
imy  thing  which  naturally  subsbts  in  the  form  of  a  part,  but  to  all  perfect 
animal ;  and  on  this  account  be  tlemoostrates  that  the  world  is  only* 
begotten,  because  its  paradigm  is  one.  For  if  it  were  aot  one,  but  many 
paradigms,  again  it  would  be  necessary  that  there  should  be  another 
animal  about  it,  of  which  it  would  be  a  part,  and  it  would  be  more  right 
to  assert  that  the  world  is  no  longer  similar  to  the  many  paradigms,  but 
to  that  which  comprehends  them.  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  one 
paradigm  should  precede  the  many^  in  the  same  manner  as  the  one  good 
subsists  prior  to  participated  goods^  and  that  the  whole  world  should  be 
the  image  of  one  paradigm  prior  to  many.  For  whether  it  is  alone  the 
image  of  many  paradigms,  whence  will  the  world  be  one  and  a  whole  ? 
And  how  is  it  possible  it  should  not  be  more  dishonourable  than  its  parts? 
For  these  indeed,  are  assimilated  to  intelUgibles,  but  the  whole  world  is 
similar  to  no  one  of  real  beings.  Or  whether  all  the  world  subsists  from 
a  certain  intelligible  paradigm,  if  indeed  there  are  many  paradigms  of  one 
world,  these  also  will  be  similar  to  each  other,  if  they  are  the  causes  of 
the  same  image.  It  is  necessary  therefore,  that  sameness  should  be 
communicated  to  these  from  one  form ;  or  again,  the  world  will  be  more 
venerable  than  its  paradigms  according  to  union.  But  if  the  paradigm  is 
one^  after  the  same  manner  also  the  demiurgic  cause  is  one.  For  as 
there  is  one  image  from  one  paradigm,  thus  also  the  progeny  being  one;, 
derives  its  subsistence  from  one  demiurgus  and  father.  For  it  is 
ineoessary  that  the  paradigmatic  cause  slionld  either  be  the  same  with  the 
damiosgusy  and  shoold  be  eataUished  ia  him,  or  that  it  should  be  prior  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  Xnr.  OF  PLATO.  545 

the  demiurgus,  as  we  say  it  is,  or  that  it  should  be  posterior  to  the 
demiurgus,  as  some  think  proper  to  assert. 

If  however,  the  paradigm  and  the  demiurgus  are  the  same,  the  demiur* 
gus  will  be  one  according  to  Plato.  For  the  paradigm  is  only-begotten,  as 
he  demonstrates.  But  if  the  demiurgus  exists  prior  to  the  paradigm, 
which  it  is  not  lawful  to  assert,  but  the  paradigm  is  one,  much  more  will 
the  demiurgus  be  one.  For  the  causes  which  are  more  elevated  are 
allotted  a  more  unifoim  hypostasis ;  since  also  the  first  cause  of  wholes  is 
one.  And  if  the  paradigmatic  cause  has  indeed  the  first  order  in  beings^ 
but  the  demiurgic  cause  the  second  order,  and  this  universe  the  last 
order,  being  the  resemblance  of  the  former,  and  the  progeny  of  the  latter, 
how  is  it  possible  since  the  extremes  are  monadic,  the  middle  multitude 
should  be  without  the  monad  ?  For  it  is  necessary  that  the  paradigm 
being  intelligible,  should  impart  by  illumination  a  greater  degree  of 
union  to  the  universe  than  the  demiurgic  cause*  And  as  the  paradigo^ 
being  only-begotten,  comprehends  in  itself  the  first  paradigms,  after  the 
same  manner  it  is  necessary  that  the  demiurgic  monad  should  be  compr^ 
hensive  of  many  demiurgi.  For  if  the  world  derives  its  only-begottea 
subsistence  from  the  paradigm,  but  through  tlie  deoEiiurgus,  the  demi^ 
urgus  also  is  indeed  entirely  one. 

Farther  still,  I  think  that  those  who  are  the  patrons  of  this  opinion 
should  direct  their  attention  to  that  assertion  of  Socrates,  that  it  is  every 
where  fit  the  many  should  be  comprehended  in  the  one.  For  on  account 
of  this  we  admit  the  hypothesis  of  forms  [or  ideas],  and  prior  to  other 
things  we  preestablish  intellectual  monads.  How  therefore  are  intellec- 
tual forms  extended  to  one  principle,  and  how  do  each  of  them  proceed 
from  one  demiurgic  cause,  but  the  whole  demiurgic  form  is  multiplied^ 
and  divided  prior  to  the  indivisible  monad  ?  For  it  is  necessary  that  as 
all  equals,  whether  they  are  intellectual,  or  psychical,  or  sensible,  should 
be  suspended  from  one  first  equality,  all  beautiful  things,  from  beauty 
itself,  and  the  many  every  where,  from  primary  beings,  thus  also  it  is 
necessary  that  the  multitude  of  demiurgi  should  be  suspended  fi*om  one 
fabrication,  and  should  subsist  about  one  demiurgic  monad.  For  how 
can  it  be  lawful  to  leave  the  one  in  forms  rather  than  in  the  Gods  ?  For 


Digitized  by 


Google 


544  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

forms  indeed,  have  their  hypostasis  mingled  with  multitude ;  but  the 
Gods  are  defined  according  to  union  itselfl  If  therefore  all  the  multi*^ 
tudes  of  forms  are  the  progeny  of  monads,  much  more  are  the  orders  of 
the  Gods  allotted  peculiarities  which  originate  from  monads,  and  which 
throu^  monads  are  inherent  in  multitudes.  But  if  this  be  the  cas^,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  whole  demiurgus  should  subsist  prior  to  the  multitude 
of  demiurgi,  and  that  the  three  demiurgi  slK)uld  distribute  the  one  cause 
of  the  generation  of  the  universe. 

Again  therefore  we  assert  from  the  beginning  that  it  is  necessary  the 
demiurgic  principle  should  either  be  one,  or  many,  or  one,  and  many. 
But  if  indeed,  it  is  one  alone,  and  the  multitude  in  the  world,  and  the 
different  order  which  it  contains  subsist  similarly  from  one  demiurgic 
principle,  how  are  mortal  and  immortal  natures  the  progeny  of  the  same 
cause  without  a  medium  ?  For  all  the  natures  that  proceed  from  the  one 
fabrication  are  immortal.  But  if  the  demiurgic  principle  is  many  only^ 
wlience  is  the  common  form  of  hyparxis  communicated  to  the  multitude^ 
if  it  does  not  originate  from* one?  For  as  the  final  cause  is  one,  viz.  the 
goodj  as  the  paradigmatic  cause  is  one,  viz.  animal  itself,  and  as  the  world 
is  a  generated  one,  thus  also  after  the  same  manner,  the  demiurgic  cause 
is  one.  But  if  there  are  one  and  many  demiurgic  principles,  whether 
does  the  one  principle  belong  to  partial  or  to  total  genera  ?  If  however,  it 
belongs  indeed  to  partial  genera,  bow  is  it  extended  to  the  first  and 
intelligible  paradigm?  For  the  supermundane  genera  subsist  about  the 
intellectual  Gods,  and  according  to  intellectual  paradigms.  For  being 
partial,  they  entirely  assimilate  the  natures  posterior  to  themselves  to 
intellectuals,  co-ordinately  to  themselves.  Or  how  will  it  any  longer 
preserve  the  union  of  total  fabrication  which  produces  wholes  totally? 
For  a  thing  of  this  kind  pertains  to  no  partial  natiu*e  ;  but  it  belongs  to  a 
partial  principle,  to  produce  parts  either  totally '  or  partially,  as  we  before 
observed.  But  if  the  demiurgic  principle  belongs  to  the  total  orders,  it 
is  necessary  that  it  should  either  be  inteUigible  or  intellectual,  or  intelli- 
gible and  intellectuaU    If  however,  it  is  of  an  intelligible  nature,  how  is 

'  oAixo)^  16  omitted  ia  tbe  original. 


f 

V 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  PLATO-      '  3^ 

it  divisive  of  wholes  ?  How  is  it  co-arranged  with  mundane  natures  ? 
How  is  it  said  to  fashion  the  universe  ?  How  from  the  genera  of  being 
•does  it  produce  souU  and  the  natures  posterior  to  soul  ?  For  [on  this 
hypothesis]  we  must  admit  that  all  these  ane  in  intelligibles,  viz.  figure; 
the  genera  of  being,  and  these  divided,  the  similar  and  the  dissimilar, 
and  other  things  through  which  the  demiurgic  principle  constitutes  the 
whole  world.  But  if  the  demiurgic  principle  is  of  an  intelligible  and  at 
the  same  time  intellectual  nature,  how  does  he  produce  participated 
intellect  ?  How  does  he  separate  the  multiform  orders  of  souls  ?  How 
does  he  divide  the  parts,  or  the  circles  that  are  io  them?  For  that  whidi 
is  generative  of  participate  intdlect,  is  imparticipable  intellect.  And 
that  which  has  the  pow^r  of  dividing  multitude  will  not  [on  this 
liypothesis]  differ  from  that  which  connects  the  total  genera  of  the 
Gods.  And  in  short,  the  demiurgHS  of  wholes,  is  called  byTimaeus 
intellect,  and  is  frequently  said  to  see,  to  discover,  and  to  reason,  but  he 
is  no  where  denominated  by  him  intelligible  and  at  the  same  tisie 
intellectual.  For  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectua]  Godsi 
divide  all  things  triadically.  But  the  demiurgus,  at  one  time  indeed, 
divides  the  wodd  into  five  parts,  and  at  another  divides  the  cirdes  of  the 
soul  into  hebdomads,  that  he  may  generate  either  the  celestial  spheres, 
or  the  seven  parts  of  the  soul.  We  must  say  therefore,  that  he  is  entirely 
secondary  to  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intdlectual  Gods,  and 
he  is  the  cause  of  secondary  goods  to  the  world.  But  we  must  refer  to 
those  Gods  the  cause  of  united  forms  and  reasons.  That  the  demiurgic 
intellect  however,  is  &a  intellectual  God,  is  I  think  tbrpugh  tl^ese  things 
jnfficiently  apparent  at  present. 


Froc.  Vol.  I.  « X 


Digitized  by 


Google 


546  ^^  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Birv  Plato  appears  to  me  ta  have  indicated  the  peculiarity  of  this 
God  in  a  remarkable  manner,  by  calling  him  intellect,  and  asserting  that 
be  Bees  intelligibles,  but  admitting  that  they  are  visible  to  him  according; 
to  iiatm^e.  For  that  which  is  truly  intellect,  and  which  establishes  itself 
according  to  this  hyparxis,  is  intellectual  intellect.  For  intelligible  intdi'^ 
lect  alsoy  is  indeed  simply  intelligible,  and  is  of  that  allotment;  but  is^ 
Mid  to  be  intellect!  as  being  the  cause  of  every  intellectual  nature. 
And  the  intellect  of  the  intelligible  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
Gods,  has  not  its  own  nature  unmingled  with  the  intelligible.  But  intel- 
lectual intellect  alone,  k  peculiarly  intellect,  being  allotted  the  intellec* 
tual  itself  in  intellectuals;  just  as  the  most  principal  of  inlelligibles,  is^ 
primarily,  the  firet,  and  the  highest  intelligible,  which  we  denominate  the- 
one  being,  and  that  which  is  occultly  being.  This  therefore  is  that  which, 
is  simply  intelligible.  But  that  which  is  simply  intellect  is  intellec-*^ 
tual  intellect.  For  the  int^igible  indeed  possesses  the  summit,  but 
intellect  the  end  of  wholes.  And  the  intermediate  natures  partly  pertain? 
to  the  intelligible,  and  partly  to  intellect,  and  the  intellectual  nature- 
And  the  inteUigibles  indeed,  that  are  primarily  so,  possess  intellect  ac- 
cording to  cause;  but  the  first  of  intellectuals  have  the  intelligibfer 
according  to  participation ;  and  the  natures  that  are  collective  of  these,, 
conjoin  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  peculiarity  together.  Since^ 
therefore,  Timaeus  also  calls  the  demiurgus  intellect  indefinitely,  and 
neither  denominates  him  hfe,  nor  intelligible,  in  consequence  of  his  pecu* 
'liarity  being  alone  intellectual,  it  is  certainly  necessary  that  he  should 
be  established  at  the  end  of  the  intellectual  Gods. 

For  there  intellect  is  intellect  itself,  and  is  not  such  an  intellect  as 
the  Satumian  is.    For  Saturn  also  is  intellect,  but  he  is  a  pure  and  incor* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHA^Xy*  OFPLATa  547 

ruptible  intellect,  which  manifests  his  supreme  empire  in  intellectuals, 
transcending  the  whole  intellectual  Gods.  -But  the  demiurgus  is  simply 
intellect.  As  therefore,  the  simply  intelligible  is  the  first  of  intelligibles, 
so  that  which  is  simply  intdlect,  is  the  last  of  intellectuals.  For  all 
things  are  in  each  of  the  orders.  For  in  intelligibles  life  and  intellect 
}>reexist ;  and  in  the  breadth  of  life,  there  are  similarly  life  and  intellect. 
And  in  intellectuals  there  is  each  of  the  rest.  But  in  intelligibles  indeed, 
being  is  according  to  essence,  but  life  and  intellect  are  according  to 
cause.  In  intellectuals,  intellect  indeed  is  according  to  essence,  but  being 
and  life  are  according  to  participation.  And  in  the  intermediate  natures^ 
intellect  is  according  to  cause,  but  being  is  according  to  participation, 
and  life  according  to  essence.  As  therefore,  that  which  is  most  vital 
in  life  is  the  middle,  and  as  that  which  is  especially  intelligible  is  the 
summit  in  being,  so  in  intellectuals,  the  extremity  is  that  which  is  most 
intellectual.  Hence  if  there  is  a  certain  intellect  which  is  simply  intel* 
lect,  and  a  perceiving  intellect,  this  is  intellectual  intellect,  which  Plato 
denominating  the  demiurgus  unfolds  to  us  the  most  manifest  order,  which 
it  is  allotted  in  intellectuals.  On  this  account  also^  prior  to  all  other 
things,  the  demiurgus  constitutes  participated  intellect,  as'Timaeus  says« 
For  placing  intellect  in  soul,  and  soul  in  body,  he  fashioned  the  universe. 
Energizing  therefore,  according  to  his  own  essence,  and  producing  by  his 
very  being,  he  constituted  the  intellect  of  the  universe  prior  to  all  othec 
things.  For  every  participated  proceeds  from  imparticipable  intellect. 
Hence,  as  if  Plato  had  said,  that  the  generative  cause  which  gives  sub- 
sistence to  participated  intelligible,  is  that  which  is  primarily  being,  so 
since  the  demiurgus  first  produces  intellect  from  himself,  he  will  be  im- 
participable and  intellectual  intellect.  From  these  things  therefore,  it  is 
evident  what  the  hyparxis  of  the  demiurgus  and  father  is,  and  what  order 
it  is  allotted  in  intellectuals  according  to  Timaeus. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


348  ^^  '^^  THEOLOGY  BOOK  Yl. 


CHAPTER  XVf: 


Let  us  however  after  another  manner  syllogistically  collect  the  pecuy 
fiaritj  of  the  demiurgus,  receiving  from  the  Timaeus  the  principles  of  the 
arguments  on  this  subject.  This  therefore  is  known  to  every  one,  that: 
Tlma^us  calls  the  whole  demiurgus  fabricator  and  father,  in  the  beginning; 
of  what  he  says  concerning  him.  For  he  says,."  It  is  difficult  to  discover 
the  fabricator  and  father  of  this  universe,  and  when  found,  it  is  impossible 
to  speak  of  him  to  all  men.''  Hence,  he  does  not  think  fit  to  call. him 
either  father  alone,  or  fabricator  alone,  nor  again  connecting  the  two,^ 
&ther  and  fabricator,  but  on  the  contrary,  he  places  the  fabricative  prior, 
to  the  paternal.  Now  therefore,  we  must  show  in  the  first  place,  in  what 
respect  fabricator  and  father  differ  from  each.other ;  and  in  the  pext  place,, 
in  addition  to  this,  who  the  fabricator  alone  is,  and  who  father  and  fa- 
bricator is,  and  how  the  fabricative  and  at  the  same  time  paternal  pecik- 
liarity,  is  considered  by  Plato  as  adapted  to  the  demiurgus* 

If  therefore,. we  divide  all  things  into  the  Gods,  and  the  progeny  of  the 
Gods,  and  this  is  tlie  same  thing  as  to  divide  them  into  superessential 
monads,  and  the  progis^ions  of  beings,  father  indeed  will  be  generative 
of  the  Gods  and  superessential  unities ;.  but  fabricator  will  give  subsist- 
ence to  essences  and  beings.  For  again,  according  to  this  reason  Timaeus 
says,  that  the  natures  which  are  generated  by  the  demiurgus  are  equal  to 
the  Gods;  for  the  demiurgus  is  not  only  fabricator,  but  also  father;  but 
that  those  which  are  produced  by  the  junior  Gods,  are  allotted  a  mortal 
nature.  For  these  Gods  are  alone  producers  and  fabricators  of  things 
which  participate  of  existence  alone,  and  not  of  the  superessential  pecu^ 
liarity.  Hence  through  that  by  which  they  suffer  a  diminution  with  re- 
spect to  the  demiurgic  monad,  through  this  they  are  not  allotted  a  power 
generative  of  things  equal  to  the  Gods.    And  through  that  by  which  the^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVr;  OF  PLATO.  349 

intellectual  demiurgus  is  expanded  above  the  junior  Gods,  through  this 
he  binds  to  himself  the  generations  of  all  mundane  natures. 
'   But  if  again,  we  diride  beings  into  the  total  and  partial,  father  indeed, 
will  appear  to  us  to  be  the  hypostatic  cause  of  wholes,  but  fabricator  of 
partial  natures.     For  the  former  is  the  cause  exemptly  of  things  that  are 
generated;   but  the  latter  proximately.      And  the    former,   produces 
indeed  by  his  very  being,  energy  giving  perfection  to  his  hyparxis ;  but 
the  latter  produces   by  energizing,  his  hypostasis  being  fixed  according 
to  energy.     If  also  we  again  separately  divide  the  generations  of  perpe- 
tual and' mortal  natures,  we  must  refer  the  generation  of  perpetual  na» 
tures  to  the  paternal  cause,  but  the  generation  of  mortal  natures  to  the 
iabricative  cause.     For  the  fabricator  indeed  produces  that  whidi  is  ge- 
nerated from   non-being  to  being.     For  the  Elean  guest  defines   the 
effective  art  to  be  this.     But  the  father  constitutes  things  posterior  ta 
hiinself  consubsistent  with  himself.     For  he  is  father  by  his  very  being, 
and  has  the  power  of  generating  united  with  himself.     Each  therefore,  I 
mean  the  paternal  and  the  effective  or  fabricative,  is  assimilated  to  the 
principle  of  bound.     And  the  former  indeed  is  the  cause  of  union,  but 
the  latter  of  the  production  of  forms.    And  the  former  is  the  cause  of 
wholes,  but  the  latter  of  an  extension  as  far  as  to  parts.     And  the  one' 
indeed;  is  the  primary  leader  of  simple,  but  the  other  of  composite  na* 
turcs;     Again  however,  in^  these  the  generative  cause,  and   the  cause 
which  is  productive  of  life,  are  opposed  to  each  other ;  because  the 
paternal  cause  indeed  is  connascent  with  generative  powers,  but  the 
eflFective  witli  vivific   powers.    And  as  the  paternal  and  the  effective 
causes  pertain  to  the  coordination  of  bound,  so  every  thing  prohfic  and 
vivific,  pertains  to  vivification,  and  the  first  infinity. 

These  things,  however,  being  thus  divided  by  us,  it  is  evident  that  the 
paternal  indeed,  is  itself  by  itself  primarily  in  the  intelligible  Gods.  For 
they  are  the  fathers  of  wholes,  being  fixed  according  to  supreme  intelligi* 
We  union.  And  on  this  account,  Plato  also  calls  the  first  God  father, 
from  the  natures  which  are  proximately  established  after  him,  transfer- 
ring to  him  the  appellation  of  father.  For  every  where  indeed,  it  is  usual 
with  Plato  ta  introduce  names  to  the  ineffable  from  secondary  causes,.* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


350  ^N  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

and  tlie  causes  which  are  postecici:  to  it.^  But  at  one  tune  indeed,  he 
introduces  the  namei^  from  all  beings,  and  at  another  from  the  first  bdlags. 
For  it  oeilher  was  nor  is  la^wful  to  refer  names  to  him  who  is  exempt  from 
all  beings^  from  subordinate  natures,  and  which  are  placed  in  an  order 
verj  remote  from  him.  If  therefore,  all  beingns  participate  of  the  paternal 
peculiarity,  we  must  say  that  Plato  gives  this  name  to  the  one  from  aU 
beings ;  for  there  is.  not  among  all  beinga  such  a  cause  as  this.  Hence  it 
is  evident  that  Plato  introduces  to  the  one  an  appellation  of  this  kind^ 
fi*ora  that  which  is  the  first  and  hi^est  in  the  Gods.  The  intelligible 
Gods^  however,  are  more  ancient  than  all  ^  divine  orders,  and  subsist 
immediately  after  the  one.  The  pftitemal  cause  therefore  of  beings  is  ia 
the  intelligible  Gods,  and  the  intelligible  Gods  are  the  Others  of  all  the 
divine  genera;  being  established  in  the  highest  essences,  and  occultly  pro* 
ducin^  wholes.  And  the  first  God  indeed,  is  beyond  the  appellation  of 
father,  as  he  is  likewise  beyond  all  other  names ;  and  he  is  neither  properly 
called  the  goody  or  the  one^  through  his  inefiable  and  unkiiown  transcen- 
dency. !l^t  the  intelligible  Gods  are  primarily  superessential  unities 
and  goodnesses,  and  are  the  exempt  fathers  of  beings. 

The  paternal  peculiarity,  therefore,  ori^nates  supernally  from  the  first 
intelligible  triad ;  but  the  fabricative  first  presents  itself  to  the  view  in 
the  third  triad.  For  that  which  generates  all  forms,  and  adorns  all  things 
with  forms  is  the  third  triad  of  intelligibles.  For  there,  as  we  have  said, 
all-perfect  animal  subsists,  which  is  comprehensive  of  the  first  and  intel- 
ligible paradigms.  Here  therefore,  the  effective  also  or  fabricative  at  the 
same  time  subsists.  For  animal  itself  constitutes  the  Gods,  and  produces 
the  forms  of  all  beings.  Hence  it  is  allotted  the  paternal  peculiarity, 
according  to  the  divine  cause,  but  according  to  the  formal  cause,  it  un- 
folds into  light  the  effective  principle  of  wholes.  But  again,  on  the  con- 
trary, the  effective  and  at  the  same  time  paternal  peculiarity,  is  allotted 
its  hypostasis  in  the  demiurgic  monad.  Hence  also  the  demiurgus  of 
wholes  is  the  hypostatic  cause  of  Gods.  In  a  particular  manner  however, 
he  fabricates  the  world,  energizing  with  forms  and  demiurgic  reasons. 
For  he  constitutes  intellect,  souls  and  bodies,  adorning  all  things  with 
formts^some  indeed  with  first,  others  with  middle,  and  others  with  last  forms. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVL  OF  PLATO.  351 

Pa  you  not  see,  therefore,  how  the  end  of  intelligibles  indeed,  was 
paternal  sxid  at  the  same  time  effective ;  but  the  end  of  intellectuals  is^ 
elective  and  at  the  same  time  paternaL  There  however,  the  paternal 
peculiarity  is  more  predominant ;  but  here  the  effective.  For  in  both 
indeed,  both  causes  preexist;  nevertheless  in  the  paradigm  [i.  e.  in  ani- 
mal itself 3  the  paternal  is  more  prevalent,^  but  in  the  demiurgus  tte 
effective.  For  the  former  produces  by  his  very  being ;  but  the  latter  by 
energizing.  And  in  the  former  indeed,  fabrication  [or  effective  energy] 
is  essential ;  but  in  the  latter  essence  is  effective.  Forms  also  are  with 
both;  but  in  the  former  intelligibly,  and  in  the  latter  intellectually.  Frona 
these  things  therefore^  it  is  evident,  that  the  demiurgic  cause  subsists 
analc^us  to  the  paradigmatic  cause ;  and  that  it  has  the  same  order  with 
respect  to  intellectuals,  as  that  has  with  respect  to  intelligibles.  And  on 
this  account  Timaeus  also  says  that  the  demiurgus  of  wholes  was  extended 
to  thit  paradigm.  For  he  says,  ^  Whatever  ideas  intellect  perceived  by 
the  dianoetic  energy  in  animal  itself,  such  and  so  many  he  conceived  it 
necessary  for  the  universe  to  contain.'*  And  together  with  this  analogy^ 
there  is  a  diminution  of  the  intellectual  with  reference  to  the  intelligible. 
For  the  latter  is  more  united ;  but  the  former  is  more  separated.  And 
the  one  indeed  is  preestablished  in  the  order  of  the  desirable ;  but  the 
ether  is  moved  about  the  desirable.  And  the  one  fills  with  paternal 
power  ;  but  tlie  other  absorbs  as  it  were  and  embosonis  the  whole  prolific 
abundance  of  the  desirable.  And  after  this  manner^  the  demiurgus  of  the 
universe  is  all-perfect,  receiving  whole  intelligible  powers,  from  all-perfect 
animal.  For  the  universe  is  threefold ;  one  indeed  being  intelligibly  [all]  ; 
another  intellectually ;  and  another  sensibly.  For  the  world  is  perfect,, 
from  perfect  natures,  as  Timaeus  says.  And  animal  itself  is  perfect  ac- 
cording to  all  things,  as  the  same  Timaeus  asserts.  The  demiurgus  like- 
wise, being  the  best  of  causes,  is  all-perfect. 

Again  therefore,  resuming  what  we  have  said,  we  repeat,  that  the 
paternal  cause  commences  from  the  supreme  union  of  intelligibles;  but 
the  paternal'  and  at  the  same  time  effective  cause  is  consubsistent  in  the 
intelligible  paradigm ;  and  the  effective  and  at  the  same  time  paternal 
cause  is  defined  according  to  the  whole  demiurgus^    But  the  cause  which 


Digitized  by 


Google 


35^  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V^ 

is  alone  ^flfective  and  fabricative,  pertains  to  the  junior  Gods  who  give 
subsistence  to  partial  and  mortal  tilings.    The  peculiarity  therefore  of 
the  demiurgic  cause  is  effective  and  paternal.    And  this  Tifnaeus  asserts, 
j\ot  only  in  the  beginning  of  the  discourse  about  it;,  in  which  he  says, "  [To 
discover]  therefore,  the  artificer  and  father  of  Ihis  .univ.erse,  &c.;*'  but 
also  in  the  speech  to  the  junior  Gods,  he  does  Jthe  same  thing;  for  the 
jdemijurgus  in  a  similar  manner  says  to  them  :  "  Gods  of  Gods  of  whom  I 
am  the  demiurgus  and  father,  [Whatever  is  generated  by  me  is  indissolju- 
J>le,  I  being  willing  that  it  should  be  so.]"    For  he  does  not  call  himself 
Jather  and  demiurgus,  but  demiurgus  and  fatiier,  just  as  there  [Timaeus 
calls  him]  fabricator  and  father.    And  not  in  the  Timaeus  only  is  this 
jxiode  of  the  arrangement  of  the  names  defined,  but  in  the  Politicus  also^ 
.the  Elean  guest  speaking. about  the  world  says  that  it  imitates  theinstruc- 
vtion  of  its  demiurgus  and  father ;  and  in  the  beginning  indeed,  he  uses 
^hese  jiames  more  accurately,  but  in  the  end  more  negligently.    Since 
Plato  therefore,  every  wherje  preserves  this  .order  of  names  unchanged,  it 
is  evident  to  those  who  are  not  entirely  uoskilled  in  things  of  this  kind^ 
that  be  defines  the  demiurgic  monad  According  to  this  peculiarity^  and 
Jthat  he  considers  it  to  be  effective  and  at  the  same  time  paternal.     For 
because  indeed,  it  is  the  end  of  the  intellectual  triad,  it  is  allotted  a  pa- 
^mal  transcendency  with  res|)ect  to  all  the  second  genera  of  Gods ;  but 
because  it  ptroduces  from  itself  all  the  partial  genera  and  species  of  beings^ 
jt  possesses  an  effective  cause  of  the  natures  to  which  it  gives  subsistence. 
And  because  indeed,  it  js  father,  power  is  in  it,  and  at  the  same  time  in- 
tellect.    jFor  the  deiroiurgus  himself  says,  "  Imitating  the  power  which  I 
emtployed  in  your  generation.^'    And  again,  Timaeus  says  concerning  the 
jdemiurgus;  "  Whatever  ideas  intellect  perceived  in  animal  itself,  such 
and  so  many  he  conceived  by  the  dianoetic  energy  it  necessary  for  thi$ 
universe  to  contain.*'    Hence  he  is  father,  and  the  power  of  JLhe  father  is 
in  him^  and  intellect.    All  these  however,  arje  in  him  intellectually,  and 
jiot  intelligibly.     Hence,  I  think  he  is  called  father  indeed,  not  simply^ 
J>ut  together  wjth  effector  and  demiurgus;  and  power,  not  by  itself,  but 
.the  power  of  the  demiurgus  and  father.    For  he  who  calls  himself  demii- 
XiTgca  and  father^  says  that  it  is  the  power  of  himself.   But  he  is  imiuedi** 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVI.  6¥  PLATO.  353 

ately  called  intellect,  without   the  addition  of  power,   and  the  other 
appellations.     **  Whatever  ideas  therefore  intellect  perceived,"  &c.     For  ' 
all  things  are  in  him  intellectually,  and  both  power  and  father,  by  which 
he  imitates  the  intelligible  paradigm.     For  in  him  all  things  were  intelli* 
gibly, '  viz.  bound,  infinity,  and  that  which  is  mixed  from  both  these. 
These,  however,  are  father,  power,  and  intellect.     But  the  intellectual  of 
the  paradigm  indeed  was  intelligible    in   the   intelligible   Gods,  sub- 
sisting prior  to  an  mtellectual  cause.     The  intellectual  however  of  the 
demiurgus,  is  of  itself  intellectual,  being  intellectual  in  intellectuals,  as 
was  before  observed.     Because  indeed,  as  we  have  said,  he  is  father, 
power  is  in  him,  and  also  intellect.     But  because  these  are  defined  ac*< 
Cording  to  the  effective  and  demiurgic,  he  is  coarranged  with  the  vivific 
order,  and  together  with  it  constitutes  the  genera  of  life,  and  vivifies  the 
whole  world.     What  this  order  is  however,  and  where  it  is  arranged,  we 
shall  shortly  survey.     But  thus  much  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said, 
that  so  far  as  he  is  the  demiurgus,  he  requires  contact  with  the  vivific 
order,  together  with  it  generates  total  lives,  and  conjoins  it  to  himself. 
Disseminating,  however^  all  the  measures  of  life  in  it,  and  together  with 
it  adorning  and  producing  them,  he  again  converts  fiiem  to  himself.  Fo^ 
it  belongs  to  him  to  generate  all  things,  and  to  recall  all  things  to  him- 
self, no  less  than  to  generate  them,  because  he  is  established  at  the  end 
of  the  intellectual  order,  and  is  the  demiurgic  intellect.    As  he  is  there- 
fore demiurgic,  he  gives  subsistence  to  all  things ;  but  as  intellect,  he 
convolves  multitude   to  union,  and   converts  it  to  himself.      He    also 
accomplishes  both  these,   by   the  words  which  he  delivers  to  the  junior 
Gods.     For  he  fills  them  with  demiurgic  and  prolific  power,  collects  them 
to  himself,  constitutes  himself  the  object  of  desire  as  it  \vere  to  the  mul- 
titude of  Gods,  and  extends  about  himself  all  the  demiurgi  in  the  world. 

'  For  votfxos,  it  b  necessary  to  read  v^co;. 


Proc.  Vol.  I.  3  Y 


Digitized  by 


Google 


354  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


In  the  third  place  therefore,  let  us  purify  our  conceptions  about  the  de- 
miurgic cause  according  to  other  projecting  energies  of  intellect,  following 
for  this  purpose  Timaeus.  In  the  first  place  then,  Timaeus  in  the  begins 
ning  of  the  theory  concerning  the  demiurgus,  sufficiently  exhibits  his  good-^ 
Bess,  and  his  unenvying  and  abundant  communication  of  demiurgic 
i^easons,  being  impelled  to  this  from  the  seat  of  goodness  which  is  in- 
herent in  him,  and  from  his  exuberant  deity.  For  his  goodness  and  hi» 
unenvying  abundance,  are  not  as  it  were  a  certain  habit  of  good,  and  a 
power,  or  a  form  itself  by  itself  existing  prior  to  many  goods,  but  it  is  one 
ioefiable  participation  of  good,  and  the  one  of  the  demiurgic  order;  ac- 
cording to  which  the  demiurgus  also  is  a  God,  and  fills  all  things  with 
their  proper  good.  For  because  there  is  deity  in  him  which  desires  ta 
adorn  and  arrange  all  things,  and  an  hyparxis  which  is  extended  to  the 
providence  of  the  whole  of  things,  on  this  account  he  establishes  the  prin-» 
ciple  of  fabrication.  His  goodness  therefore  is  nothing  else  than  demi* 
urgic  deity.  But  his  will  is  the  progeny  of  the  energy  of  his  goodness^ 
bounding  the  end  of  his  power.  For  since  in  the  demiurgus  of  wholes 
there  are,  as  we  have  said,  fsXhtv,  power,  and  intellect,  and  these  subsist 
in  him  intellectually,  according  to  each  of  these  he  is  filled  with  the  par- 
ticipation of  the  one.  And  through  goodness  indeed,  that  which  is 
paternal  in  him,  and  which  is  as  it  were  the  intelligible  of  intellect,  i^ 
illuminated.  But  through  will,  his  power  is  governed,  and  is  extended 
to  one  intelligible  good.  And  througli  providence,  his  intellect  is  perfect, 
and  gives  subsistence  to  all  things.  All  these  likewise  are  the  progeny 
of  the  one  deity  in  the  demiurgus. 

In  the  first  place,  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  Timaeus  unfolds  through 
these  things  the  divine  peculiarity  of  the  demiurgus.    But  in  the  second 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVU.  OF  PLATO.  355 

placet  be  preKDts  to  our  view  the  intelligible  cause  which  is  in  him,  and 
also  the  united  paradigmatic  cause  of  wholes  which  he  contains.  For 
to  make  all  things  similar  to  himself,  evinces  that  he  is  the  intelligible 
paradigm  of  every  thing  beautiful  and  good  in  the  world.  For  because 
he  gives  subsistence  to  all  things  by  his  very  being,  that  to  which  Jie 
gives  subsistence  is  the  image  of  himself.  And  according  to  this 
reasoning  the  demiurgus  is  not  only  a  God,  but  he  contains  in  himsdf 
the  intdligible,  and  true  being,  and  antecedently  comprehends  not  only 
the  final  cause  of  mundane  natures,  but  also  the  paradigmatic  cause. 
But  again,  in  the  third  place,  Timaeus  celebrates  the  demiurgic  power, 
and  the  principle  which  abolishes  every  thing  disorderly  and  indefinite, 
and  prepares  the  beautiful  alone  and  the  good  to  have  dominion  in 
whdes.  For  the  assertion  that  the  demiurgus  to  the  utmost  of  his  power 
suffered  nothing  evil  and  vile  to  exist,  indicates  his  unconqoerable 
power,  which  adorns  things  material  in  an  unpolluted  manner,  and 
imparts  by  illumination  bound  to  indefinite,  and  order  to  disorderly 
natures. 

In  which  part  of  the  TimsBus,  likewise,  this  dogma  of  Plato  will  appear 
to  you  to  be  admirable,  that  matter  is  generated  from  some  one  of  the 
Gods  situated  above  the  demiurgus.  For  the  demiurgus  receiving 
matter  occupied  by  the  vestiges  of  forms,  thus  himself  introduces  into  it 
all  the  perfection  of  ornament  and  arrangement.  Matter,  therefore,  and 
the  whole  of  that  which  is  the  subject  of  bodies,  proceed  sup^nally  from 
the  first  principles,  which  on  account  of  their  exuberance  of  power,  are 
able  to  generate  even  the  last  of  beings.  But  the  demiurgus  of  the 
universe,  imparts  by  illumination,  order,  bound,  and  ornament,  and  the 
whole  world  is  fabricated  an  image  of  intelligibles,  through  the  commu- 
nication  of  forms. 

In  the  fourth  place,  therefore,  let  us  survey  how  Timssus  unfolds  to 
us  the  demiurgic  intellect.  "  Byja  reascming  process,'*  says  he,  *•  the 
demiurgus  discovered  from  the  things  which  are  visible  according  to 
nature,  that  no  work  which  is  destitute  of  intelligence  can  ever  become 
more  beautiful  than  that  which  possesses  intellect/'  What  therefore  h 
this  reasoning?   What  is  the  discovery,  and  whence  does  it  originate ^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


356  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  Y. 

Reasoning,  therefore^  is  indeed  distributed  intellectiont  looking  to  itsdf^ 
and  in  itself  investigating  good.  For  every  one  who  reasons,  passes  from 
one  thing  to  another,  and  being  converted  to  himself,  searches  after 
good.  The  demiurgic  intellect,  therefore,  in  adorning  and  arranging  the 
universe  .  subsists  analogously  to  him  who  reasons ;  for  he  emits  the 
divided  causes  of  mundane  natures,  which  preexist  unitedly  in  inteU 
ligibles.  For  those  things  which  intelligible  intellect  constitutes 
uniformly  and  exemptly,  these  intellectual  intellect  separating,  distri* 
buting  into  parts,  and  as  it  were  fabricating  by  itself,  generates. 
Reasoning  therefore  is  the  being  filled  with  the  intelligible,  and  an  all- 
perfect  union  with  it.  By  which  also  it  is  evident  that  it  is  not  fit  to 
think  this  reasoning  [of  the  demiurgus]  is  either  investigation  or  doubt, 
or  a  wandering  of  divine  inteUect,  but  that  it  is  stable  intelligence 
intellectually  perceiving  the  multiform  causes  of  beings.  For  intellect  is 
always  united  to  the  intelligible,  and  is  filled  with  its  own  intelligibles. 
And  in  a  similar  manner  it  is  intellect  in  energy,  and  intelligible.  For 
at  one  and  the  same  time,  it  intellectually  perceives  and  is  perceived, 
discovers  itself,  entering  into  itself,  and  the  reasoning  also  finds  what 
this  intelligence  is,  but  not  according  to  transition.  For  the  intelligence 
of  the  Gods  is  eternal.  And  invention  with  them  is  not  the  discovery  of 
that  which  is  absent;  for  all  things  are  always  present  to  the  intellect 
of  the  Gods. .  The  intelligible  likewise  there  is  not  separated  fr6m 
intellect.  ,The  conversion,  therefore,  of  intellect  to  itself  may  be  called 
reasoning;  but  the  being  filled  from  intelligibles  invention.  And 
intelligibles  themselves  may  be  denominated  things  visible  according  to 
nature*.  For  because  Timeeus  had  denominated  the  unadorned  subject 
of  bodies  when  it  wa^  vanquished  by  the  obscure  vestiges  of  forms^ 
visible,  hence,  I  think,  he  calls  intelligibles  visible  according  to  nature. 
For  it  is  according  to  nature,  to  intellect  to  loc^  to  these,  and  not  to 
things  subordinate  to  these.  As,  theircfore,  he  says,  that  intellect  itself 
sees  intelligibles,  after  the  same  manner  also  he  calls  intelligibles  things 
naturally  visible,  and  converts  intellect  to  the  intelligible,  as  that  which 
sees  to  that  which  is  seen.  If,  therefore,  intellect  sees  animal  itself,  and 
assimilates  to  it  the  whole  world,  it  may  be  said  that  animal  itself  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVIII.  OF  PLATO.  357 

visible  to  the  demiurgus  of  the  universe.  For  there  the  most  splendid  of 
intelligibles  subsists ;  and  this  is  that  which  we  before  demonstrated^ 
when  we  said  that  there  the  fountain  of  beauty  shines  forth,  whieh 
Socrates,  in  the  Phaedrus,  denominates  splendid  and  fulgid. 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 


Such  therefore  are  the  conceptions  which  are  to  be  assumed  of  the 
demiurgic  cause,  and  from  these  things  they  are  to  be  derived.  We 
shall  however  obtain  one  perfection  of  the  summit  of  the  dogmas 
concerning  it,  if  we  are  able  to  survey  the  words  which  this  cause 
extends  to  the  junior  demiurgi,  and  to  unfold  the  concealed  meaning  of 
them.  This,  therefore,  we  shall  also  do,  estabHshing  the  following  principle 
of  the  explanation  of  them  :  The  energies  and  powers  of  the  Gods  are 
twofold.  And  some  indeed  abide  in,  and  energize  about  them,  and 
have  for  their  end  one  hypostasis,  and  which  is  united  to  essence.  But 
others  proceed  from  them,  exhibit  an  efficacious  power  about  secondary 
natures,  and  coexist  with  the  multitude  of  their  recipients,  and  with  the 
peculiarity  of  essence.  These,  however,  being  twofold,  the  secondary 
are  suspended  from  those  that  are  prior  to  them,  are  defined  about  them, 
and  receive  their  proper  hyparxis  according  to  them.  For  it  is  every 
where  necessary  that  externally  proceeding  should  be  the  images  of 
internal  energies,  evolving  the  at-once-collected  nature  of  their  indi- 
visibility ;  multiplying  that  in  them  which  is  united,  and  dividing  their 
impartibility. 

According  to  this  reasoning,  therefore,  the  energy  of  nature  is  also 
twofold,  one  being  that  which  abides  in  it,  according  to  which  it  connects 
itself,  and  the  reasons  it  contains,  but  the  other  proceeding  from  it» 


Digitized  by 


Google 


358  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

through  which  also  bodies  at«  filled  with  these  physical  potrew,  which 
heing  moved  by  nature,  act  on  each  other,  aud  physically  sufier  by  each 
Others  Again,  the  motion  of  the  soul  likewise  is  twofold.  And  the  one 
indeed  is  self-motive,  is  converted  to  itself,  is  of  itself,  concurs  with  the 
life  of  the  soul,  and  is  without  any  diflference  with  respect  to  it.  But 
the  other  is  incumbent  on  alter-motive  natures,  moves  these,  and  about 
these  extends  the  power  of  itself.  The  energy  of  intellect,  therefore,  is 
likewise  twofold.  And  one  indeed  is  intellectual,  is  united  to  true 
beings,  and  is  impartible,  being  co*existent  with  the  intelligible  itself  of 
intellect,  or  rather  being  the  intelligible  itself,  and  intellect.  For  intellect 
is  not  of  itself  in  capacity,  and  afterwards  receiving  energy,  intellec- 
tually perceives  the  intelligible ;  but  it  is  one  simple  energy.  For  the 
multitude  of  it  is  unical,'  and  its  energy  is  directed  to  itself.  But  the 
x>thw,  energy  of  intellect  is  directed  to  externals,  and  to  things  which  are 
able  to  participate  of  intellect.  For  these  intellect  causes  to  be  intel- 
lectual through  itself,  splendidly  as  it  were  emitting  the  light  of  its  own 
intelligence,  and  imparting  it  to  others.  .  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that 
the  divine  and  demiurgic  intellect  itself,  should  always  indeed  be  united 
to  the  intelligible,  and  that  it  should  have  the  plenitude  and  self- 
sufficiency  of  demiurgic  intelligence  eternally  established  according  to  a 
union  exempt  from  wholes ;  to  which,  as  it  appears  to  me,  Timseus  also 
looking  says,  that  the  father  of  the  universe  abides  in  his  accustomed 
manner,  and  withdraws  himself  to  his  own  place  of  survey,  delivering 
the  fabrication  of  mortal  natures  to  the  mundane  Gods.  For  so  far  as 
he  is  exempt  from  the  beings  posterior  to  himself  aud  is  uncoordinated 
with  the  more  partial  multitude  of  Gods,  so  far  he  is  converted  to 
himself,  and  surveys  and  intellectually  perceives  the  natures  prior  to 
liiraself,  according  to  one  uniform  union.  But  in  consequence  of  the 
more  ruling  and  leading  Gods  being  extended  towards  him,  he  emits 
from  himself  secondary  energies,  to  all  tlie  partial  orders. 

Timaeus,  therefore,  fashions  through  words,  these  powers  and  effica- 
cious energies  which  proceed  from  the  whole  and  one  fabrication  to  the 
demiurgic  multitude  of  Gods.  For  words  are  the  images  of  intellections ; 
because  indeed  they  evolve  that  which  is  contracted  in  intelligibles,  but 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVTII.  OF  PLATO,  359 

lead  forth  that  which  is  impartible  into  a  partible,  hypostasis.  They 
likewise  transfer  that  which  abides  in  itself  into  habitude  to  another 
thing.  And  it  is  evident  that  the  reasons  which  arc  impelled  from 
nature,  are  certain  natural  [powers],  and  render  that  which  receives  them 
physical.  But  the  reasons  which  are  generated  from  soul,  are  indeed 
vivific,  but  render  the  inanimate  nature  which  participates  of  them 
[[animated}  and  moved  from  itself,  through  the  power  of  soul,  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Phaedrus,  and  communicate  to  it  the  resemblance  of  self- 
motion,  And  the  reasons  which  are  generated  from  intellect,  illumi- 
nating the  natures  posterior  to  it,  distribute  all  intellectual  goods  to  their 
recipients,  being  the  suppliers  of  true  knowledge,  of  purity  and  a  more 
simple  life.  After  the  same  manner  also  the  demiurgic  words  produce 
in  the  junior  Gods,  whole,  impartible,  and  united  measures  of  exempt 
fabrication,  and  fill  their  essences  with  demiurgic  providence.  Thejr 
likewise  render  them  second  demiurgi,  and  emulous  of  their  father.- 
FcM*  he  indeed  gives  subsistence  to  the  whole  plenitudes  of  the  world. 
But  they,  imitating  him,  fabricate  all  partial  natures  in  conjunction  with 
wholes.  And  he  produces  the  essence  of  perpetual  natures.  But  they 
fashioning  mortal  natures  according  to  one  generation-producing  circle^ 
likewise  transmute  these.  And  as  the  one  demiurgus  governs  the  whole 
periods  of  the  universe,  thus  also  the  many  demiurgi  convolve  the 
divisible  circles  of  the  natures  that  are  borne  along'  in  generation.  If, 
therefore,  we  assert  these  things  rightly  concerning  the  words  proceeding 
from  the  demiurgus  to  the  multitude  of  mundane  Gods,  and  they  are 
efficacious,  fabricative,  and  convertive  of  their  recipients  to  a  union  with 
him,  and  are  also  perfective  of  the  beneficent  reasons  which  they 
contain,  we  shall  no  longer  seem  to  speak  paradoxically,  if  we  say  that 
these  words  extend  to  the  Gods  in  the  world  the  participation  of  all  the 
powfers  that  are  firmly  established  in  the  father,  and  of  the  causes  prior 
to,  and  subsisting  after  him.  And  as  he  convolving  the  end  of  the 
intellectual  Gods,  is  the  plenitude  of  all  things,  so  Hkewise  the  demiurgic 
words  proceeding  firom  him,  produce  in  the  junior  Gods  the  peculiarities,, 

• 
'  For  ^vgoijif^m  read  fi§ofU8V(»¥^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


360  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

as  I  may  say,  of  all  the  dirine  genera  that  are  above  the  world,  through 
which  they  are  suspended  from  all  the  orders  prior  to  them ;  just  I  think 
as  the  whole  of  this  world  [is  suspended  from  the  mundane  Gods  who '] 
fabricate  all  mortal  natures,  and  impart  to  diflferent  things  a  different 
power,  and  an  efflux  of  divine  powers. 

What,  therefore,  in  short,  is  it  which  Plato  indicates  the  Gods  derive 
through  these  words  from  the  first  demiurgus,  and  the  all-perfect  fabri* 
cation  ?  In  the  first  place,  indeed,  they  derive  this,  that  they  are  Gods  of 
Gods.     For  the  vocal  address  proceeding  to  them  from  the  father,  is  the  , 
supplier  of  divine  power,  and  is  allotted  an  efficacious  presence  in  its 
participant,  as  we  before  observed.     But  in  the  next  place,  these  words 
impart   to   them   an    indissoluble  power.     The  demiurgus  of  wholes, 
however,  comprehends  in  himself  the  cause  of  dissolution,  in  order  that 
they  may  indeed  l>e  essentially  indissoluble,  but  according  to  the  caus6 
of  binding,  not  indissoluble.    In  the  third  place,  therefore,  the  demiurgus 
produces  in  them  from   on  high,  through   these    words,  a  renovated 
immortality.     For  the  assertion  that  they  are  neither  immortal,  nor  shall 
be  subject  to  the   fatality  of  death,  establishes  them  in  this  form  of 
immortality,  which  the  fable  in    the  Politicus  denominates  renovated. 
In  addition  to  this  also,  the  words  testify  that  they  derive  from  the  father 
a  power  perfective  of  wholes.     For  if  the  world  is  imperfect  without  the 
subsistence  of  mortal  animals,  it  is  doubtless  necessary  that  those  who 
preside  over  the  generation  of  them  should  be  the  causes  of  perfection 
to  the  universe.     And  in  the  last  place,  these  words  impart  to  the  junior 
Gods  a  paternal  and  generative  empire  derived  from  the  exempt  and 
intellectual  cause  of  wholes ;   and  insert  in  them  the  proximate  powers 
of  regeneration.     For  through  these  words,  the  junior  Gods  again  receive 
in  themselves  the  natures  that  are  corrupted,  fabricate  parts  from  wholes, 
and  again  effect  the  dissolution    of   parts   into    their  wholes.      And 
universally  tl^  words  of  the  demiurgus  subject  the  perpetually-generated 
course  of  nature,  to  the  fabrication   of  the  junior  Gods.     In  short, 

*  There  is  eyidently  something  wanting  in  the  original  in  this  part ;  and  as  it  appears  to  me 
after  xaSontif  (oifi^)  leai  o  (rvpira;  ovroo-i  xoo-fto^,  it  is  requisite  to  supply  the  words  ti;  rou;  r/xocfMovg 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  XVIII.  OF  PLATO.  361 

therefore,  the  demiurgus  fills  the  junior  Gods  with  divine  union,  filb 
them  with  a  firm  establishment,  and  fills  them  with  a  perpetuity  adapted 
to  their  nature.  But  he  [Kmrs  into  them  the  all^various  causes  of 
perfective  powers,  of  vivific  rivers,  and  demiurgic  measures.  Hence 
also,  the  many  demiurgi  refer  the  fabrication  of  particulars  to  the  one 
and  whole  providence  of  the  father,  and  the  principles  of  demiurgic 
works  which  they  received  from  him,  to  his  elficacioOs  production.  And 
all  of  them  indeed  are  filled  with  all  powers,  because  all  of  them 
participate  of  the  demiurgic  words  which  proceed  into  them  from  the 
father.  But  some  of  them  are  more  characterized  by  one  peculiarity 
than  another. 

And  some  of  them  indeed  are  the  suppliers  of  union  to  their  progeny; 
others,  of  indissoluble  ])ermanency ;  others,  of  perfection ;  and  others,  of  life. 
But  others  preside  over  regeneration,  and  being  allotted  in  a  distributed 
manner  in  the  universe,  the  powers  which  subsist  unitedly  in  the  one  demi- 
urgus, they  are  subservient  to  the  providence  of  the  father.  And  every  thing 
which  is  generated  by  the  many  demiurgi,  is  in  a  much  greater  degree 
produced  by  the  one  fabrication  ;  which  governs  mortal  natures  indeed, 
eternally,  things  that  are  moved,  immoveably,  and  partible  natures 
impartibly.  It  is  not  however  necessary  that  the  progeny  of  that  one 
demiurgus  should  be  suspended  from  the  motion  of  the  junior  Gods* 
For  every  where  the  one  fabrication  is  more  comprehensive  than  that 
which  is  multiplied.  And  the  more  causal  of  divine  natures  energize 
prior  to  their  own  oflFspring,  and  together  with  them  constitute  the 
progeny  that  proceed  from  them.  The  first  [demiurgic]  God,  therefore, 
produces  from  and  through  himsdf  the  divine  genera '  of  the  universe, 
according  to  his  beneficent  will.  But  he  governs  mortal  natures  through 
the  junior  Gods,  generating  indeed  these  also  from  himself,  but  other 
Gods  producing  them  as  it  were  with  their  own  hands.  For  he  says, 
**  these  being  generated  throtigh  me  will  become  equal  to  the  Gods/' 
'I'he  cause,  therefore,  through  which^  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  junior 
Gods ;    but  the  cause  from  which^  even  in  the  production  of  mortal 

'  It  appears  from  the  verskmc^Fortve  tint  die  words  ttMtyiy^ 
?roc.  Vol.  I.  2  Z 


Digitized  by 


Google 


362  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

natures  is  to  be  referred  to  the  whole  demiurgus.  For  always  the  first 
of  those  things  that  are  constituted,  produce  in  conjunction  with  their 
monad  the  generation  of  secondary  natures.  And  all  things  indeed 
proceed  from  that  monad,  but  some  things  immediately ;  and  through 
it,  but  some  things  through  other  medict  receive  the  providence  that 
emanates  from  it.  For  these  middle  genera  of  causes  are  allotted  the 
providential  inspection  of  secondary  natures  from  the  first  effective 
monad. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


Concerning  the  words,  therefore,  in  the  Timaeus,  which  the  demi^ 
urgus  delivers  to  the  Gods  in  the  world,  thus  much  may  suffice  at 
present.  But  after  these,  it  is  fit  to  survey  the  second  measures  of  total 
demiurgic  providence,  which  the  detoiurgus  extends  from  himself  to  the 
many  and  divisible  souls.  For  having  constituted  these,  divided  them 
equal  in  number  to  divine  animals,  and  disseminated  them  about  the 
world,  he  inserts  in  them  fabricative  boundaries,  defines  the  whole 
periods  of  them,  inscribes  in  them  the  laws  of  Fate,  proposes  the 
apparent  measures  of  their  generation-producing  life,  legally  institutes, 
and  adorns  in  a  becoming  manner  all  the  rewards  of  virtue,  and  the 
works  of  vice,  intellectually  comprehends  in  one  the  end  of  every  period, 
and  coarranges  with  a  view  to  this  the  whole  polity  of  partial  souls* 
Air  souls,  therefore,  of  an  immortal  condition,  being  allotted  a  pro- 
gression from  the  demiurgus,  are  filled  firom  him  with  an  united  and 

'  For  Tori;  it  is  necessarj  taread  wct^eu. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP,  XIX.  OF  PLATO.  353 

intellectual  providence.  Because,  however,  progeny  which  are  suspended 
from  their  causes  participate  of  the  perfective  efficacy  which  proceeds 
from  them,  divine  souls,  indeed,  primarily  subsisting  from  thence, 
become  auditors  of  the  words  of  their  father  immediately ;  but  partial 
souls  participate  of  the  uniform  providence  of  the  demiurgus  secondarily, 
and  with  greater  partibility.  Hence  also  the  demiurgus,  as  a  legislator, 
defining  to  these  all  the  measures  of  their  life,  he  thus  extends  demiurgic 
words,  unitedly  comprehending  the  divided  nature  of  the  whole  of  their 
life,  convolving  in  sameness  without  time  their  temporal  mutability,  and 
collecting  uniformly,  according  to  one  simplicity,  the  multiform  and 
diversified  nature  of  the  energy  which  exists  about  them.  But  to  divine 
souls  he  immediately  unfolds  the  providence  of  himself,  and  exhorts 
them  to  join  with  him  in  a  providential  inspection  of  the  whole  world,  to 
fabricate,  adorn  and  dispose  in  conjunction  with  him,  mortal  natures,  to 
govern  generated  beings  according  to  the  measures  of  justice,  and  to 
lead  and  convolve  all  things,  following  demiurgic  providence.  Very  far 
therefore,  are  tl^ose  interpreters  of  Plato  from  according  with  the  fabri- 
cation of  the  universe,  who  admit  that  partial  are  the  same  with  jvHole 
souls,  and  who  attribute  the  same  essence  to  all  souls ;  because  all  of 
them  are  allotted  their  generation  from  one  demiurgus. 

For  in  the  first  place,  the  father  in  the  course  of  his  fabrication 
adorning,  and  disposing  in  an  orderly  manner  partial  souls,  poured 
mingling,  the  remainder  of  the  former  mixture,  says  Timaeus,  and 
produced  the  second  and  third  genera.  But  in  a  progression  of  this 
kind,  the  words  efiective  of  conversion  which  he  extends  to  divine  souls, 
are  intellectual,  and  demiurgic,  and  impart  to  them  generative  powers, 
and  perfective  goods ;  but  those  which  he  extends  to  partial  souls,  are 
the  definite  sources  of  generation,  of  the  laws  of  Fate,  of  justice,  and 
all-various  periods.  If,  therefore,  every  thing  which  proceeds  from  the 
demiurgus  is  essentially  imparted  to  souls,  it  is  indeed  necessary  that 
different  measures  of  words  should  be  the  causes  of  different  powers ; 
^nd  that  to  some  among  the  number  of  divisible  souls,  the  demiurgus 
should  •distribute  a  polity  exempt  from  mundane  affairs,  but  to  others 


Digitized  by 


Google 


364  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

a  polity  arranged  under  these  souls,  and  supernally  governed  by  them. 
These  things,  however,  may  elsewhere  be  more  copiously  demonstrated. 


CHAPTER   XX. 


After  the  demiurgic  words  therefore,  again  returning  to  the  demiurgic 
intellect,  let  us  survey  following  Plato,  who  the  demiurgus  is,  who 
convolves  the  end  itself  of  the  intellectual  triad  to  the  l>eginning,  and 
after  what  manner  it  is  fit  to  denominate  him  according  to  the  Grecian 
theology.  Or  rather,  prior  to  this  let  us  summarily  show  what  we  may 
assume  concerning  him  according  to  the  narration  of  Timaeus,  For  we 
shall  more  easily  learn  those  particulars,  if  we  assent  to  these.  For  di- 
rectly, in  the  beginning  of  the  theology  concerning  him,  he  is  celebrated 
as  the  fabricator  and  father  of  the  world.  And  he  is  neither  called  fabri- 
cator alone,  nor  father  and  fabricator,  but  at  one  and  the  same  time 
manifestly  possessing  both  peculiarities,  he  is  rather  characterized  by  the 
febricative,  than  by  the  paternal  cause.  But  he  is  denominated  the 
demiurgus  of  wholes,  according  to  his  goodness,  unen  vying  and  exuberant 
win,  and  his  power  which  is  able  to  adorn  and  arrange  all  things,  and 
even  such  as  are  of  a  disorderly  nature.  He  is  however  particularly 
unfolded  to  us  as  the  supplier  of  beauty,  symmetry  and  order,  and  as  the 
best  of  causes ;  and  this  because  he  is  allotted  the  uniform,  and  first 
effective  power  of  the  whole  demiurgic  series.  But  he  gives  subsistence 
to  intellect  and  soul,  and  at  the  same  time  to  all  the  life  in  the  world  ; 
since  he  fabricated  the  whole  world  an  animal  animated,  and  endued  with 
intellect.  Being  likewise  full  of  every  intelligible,  and  extending  himself 
to  intelligible  and  all-perfect  animal  and  conjoining  this  to  himself  through 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX.  OF  PLATO.  3^5 

similitude,  he  fabricates  the  sensible  universe  onlj*begotten,  in  tl^  same 
manner  as  tbe  separate  paradigm  [animal  itself}  transcending  whales, 
unitedly  constitutes  tbe  intelligible  universe. 

Moreover,  he  is  likewise  the  fabricator  of  bodies,  and  the  perfector  of 
works,  binding  all  things  by  the  most  excellent  analogies,  and  co-adapt- 
ing their  powers,  bulks^  and  numbers  by  the  most  beautiful  bonds. 
Farther  still,  he  constituted  the  universe  a  whole  from  wholes,  and  perfect 
from  perfect  parts,  that  it  might  be  free  from  old  age  and  disease,  and 
might  contain  in  itself  all  the  genera  of  the  elements.  He  likewise 
adorned  it  with  the  first  figure,  and  with  the  most  simple  and  most  com- 
prehensive of  all  figures.  Besides  these  things,  he  is  also  tbe  cause  of 
self-sufficiency  to  the  universe,  and  of  a  circulation  into  itself,  in  order 
that  suffering  all  things  from,  and  e£fecting  all  things  in  itsdf,  it  might 
not  be  in  want  of  any  thing  externally  situated.  And  he  is  indeed  the 
supplier  of  intellectual  motion,  and  of  a  life  which  is  evolved  according 
to  time,  and  which  effects '  a  mutation  always  according  to  the  same,  and 
similarly,  and  about  the  same  things.  Farther  stilly  he  is  the  father  of 
soul,  and  of  all  the  genera  in  soul,  of  the  division  in  it,  and  all  the 
harmonic  reasons  it  contains,  constituting  it  in  the  world,  as  a  self^moved 
and  immortal  lyre ;  and  he  is  also  the  divider  of  the  one,  and  the  seven 
circles  in  it,  and  in  short,  is  the  maker  and  fabricator  of  figure  and 
morphe/ 

In  addition  to  these  things  likewise,  he  generates  from  himself  the 
whole  of  time,  according  to  the  imitation  of  eternity,  together  with  all  the 
measures  of  time,  and  the  Gods  that  unfold  these  measures  into  light. 
But  he  especially  constitutes  the  whole  sun,  enkindling  its  light  from  his 
own  intellectual  essence,  in  order  that  possessing  a  transcendency  exempt 
from  the  other  Gods  it  might  be  the  king  of  the  universe.  Moreover,  he 
fabricates '  Oil  the  multitudes  of  mundane  Gods  and  daemons,  and  all 
celestial  and  sublunary  natures,  in  order  that  he  may  evince  this  only* 

'  For  Toiov/Mvov,  it  is  necessary  to  read  toiou/ovii;. 

*  Merj^  pertains  to  the  colouif,  figure,  and  magnitude  of  superficies. 

)  For  huMWfYw,  it  is  necessary  to  read  huMovpy*^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


366  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

begotten  and  self-sufficient  God  [the  world]  to  be  the  image  of  the  intel- 
ligible and  all-perfect  God;  fixing  the  earth  indeed,  as  a  firm  seat 
or  Vesta,  in  it,  but  distributing  by  lot  the  other  elements  to  divine  souls 
and  daemons.  Besides  all  this  likewise,  he  converts  to  himself  the  genera 
of  Gods  that  have  proceeded  from  him,  and  fills  all  things  with  undefiled 
generation,  with  perpetual  life,  demiurgic  perfection,  and  generative 
abundance.  He  also  constitutes  divisible  souls  together  with  their  vehi- 
cles, divides  them  about  their  leading  Gods,  arranges  di£ferent  souls  under 
difierent  Gods,  unfolds  to  them  the  laws  of  Fate,  measures  their  descents 
into  generation,  estabUshes  rewards  to  their  contests  in  their  periodic 
revolutions,  and  institutes,  as  I  may  say,  the  whole  of  their  polity  in  the 
world. 

But  after  all  these  things,  he  introduces  a  boundary  to  the  providence 
of  wholes,  and  returning  to  his  own  place  of  survey,  delivering  to  the 
junior  Gods  the  superintendence  of  mortal  natures,  and  abiding  in  his  own 
accustomed  manner,  is  the  paradigm  to  the  demiurgi  in  the  world  of 
providential  attention  to  beings  of  a  second  order.  And  as  in  the  fabri- 
cation of  wholes  the  paradigm  is  intelligible  animal,  so  in  the  arrange- 
ment of  partial  natures,  the  paradigm  is  intellectual  animal,  in  which  all 
forms  shine  forth  in  a  divided  manner,  according  to  their  own  nature. 
For  Timaeus  says,  **  the  children  understanding  the  order  of  their  father, 
were  obedient  to  it,**  and  he  abiding,  and  paternally,  and  eternally  pro- 
ducing all  things,  they  adorn  and  arrange  the  mortal  genera  demiurgi- 
cally, and  according  to  time.  Hence  the  providence  of  the  demiurgus 
presents  itself  to  the  view,  extending  from  on  high  as  far  as  to  the  produc- 
tion of  these,  and  what  is  here  said  by  Plato,  is  as  it  were  a  hymn  to  the 
demiurgus  and  father  of  this  universe,  celebrating  his  productions,  and 
the  benefits  which  he  confers  on  the  world. 

And  it  is  requisite  that  being  persuaded  by  what  is  here  clearly  written, 
we  should  investigate  all  the  other  enquiries  about  the  demiurgus.  My 
meaning  is,  that  we  should  investigate  what  we  mentioned  a  little  before, 
who  the  demiurgus  is,  and  how  we  ought  to  denominate  him  according 
to  the  sentiments  of  the  Greeks ;  and  on  what  account,  Timaeus  neither 
delivers  the  name  of  him,  nor  unfolds  to  us  who  be  is,  but  says,  ^^  that  it 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXI.  OF  PLATO.  3^7 

is  difficult  to  discover  hiin,  and  that  when  discovered,  it  is  impossible  to 
speak  of  him  to  all  men/'  Now  therefore,  I  think,  from  what  has  been 
aliready  said,  it  is  evident  even  to  those  who  are  but  in  a  small  d^ee 
iatdUgent,  that  according  to  the  decision  of  Plato,  it  is  the  great  Jupiter, 
who  is  now  celebrated  by  us  as  the  demiurgus.  For  if,  as  we  have  ob- 
served, the  kingdom  of  Saturn  is  the  summit  of  the  whole  intellectual 
triad,  and  the  intelligible  transcendency  of  intellectuals,  but  the  maternal 
and  vivific  fountain  of  Rhea,  is  the  middle  centre,  and  the  receiving  bosom . 
of  the  generative  power  in  Saturn,  it  is  manifest  to  every  one,  that  the 
mighty  Jupiter  is  allotted  the  end  of  this  triad.  For  from  the  before- 
mentioned  causes,  one  of  which  indeed  is  paternal,  but  the  other  g^e- 
rative,  he  is  the  God  having  a  paternal  subsistence,  who  is  said  to  reign, 
receiving  the  intellectual  dominion  of  his  father.  If,  therefore,  it  is  ne- 
cessary that  the  demiurgus  should  convolve  the  end  of  this  intellectual 
triad,  as  was  before  demonstrated,  and  to  effect  this,  is  the  province  of 
the  royal  power  of  Jupiter,  we  must  evidently  acknowledge  that  the 
Jovian  empire  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  demiurgus,  and  that  Jupiter  is 
the  demiurgus  celebrated  in  the  Timaeus. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


If,  however,  it  be  necessary  to  consider  this  as  worthy  of  further  discus-^ 
sion,  and  to  demonstrate  that  the  theology  in  the  Timseus  about  the 
demiurgus,  accords  with  what  is  elsewhere  written  by  Plato  concerning 
this  God,  let  us  in  the  first  place  assume  what  is  delivered  in  the  Critias, 
because  this  dialogue  proximately  follows  the  Timaeus,  and  is  composed 
according  to  an  analogy  to  it,  delivering  the  hypostasis  of  the  same  things 
in  image^,  the  primary  paradigms  of  which  Timaeus  celebrates  through 


Digitized  by 


Google 


368  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V, 

th^  fiibricatioii  of  the  world.  Here»  thereforet  Plato^  (that  I  may  derive 
idiat  I  say  from  the  beginning)  relating  the  warlike  preparations  of  the 
Atiienians,  in  former  times^  and  the  insolence  and  usurpation  of  the 
Atlantics,  who  were  the  progeny  of  Neptune,  but  destroyed  the  diyine 
needs  through  the  mixture  of  human  and  mortal  pursuits,  and  conducted 
themselves  insolently  to  all  men,  colfects  indeed  the  Gods  to  a  consultation 
concerning  them,  in  the  same  manner  as  poets  inspired  by  Pho&bos,  and 
fyrtm  a  common  assembly  of  the  Gods.  But  Jupiter  is  the  author  of  the 
whole  pcdity  of  them,  and  converts  the  multitude  of  them  to  himself.  And 
as  in  the  Timasus  the  demiurgus  convolves  all  the  mundane  Gods  to  him* 
sdf,  so  Jupiter  in  the  Critias  providentially  attending  to  the  whole  of 
diings,  collects  the  Gods  to  himself. 

In  the  next  place,  therefore,  let  us  consider  what  Plato  says  concerning 
this  God,  and  how  it  accords  with  what  was  before  said  by  Timaeus. 
**  But  Jupiter  the  God  of  Gods  who  reigns  legitimately,  and  who  is  able 
to  perceive  every  thing  of  this  kind,  when  he  saw  that  an  equitable  race 
was  in  a  miserable  condition,  and  was  desirous  of  punishing  them,  in  order 
that  by  being  chastized  they  might  possess  more  elegant  manners,  col* 
lected  all  the  Gods  into  their  most  honourable  habitation,  whence  being 
seated  as  in  the  middle  of  the  whole  world,  he  beholds  all  such  things  as 
participate  of  generation.''  Here,  directly  in  the  beginning,  king  Jupiter 
being  celebrated  as  the  God  of  Gods,  does  it  not  accord  with  what  is 
written  in  the  Timaeus,  where  he  is  said  to  be  the  father  and  cause  of  all 
the  mundane  Gods?  For  what  other  God  is  it  who  reigns  over  all  the 
Gods,  except  the  cause  of  their  subsistence  and  essence?  Who  is  it  also 
that  calls  the  mundane  deities,  Gods  of  Gods  ?  Is  it  not  him  who  binds 
to  himself  the  principle  of  all  fabrication  ?  If,  therefore,  he  imparts  to 
his  progeny  to  be  Gods  of  Gods,  in  a  mupb  greater  degree  it  pertains  to 
him  to  be  celebrated  as  the  God  of  all  [the  mundane]  Gods.  To  which, 
therefore,  of  the  Gods  prior  to  the  world,  does  it  particularly  belong  to 
punish  offenders  except  to  him  who  defines  to  souls  all  their  measures, 
unfolds  to  them  the  laws  of  the  universe,  and  legally  institutes  such  things 
as  are  fit  concerning  justice  and  injustice,  in  order  that  afterwards  he  may 
not  be  accused  of  the  vices  of  each  of  them  ?    Moreover,  to  congregate 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  XXII.  OF  PLATO.  369 

all  the  Oods  into  their  most  honourable  habitation,  fh>ra  which  the  whole 
of  generation  may  be  seen,  and  which  possesses  the  middle  of  the  universe, 
IS  to  attribute  to  him  a  providence  e;cempt  from  multitude,  but  extendiog 
equally  to  the  whole  world ;  which  things  indeed  are  th^illustrious  goods 
of  the  demiurgic  monad.  For  to  convert  all  the  Gods  to  himself,  and  to 
survey  the  whole  world  pertains  exemptly  to  the  <lemiurgus  of  the 
universe.  For  what  else  is  multitude  aUe  to  participate  proximately, 
accept  the  monad  from  which  it  derives  its  subsistence  ?  And  who  can 
convert  all  the  Gods  in  the  world  to  himself,  but  the  fabricator  of  their 
essence,  and  of  their  allotment  in  the  universe? 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


We  must  establish  this,  therefore,  as  one  and  the  first  argument  in 
proof  of  the  thing  investigated.  But  if  you  are  willing,  we  will  derive  a 
second  argument  from  what  is  said  by  Socrates  in  the  Cratylus,  in  which 
he  discusses  the  meaning  of  the  names,  from  which  he  may  represent  to 
us  the  essence  of  Jupiter.  For  he  is  not  led  to  the  nature  of  this  God 
from  one  name,  as  he  is  in  tKe  names  of  other  Gods,  such  as  Saturn, 
Rhea,  Neptune,  and  Pluto,  but  from  two  names  which  tend  to  one  thing, 
and  which  divisibly  indicate  the  one  and  united  essence  of  Jupiter,  he 
unfolds  the  power  of  this  God,  and  the  peculiarity  of  his  hyparxis.  For 
the  common  rumour  concerning  him,  denominates  him  in  a  two«fold 
respect.  And  at  one  time  calling  him  {ha)  dia^  we  worship  him  in  our 
prayers  and  hymns ;  but  at  another  time  we  celebrate  him  as  (gijm)  zena, 
a.  word  derived  from  life.  Being  therefore  at  the  same  time  called  (^s) 
zemy  and  delighting  in  the  appellation  of  dia,  he  is  similarly  denominated 

Prac.  Vol.  I.  3  A 


Digitized  by 


Google 


570  ON  THE  THEOLOGY         ^  BOOK  K 

from  both  Dairies  by  the  Greeks.  And  these  names  manifest  the  essence 
and  order  which  he  is  allotted  among  divine  natures.  '  And  neither  of 
these  names  indeed,  is  by  itself  suflScienftly  able  to  malce  known  the  pecu- 
liarity of  the  God ;  but  when  conjoined  with  each  other  and  fornving  a 
sentence,  they  have  the  power  of  unfolding  the  truth  concerning  him.  * 
How,  therefore,  from  both  the  names  the  power  of  this  king  is  signified, 
and  the  precedaneous  order  of  his  hypostasis  in  the  Gods,  we  may  hear 
Socrates  himself  saying,  "  That  the  nan>e  of  his  father*  who  is  called 
Jupiter  is  beautifully  posited  ;  but  that  it  is  not  easy  to  apprehend  the 
meaning  of  it,  because  in  reality  the  name  of  Jupiter  is  as  it  were  a 
sentence*  Dividing  it  however  into  two  parts,  some  of  us  use  one  part,, 
and  43ome  another.  For  some  indeed  call  him  zena^  but  others  dia. 
And  these  parts  collected  into  one  evince  the  nature  of  the  God,  which 
we  say  a  name  ought  to  eflFect.  For  there  is  not  any  other  who  is  more 
the  author  of  life  to  us,  and  to  all  other  things  than  he  wh<»  is  the  ruler 
and  king  of  all  things.  It  happens,  therefore,  that  this  God  is  rightly 
denominated,  on  account  of  whom  life  is  present  to  aH  living  beingsw. 
But  it  is  divided  into  two  parts,  as  if  I  should  say  that  there  is.one^ 
name  from  dia  and  zena.''  The  mode»  therefore,  of  collecting  the  names 
into  one,  and  of  rendering  the  hyparxis  of  this  God  apparent  through 
both,  is  manifest  to  every  one. 

If,  however,  he  is  the  supplier  of  life  to  all  things,  as  he  is  said  to  be, 
and  is  the  ruler  and  king  of  all  such  things  as  are  said  to  live,  to  whom  can 
we  assert  this  peculiarity  pertains,  if  we  omit  the  demiurgus?  And  is  it 
not  necessary,  that  according  with  what  is  said  in  the  Timaeus,  we  should 
refer  to  him  the  principle  of  vivifica,tion.  For  the  demiargus  renders  the 
whole  world  animated,  endued  with  intellect,  and  an  animal,  and  coAsti- 
tutes  the  triple  life  which  is  in  it,  one  indeed  being  impartible  and 
intellectual,  another  partible  and  corporeal,  and  another  between  these, 
impartible  and  at  the  same  time  partible.  It  is  he  likewise  who  conjoins 
each  of  the  cdestial  spheres  to  the  circulations  of  the  soul,  inserts  in  each 
of  the  stars  a  psychical  and  intellectual   life,   and   produces  in   the 

"  For**tuTa)v  it  seems  necessary  to  read  avrov^ 
*  i,  e.  Of  the  father  of  Tantalus. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXII.  OF  PLATO.  371 

sublunary  dei&ents  leading  Gods  and  souls,  and  in  addition  to  all  these 
tilings,  constitutes  the  divisible  genera  of  life,  and  imparts  to  the  junior 
Gods  the  principle  of  moitai  animals.  All  things  therefore  in  the  world 
are  full  of  life,  through  the  power  of  the  demiurgus  and  father.  And  this 
world  is  one  animal,  deriving  its  completion  from  containing  all  animals, 
through  the  never-failing  cause  of  the  power  by  which  it  was  generated. 
And  there  is  no  other  who  is  the  supplier  of  life  to  all  things,  and  through 
whom  all  things  live,  some  indeed  more  clearly,  but  others  more 
obscurely,  than  the  d^niurgus  of  wholes.  For  he  also  is  intellectual 
animal,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  all-perfect  paradigm  is  intelligible 
animal.  Hence  likewise,  these  are  conjoined  to  eaoh  other.  And  the 
one  indeed  is  paternally  the  cause  of  wholes ;  but  thp  other  demiurgi- 
cally. And  as  animal  itself  constitutes  intelligibly,  all  intelligible  and 
sensible  animals,  according  to  one  cause,  thus  also  the  demiurgus 
&bricates  intellectually  according  to  a  second  order,  the  animals  in  the 
world. 

As  animal  itself  likewise  proximately  subsists  from  intelligible  life,  so 
the  demiurgus  is  generated  from  intellectual  life,  and  is  the  first  that  nIs 
filled  with  the  rivers  of  vivification.  Hence  he  illuminates  all  things 
with  life,  unfolding  the  depths  of  the  animal-producing  deity,  and  calling 
forth  the  prolific  power  of  the  intellectual  Gods.  If  therefore,  all  things 
live  through  the  demiurgic  cause,  they  also  participate  of  soul  and  intel- 
lect, and,  as  I  may  say,  of  all  vivification,  through  the  providence  of  this 
God.  But  he  who  pours  the  rivers  of  life  on  all  things  in  the  world  from 
himself,  and  is  the  ruler  and  king  of  wholes,  is  the  mighty  Jupiter,  as 
Socrates  says  in  the  Cratylus,  and  evidently  appears  to  be  the  same  with 
the  demiurgus.  And  the  divinely-inspired  intellectual  conception  of 
Timaeus  concerning  the  demiurgus,  accords  with  the  theology  of  Socrates 
about  Jupiter.  If  likewise  each  of  them  denominates  the  knowledge  of 
this  God  difficult  to  be  apprehended,  and  one  of  them  says  that  it  i^ 
difficult  to  discover,  him,  and  when  discovered,  that  it  is  impossible  to 
speak  of  him  to  all  men,  but  the  other  asserts  that  it  is  not  jsasj  to 
understand  the  name  of  Jupiter,  do  they  not  in  this  respect  accord  with 
each  other  in  what  they  say  concerning  this  God?   Besides  this  also,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


372  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V* 

compoBitiQQ  of  tbe  names,  and  the  coalitioa  of  the  two  names  into  one 
hyp^rxiSf  appear  in  a  remarkable  d^ee  to  be  adapted  to  the  demiurgus* 
For  a  biformedJ  essence,  and  generative  power,  are  attributed  to  him 
according  to  other  theologists.  For  the  duad  sits  with  him,  according  to 
which  he  generate  all  things ;  concerning  which  Timaeus  also  introduces 
hjm  speaking  to  the  demiurgi  in  the  world,  and  saying,  ^^  Imitating  my 
power/'  And  through  this  he  produces  and  vivifies  all  things.  Hence 
it  is  necessary  through  names  also  to  consecrate  the  duad  to  him 
according  to  ancient  rumour.  For  he  glitters  with  intellectual  sections, 
divide  and  collects  wholes,  and  ccmstitutes  one  indissoluble  order  from 
many  things.  And  this  the  power  of  the  names  indicates,  extending  us 
&Qm  divided  intellection,  to  one  self-perfect  and  uniform  theory. 

All  these  particulars  therefore,  clearly  demonstrate  to  us  that  Plato  con^ 
sidera  the  demiurgus  of  wholes  to  be  the  same  with  Jupiter.  For  he  who 
lUone  is  the.  cause  of  life  to  all  things  and  who  is  the  king  of  all  things,  is  the 
demiurgus  of  the  universe.  And  he  who  in  a  remarkable  manner  rejoices  in 
a  duad  of  names,  is  he  who  arranges^  and  adorns  the  whole  world.  And  it 
appears  to  me,  as  I  have  frequently  said,  that  in  consequence  of  being 
plotted  the  end  of  the  inteliectdal  triad,  converting  this  to  the  beginning, 
and  being  full  of  the  n)iddl6  fountains  of  life,  but  uniting  himself  to  the 
watch-tower  of  his  father,  and  producing  into  himself  the  simplicity  of 
an  intelligible  subsistence,  according  to  the  peculiarity  of  first-effectii^ 
causes,  he  is  also  allotted  a  duad  of  names.  And  as  he  received  his 
essence  from  both  [i.  e.  from  Saturn  and  Rhea]  and  possesses  indeed 
bound  from  his  lather,  but  infinite  power  from  the  generative  deity  of  his 
mother,  thus  also  he  possesses  one  of  the  names  from  his  father,  and  from 
the  uniform  perfection  which  is  id  him ;  but  the  other  from  total  vivifica^ 
tipn.  And  through  both,  as  h^  is  allotted  an  essence,  so  likewise  an 
appellation.  For  it  is  obvious  to  every  one,  that  the  term  (iM)dia^  on 
account  of  whkhy  is  a,  sign  of  a  total  essence.  ^'Iiet  us  declare,  says 
Tima^us,  on  account  of  what  cause  [the  composing  artificer  constituted 
genevation  and  the  universe].     He  was  good.'"    But  the  name  of  life 

'  For  io9%JUg^  it  is  ntcessary  to  read  Soof  iSiy. 

*  In  tkt.origioal  Sao,  M  itift  ^ridtntlf  ntcttMry  to  read  Sm. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP,  XXllI.  6F  PLATO.  373 

pertaifift  of  itself  to  the  middle  order  6f  beings.  The  demiurgus  there- 
fore obtains  one  of  these  names,  viz.  dia^  from  the  ihtellectual  summit, 
and  the  paternal  union.  For  according  to  the  participation  of  it,  he  is 
one^'  bound,  and  intelligible.  But  he  obtains  the  other  name  from  the 
middle  order  of  intellectuals.  For  there  life,  and  the  vivific  bosoms  are 
allotted  their  hypostasis.  The  demiurgic  intellect  howei/^er,  shining  forth 
from  both,  participates  also  of  the  names  through  composition.  For  we 
call  him  dia  and  2^9111,  because  life  proceeds  to  all  things  on  account  of 
him,  and  to  live  is  inherent  in  all  [vital  natures]  on  account  of  him. 
And  thus  after  a  manner  the  position  of  the  names  indicates  the  progrbs- 
sion  of  the  demiurgus  from  both  the  precedaneous  causes. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 


Again  therefore,  let  us  direct  our  attention  to  what  is  written  in  the 
Pbilebus,  and  survey  how,  in  what  is  there  said,  Socrates  refers  the  fabri- 
cation of  the  universe  to  Jupiter.  For  admitting  that  intellect  adorns  and ' 
arranges  all  tilings,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  wise  men  prior  to  him, 
and  that  it  governs  the  sun  and  moon,  and  all  the  circulation  [of  the 
heavens}  he  demonstrates  that  the  whole  world  participates  of  soul,  and 
intellectual  inspection,  and  that  we  also  derive  the  participation  of  these 
from  wholes ;  but  that  the  universe  is  not  and  was  not  from  chance,  and 
likewise  the  most  divine  of  visible  natures,  as  many  physiologists  assert, 
while  the  natures  which  the  universe  contains  participate  of  soul  and 
intellect.    Having  therefore,  as  we  have  said,  demonstritted  these  things, 

^  For  mrri^  it  h  ntceiiary  t/o^rtnA-if  irru 


Digitized  by 


Google 


374 


ON  THE  TOEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 


and  stiown  that  what  the  whole  world  contains  is  greiater  and  more  perfect 
than  what  we  contain,  and  that  wholes  have  a  greater  authority,  and  a 
more  ruling  essence  than  partial  natures,  and  having  placed  intellect  over 
wholes,  as  that  which  adorns  and  arranges  the  universe,  and  likewise 
assigned  this  province  to  soul,  through  the  inspection  of  intellect,  (for 
intellect  is  not  present  to  the  world  without  soul)  he  afterwards  recurs  to 
iinparticipable  intellect,  to  the  author  of  participated  intellect  and  soul, 
and  the  fabricator  of  the  whole  world,  and  he  denominates  and  celebrates  ^ 
this  fabricator,  who  contains  the  causes  of  the  plenitudes  in  the  world,  as 
no  other  than  Jupiter  the  great  king  and  ruler  of  wholes,  conformably  to 
the  rumour  of  the  Greeks.  He  likewise  extends  about  him  all  the 
providence  of  the  world,  and  places  in  him  the  whole  cause  of  the 
arrangement  and  ornament  of  the  universe. 

It  is  better  however,  in  the  next  place,  to  hear  the  words  themselves  of 
Plato.  He  gives  therefore  to  the  world  an  intellectual  superintendance, 
and  adds  this  to  the  before  mentioned  demonstrations,  that  there  is,  as  we 
have  freque,ntly  observed,  an  abundance  of  infinity  in  the  worlds  and  a 
sufficiency  of  bound,  and  that  there  is  a  certain  cause  in  them  by  no 
means  vile  and  contemptible,  which  adorns  and  co-arranges  the  years, 
the  seasons,  and  the  months,  and  which  may  most  justly  be  called 
wisdom  and  intellect.  But  again,  because  it  is  necessary  that  partici- 
pated intellect  should  govern  the  world  through  soul  as  a  medium,  (for  it 
is  impossible  that  intellect  should  be  present  to  any  thing  without  soul, 
as  Timaeus  also  asserts)  hence  it  is  requisite  that  soul  also  should  preside 
over  the  universe,  and  that  proximately  having  dominion  over  the  natures 
it  contains,  it  should  govern  the  world  according  to  intellect.  This 
therefore  Socrates  having  in  the  next  place  added,  he  subjoins  as  follows: 
•*  Moreover,  wisdom  and  intellect  could  never  be  without  soul.''  For 
how  could  the  impartible  and  eternal  essence  of  intellect  be  immediately 
conjoined  with  a  corporeal  nature  ?  It  is  necessary  therefore  that  intellect 
should  preside  over  wholes,  that  it  may  connect  the  order  in  the  world, 
well- being,  and  all  things.  For  order  and  well-being  are  the  progeny  of 
an  intellectual  essence.  But  it  is  necessary  that  soul  primarily  participa- 
ting of  intdlect,  should  illuminate  body  with  the  light  proceeding  from 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXHI.  OF  PLATO.  375 

thence^  and  fill  all  things  with  intellectual  arrangement  It  must  be 
admitted  therefore^  that  the  world  is  animated  and  endued  with  intellect* 
Hence  from  this  Socrates  ascends  to  the  cause  itself  of  the  whole  world, 
which  produced  intellect  and  soul,  and  generated  the  total  order  [of  the 
universe.3 

^*  Hence,  (Socrates  adds)  jou  may  say  that  in  the  nature  of  Jupiter 
there  are  a  royal  soul  and  a  royal  intellect  through  the  power  of  cause ; 
and  that  in  the  other  Gods  there  are  other  beautiful  things,  whatever 
they  are,  by  which  their  deities  love  to  be  distinguished,  and  from  which 
they  delight  in  taking  their  respective  denominations/^     One  of  these 
two  things  therefore  is  necessary,  either  that  what  is  here  said  is  said 
concerning  the  world,  or  concerning  the  *demiurgus  of  wholes.     For  if 
the  world  is  Jupiter,  the  participated  intellect  in  the  world  is  royal, 
and  the  soul  also  is  royal  which  governs  the  universe,  and  arranges  and 
adorns  it  according  to  intellect.    And  these  things  are  evidently  present 
to  the  world  through  the  power  of  the  cause  by  which  it  was  constituted, 
and  which  rendered  it  a  partaker  of  intellect  and  animated.     And  thus 
Jupiter   will   be  that  which  is   adorned  and  fabricated,  and   not  the 
adorner  and  fabricator  of  all  things.     If,  however,  it  is  necessary  that  the 
power  of  cause  should  be  comprehensive  in  an  exempt  manner  of  a  royal 
intellect  and  a  royal  soul,  we  must  admit  that  the  nature  of  Jupiter  is  in 
the  demiurgic  order  and  power ;    and  intellect  and  soul  will  be  in  him 
according  to  cause,  since  he  imparts  both  these  to  his  progeny.     Of  these 
two  opinions  therefore,  every  one  may  adopt  that  which  he  pleases,  but 
to  me,  when  I  consider  what  is  here  said,  and  every  other  assertion  of 
Plato  concerning  this  God,  it  by  no  means  appears  to  be  necessary  to 
refer  the  nature  of  Jupiter  to  the  whole  world.     For  neither  does  the 
only-begotten  subsistence  of  the  world  accord    with  the  kingdom  of 
Jupiter,  since  the  Saturnian  triad,  and  which  distributes  the  dominion  of 
the  father,  is  manifestly  celebrated  by  Plato  himself;  nor  can  that  which 
is  cause  to  all  things,  as  .it  is  said  in  the  Cratylus,  refer  *  to  the  world. 
For  the  world  is  among  the  number  of  things  which  participate  of  life 

*  For  haitfii,  it  is  necessary  to  read  am^tftu 


Digitized  by 


Google 


376  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  POOK  V. 

from  »Dother.  As  I  have  said  therefore,  we  vw^t  leave  this  opipioD,  as 
by  no  means  adapted  to  Plato,  though  it  is  adopted  by  some  of  his 
interpreters.  But  considering  cause  to  be  the  same  as  Jvpiter^  we  must 
say  that  soul  and  intellect  are  established  in  him  estenqptly ;  and  that 
Jupiter  participates  oif  both  these,  from  the  Gods  that  are  prior  to  hiin ; 
of  intellect  indeed,  from  his  father,  bat  of  soul  from  the  queen  C^^^^^l 
who  is  the  deity  of  vivification.  For  there  the  fountain  of  soul  subsists, 
just  as  in  Saturn,  there  is  intellect  according  to  essence.  For  every 
where  the  intelligible  unically  comprehends  the  intellect  which  is  coordi- 
nate with  it.    And  thus  much  concerning  thetie  particulars. 


CHAPTER  XXjy. 


In  tibe  next  place,  we  may  conjoin  with  this  the  mythological  concep- 
tions in  the  Protagoras,  and  arrive  at  the  same  conclusion,  considering  in 
common  with  the  Timaeus,  how  the  opinions  delivered  to  us  concerning 
the  mighty  Jupiter,  through  the  Protagorean  fable,  accord  with  the  asser* 
tions  about  the  demiurgus.  The  fable  says,  therefore,  that  Prpmetheus 
adorning  the  human  race,  and  providentially  attending  to  our  rational 
life,  that  it  may  not  perish  by  being  merged  in  the  furies  of  earth,  and 
the  necessities  of  nature,  as  some  one  of  the  Gods  says,  bound  nature  to 
the  arts,  extended  these  which  are  imitations  of  intellect,  as  it  were  to 
sportive  souls,  and  through  these  excited  our  gnostic  and  dianoetic  power 
to  the  contemplation  of  forms.  For  every  artilicial  production  is  eflfec- 
tive  of  form,  and  adorns  the  matter  which  is  the  subject  of  it.  The  fable 
also  adds,  that  Prometheus  providentially  attending  to  the  arts  gave  them 
to  souls,  and  that  he  received  them  from  Vulcan  and  Minerva.    For  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIV.  OF  PLATO.  377 

these  Gods  the  ^ause  of  all  arts  is  primarily  compi^ebeDded;   Vulcan 
primarily  imparting  the  fabricatiye  poirer  of  them  ;  but  Minerva  super- 
oally  ttlumioating  their  gnostic  aod    intellectual    power.      Not  only 
however^  is  the  invention  of  arts  necessary  to  souls  in  generation,  but 
also  a  certain  other  science,  the  political,  which  is  more  perfect  than  the 
arts,   and   which  is  able  to  arrange  and  adorn  them,  and  to  lead  muls 
through  virtue  to  a  life  according  to  intellect     But  as  Prometheus  was 
unable  to  impart  this  life  to  us,  because  the  political  science  is  primarily 
with  the  mighty  Jupiter,  but  it  was  not  possible  (says  the  hbk)  for 
Prometheus  to  enter  latently  into  the  tower  of  Jupiter,  (for  the  guards  of 
Jupiter  are  terrible,  defending  him  exempt  from  all  partial  causes,)—- 
iience  Jupiter  sent  the  messenger  Hermes  to  men,  who  brouj^ht  with  him 
prudence  and  shame,  and  in  short  the  political  science.    Jupiter  also 
ordered  Hermes  to  imparl  similarly  to  all  men  these  virtues,  and  (o^ii- 
tribute  to  all  souls  the  knowledge  of  things  just,  beautiful,  and  good,  but 
not  in  a  divided  manner,  as  different  arts  are  distributed  to  different 
persons.    And  some  men  indeed  are  judges  of  these  things ;   but  others 
are  ignorant  either  of  all,  or  of  some  of  the  arts. 

In  what  is  here  said,  therefore,  Plato  primarily  refers  to  Jupiter  the 
paradigm  of  the  political  science,  as  is  evident  from  the  words  themselves. 
But  he  produces  the  progression  of  this  science,  and  the  communication 
and  participation  of  tlie  Hermaical  series,  and  extends  its  essential, 
presence,  which  we  participate  in  common,  to  all  souls.  For  to  distribute 
to  all  of  them,  is  to  insert  in  souls  essentially  a  science  of  this  kipd. 
These  things,  therefore,  being  laid  down,  let  us  consider  to  whom  we 
must  say  the  political  science  especially  pertains,  and  who  it  is  that 
primarily  established  a  polity  in  the  universe,  that  fbraied  divine  to 
govern  mortal  natures,  divided  wholes  from  parts,  and  pioduced  sel^ 
"motive  and  intellectual  natures  more  ancient  than  those  that  are  deprived 
of  the  presence  of  intellect.  Is  it  not  the  demiurgus,  who  is  tbe  Cause  to 
us  of  all  diese  goods,  who  governs  the  whole  w<H*ld  according  to  recti- 
tude, binds  it  by  the  best  analogies,  establishes  every  polity  in  it,  pdfr* 
scsses  and  comprehends  the  laws  of  Fate^  and  extends  the  sacred  laws  of 
Adrastia,  as  far  as  to  the  last  of  things,  and  arranges  and  adorns  by  justice 
Proc.  Vol.  I.  3.  B 


Digitized  by 


Google 


378  ON  THE  THEOliOGY  BOOK  V. 

all  celestial  and  sublunary  natures  ?  For  he  who  introduces  partial  souls 
into  the  universe  as  into  their  habitation,  and  imparts  to  them  a  total 
polity  which  is  the  best  of  all  pohties,  and  is  governed  by  the  most  excel- 
lent laws,  is  he  who  denominates  these  laws  the  laws  of  Fate,  who  defines 
the  measures  of  Justice,  and  legally  institutes  all  things,  as  Timseus  says. 
Is  it  not  therefore  superfluous  to  endeavour  to  prove  that  he  who  possesses 
the  first  paradigm  of  the  political  science,  is  according  to  Plato  the  derni- 
urgus? 

If,  however,  these  things  are  true,  and  according  to  the  fable  in  the 
Protagoras  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  political  science  first  subsists  in 
Jupiter,  it  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said,  that  the  demiurgus  of  the 
universe  is  Jupiter.  For  to  what  other  cause  can  we  grant  the  primary 
form  of  f^  political  science  to  belong,  than  to  that  which  arranges  and 
adorns  the  universe  ?  If  the  poUty  in  the  heavens  is  the  first  and  most 
perfect  of  all  polities,  as  Socrates  in  the  Republic  says  it  is.  Who  like^ 
wise  is  he  that  produces  all  things,  and  co-airanges  them  when  product 
to  each  other,  in  order  to  the  elegant  disposition  of  the  universe  ?  If, 
therefore,  the  first  and  most  perfect  demiurgus  of  the  universe  is  political^ 
biit  the  political  science  first  subsists  with  Ju|>iter,  being  established  with 
him  on  a  sacred  foundation,  proceeds  from  thence  to  all  secondary 
natures,  and  adorns  and  arranges  both  wholes  arfd  parts  according  to 
intellect,  it  is  evidently  necessary  that  the  demiurgus  of  wholes  should  be 
the  same  with  Jupiter,  and  that  there  should  be  one  hyparxis  of  both, 
which  administers  every  thing  in  the  world  according  to  rectitude,  and 
circularly  leads  every  thing  confused  and  disorderly  into  order.  For, 
says  Tim«us,  it  is  not  lawful  for  that  which  is  best  to  effect  any  thing 
else  than  that  which  is  most  beautiful.  How  therefore  is  it  possible  that  he 
whx>  adorns  and  arranges  wholes  through  Themis,  and  together  with  her 
^produces  all  things,  should  not  essentially  possess  in  himself  the  whole  of 
the  political  science  ? 

How  is  it  possible  likewise  that  he  should  not  be  the  first  Jupiter,  who 
definitely  imparts  to  all  things  that  which  is  divine,  and  weaves  one  poUty 
from  all  things,  but  is  exempt  from  all  partial  causes  and  the  Titannic 
genera,  and  is  guarded  by  his  own  undefiled  powers,  beyond  the  whole 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXV.  OP  PLATO.  379 

world  ?  For  the  guards  which  surround  him,  obscurely  signify  his  immu^ 
table  order*  and  the  undeviatin^  defence  of  fabrication,  through  which 
being  firmly  established  in  himself,  he  pervades  through  all  things  without 
impediment,  and  being  present  to  all  his  progeny,  is  according  to  supreme 
transcendency  expanded  above  wholes.  Moreover,  the  citadel  of  Jupiter, 
according  to  the  rumours  of  theologists,  is  a  symbol  of  intellectual  circula* 
tion^  and  of  the  highest  summit  of  Olympus,  which  all  the  wise  suspend 
from  the  intellectual  watch  tower  of  Jupiter,  to  which  he  extends  all  the 
mundane  Gods,  imparting  to  them  from  thence  intellectual  powers, 
divine  light,  and  vivific  illuminations,  and  compressing  all  the  profundi* 
ties  of  the  worlds  by  one  most  simple  circulation,  throu^  which  the 
summit  also  of  the  apparent  worlds  is  denominated  the  period  of  same- 
ness^  and  the  most  prudent  and  uniform  circulation,  as  Timteus  says, 
expressing  the  unical  intellectual  power  of  demiurgic  conversion,  and 
being  allotted  the  same  transcendency  with  respect  to  all  the  sensible 
world  that  the  supreme  summit  of  Jupiter  possesses  with  respect  to  all 
the  arrangement  of  the  firmaments.  .  These  tibings  may  also  be  assumed 
by  us  as  subservient  to  the  proposed  investigatiout  from  the  fabulous 
fictions  in  the  Protagoras. 


CHAFfER  XXV. 


We  may,  however,  approach  still  nearer  to  the  truth,  and  assume  in 
the  present  discussion,  the  fable  in  the  Politicus.  Foe  in  this  it  will  ap» 
pear  that  Plato  in  a  remarkable  manner  considers^,  the  demiurgus  of  the 
universe  to  be  the  same  with  Jupiter,  and  even  as  finr  as  to  the  very 
names  assets  the  same  things  as  Timaeus.  The  Elean  guest,  tkerefote^ 
as  we  have  before  observed^  assigns  [in  this  dialogue]  twofold  dfculatians 


Digitized  by 


Google 


380  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

^ihe  wjboleiof  ibis  world,  the  one  intellectual^  and  which  elevates  souh 
but  the  other  proceeding  ipto  nature^  a^d  imparting  things  contfary  ta 
the  former.  And  the  one  incbed,  being  unapparent,  and  governed  bj 
diving  providence,  but  the  otiier  apfKirent,  and  convolved  according  to 
the  order  of  Fate.  lie  also  places  twofold  motive  causes  over  these 
eirculalioQs.  For  every  mutation  and  period  require  a  certain  moving 
cause.  And  prior  to  the  causes  that  move  the  circulations,  he  asserts 
that  there  are  as  it  were  twofold  ends  of  the  periods,  and  assigns  firsts 
^eetive  causes  of  the  motions,  coordinate  to  the  moving  causes,  and  to 
the  circulations  themselves  which  differ  from  each  other.  Jupiter  there^ 
fore  moves,  aj>d  circularly  leads  one  of  the  periods,  whether  you*  are  wiU 
ling  to  call  it  intellectual,  or  providential,  or  in  whatever  other  way  you 
Bi»y  denominate  it,  and  he  also  supplies  the  world  with  life,  and  imparts 
to  it  a  renovated  immortality.  But  lie  preestablishes  his  lather  Saturn 
as  the  object  of  desire  to,  and  the  end  of  the  whole  of  this  circulatioo^  Fei 
ke  leads  back  wholes,  and  conveirts  them  to  himself. 

Moreover,  he  extends  happy  souls  to  the  watch-tower  of  bis  father,  via^ 
tfiose  souls  whose  corporeal  nature  in  obliterated,  and  whose  drcuktioii 
is  to  the  incorporeal  and  the  impartible.  All  the  geAeration<»praducing  ^ 
symbols  likewise  of  these  souls  are  aniputated,  and  the  form  of  their  Ufe 
is  transferred  to  the  intellectual  summit.  For  these  souls  are  also  said  ^o 
be  the  nurselings  of  Saturn,  but  to  cMiMnit  the  government  of  themselves 
to  Jupiter,  and  through  him  to  be  extended  to  the  intelligible,  and  the 
Saturnian  dominion.  For  the  intelligible  is  nutriment,  as  it  is  said  by  the 
Gods  themselves.  And  as  Socrates  in  the  Phsedrus  elevates  souls 
through  the  circulation  of  the  heaven  to  the  supercelestial  place,  whece 
souls  are  nourished,  survey  true  beings,  and  the  unknown  order  of  the 
Gods,  with  the  highest  powers  of  themselves,  and  as  he  there  says,  intel- 
lectually penceive  with  tkt  licadg  of  tiie  diarioteiPWi— thii»  ateo  tiie  £1«an 
guest  circularly  leads  souls  under  Jupiter,,  to  the  SatureMn  watehrtawer, 
and  aaseris  tbaib  such  a^  have^^cended  are  nouiished  by  Satuen^  and  caHt 
them  the  nurselings  of  the  God«  For  every  whew  indeed,  the  inteDigibb/ 
h  perteetive  of,  aod  has  the  power  of  filling  an  lAtdleGtuallifi^  and  the^ 

*  For  TeXfo'fou^a;  It  18  necessary  to  read  ytvso'iovpy^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXV.  ©F  PLATO.  5gl 

summit  of  intelleetuab  extends  perfection.  These  souls  Kkewise  partici* 
pate  of  the  natures  that  are  beyond^  establish  themselves  in  more  elevated 
intellectuals,  and  ascend  as  far  as  to  the  unknown  order,  but  remote  from 
the  good^  apd  the  one  principle  of  all  things.  But  tl;ie  souls  [that  ascend 
through  the  circulation  of  the  heaven^  are  extended  to  the  first  inteliecty 
which  is  imparticipable,  and  the  intelligible  itself,  iind  when  they  are 
there,  and  have  established  their  life  in  the  occult  order  as  in  a  port,  they 
ineffably  participate  of  the  union  proceeding  from  the  goody  and  of  the 
light  of  truthi 

With  respect  however  to  what  remains  respecting  the  twofold  periods, 
as  we  have  said,  the  world  itself  indeed  moves  itself,  being  moved 
according  to  its  own  natoret  and  giving  completion  to  the  order  of  Pate. 
But  the.first-elfective  cause  of  this  nM>t]on  of  the  world,  and  of  its  life,  is^ 
the  God  who  illuminates  it  with  the  power  oi  being  moved  and  of  fiviog, 
and  19  the  mighty  Jupiter*  Hence  also  this  period  is  said  to  be  Jovian, 
so  far  ad  Jupiter  is  the  cMise  of  this  apparent  arrangement,  just  as  Saturn 
ts^  the  Cadse  of  the  intellectual  and  umapparent  arrangement.  It  is  better, 
however,  (o  hear  Pbto  biJOMelf  discussing  these  things.  That  there  are, 
th«fefore,  twofold  circulation^  of  the  universe,  and  that  the  God  who 
moves  it  is  the  leader  of  the  one,  but  of  the  other  the  world  itself  con  vol  v- 
ing  itself,  Plato  here  teaches  us.  But  as  was  just  now  said,  and  which  is 
tlie  only  thio^  that  ramainst  the  universe  is  at  one  time  co-governed  by 
another  divine  cause,  again  acquiring  life,  and  receiving  a  renovated 
immortality  fi^m  the  demiurgus ;  but  at  another  time,  when  he  lays  aside 
as  it  were  the  handle  of  his  rudder,  the  world  being  left  by  itself,  moves 
lor  a  time  by  itself»  so  as  frequently  to  proceed  in  an  inverted  order. 

j&^in,  however,  that  one  of  the  periods,  viz.  the  apparent,  is  Jovian, 
but  that  the  other  is  referred  to  the  kingdom  of  Saturn,  Plato  himself 
determines  ia  what  fc41ows,  subjoining  these  words,  afler  the  celebration 
of  that  life,  and  of  the  undefiled  polity  of  the  souls  that  are  there,  which 
i3libemted  from  all  corpofeol  pains,  and  the  servitude  about  matter : 
^^  You  have  heard,  Socrates,  what  was  the  life  of  men  under  Saturn ;  but 
you  youfsel^have  seen  what  th^  eoaditioa  of  the  pi^esent  life  is,  which  is  said 
to  be  under  Ju](^iter/'    ^nd  moreover,  tliat  of  these  two  circulations. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


382  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

(since  the  apparent  is  under  Jupiter)  Jupiter  is  the  cause  and  maker  of 
it,  is  obvious  to  every  one,  and  that  again  Jupiter  is  the  power  that  moves 
the  unapparent  circulation,  which  is  Saturnian,  may  be  demonstrated 
from  what  is  written.  For  it  is  necessary  that  these  two  Gods  should 
either  rule  over  each  of  these  circulations,  or  that  one  of  them  should  rule 
over  the  unapparent,  but  the  other  over  the  present  circulation.  If, 
however,  Jupiter  moves  the  universe  according  to  this  period,  the  world 
can  no  longer  be  said  to  convolve  itself,  and  to  govern  every  thing  it 
contains.  Nor  will  it  be  true  neither  that  the  whole  is  convolved  by 
divinity  with  twofold  and  contrary  circulations,  nor  again,  that  two 
certain  Gods  convolve  it  whose  decisions  are  contrary  to  each  other. 
For  it*  Saturn  indeed  moves  it  according  to  one  circulation,  but  Jupiter 
jnoves  it  according  to  a  period  contrary  to  that  of  Saturn,  two  Gods 
Ifvill  move  it  according  to  contrary  circumvolutions.  If,  however,  these 
things  are  impossible,  it  is  indeed  manifest  to  every  one  that  both  tlie 
divitae  causes  preside  over  the  circulation  according  to  the  Satumian 
convolution ;  Saturn  indeed  as  the  supplier  of  an  intellectual  life ;  but 
Jupiter,  as  elevating  all  things  to  the  Satumian  empire,  and  estaMishing 
them  in  his  own  intelligible.  And  thus  that  period  may  be  called  Sa- 
turnian,  in  consequence  of  Saturn  imparting  the  first  effective  cause  of 
th^  whole  [of  an  intellectual]  life.  But  according  to  this  more  physical 
circulation,  and  which  is  known  to  every  one.  Fate  and  connate  desire 
move  the  universe. 

Jupiter,  however,  is  the  cause  of  this  motion  exemptly,  -who  gives 
Fate  and  an  adscititious  life  to  the  worid.  These  things,  therefore,  being 
demonstrated  by  us,  let  us  consider  what  the  particulars  are  which  are 
asserted  of  the  God  who  moves  the  world  according  to  the  other  period. 
And  they  are  these;  ^^  that  the  world  indeed  at  another  time  is 
conjointly  governed  by  another  divine  cause,  again  acquiring  life,  and 
receiving  a  renovated  immortality  from  the  demiurgus.'^  It  is  obvious, 
therefore,  to  every  one^  that  the  Elean  guest  says,  that  the  God  whd 
moves  the  universe  according  to  the  Saturnian  period,  supplies  it  with' 
Ufe,  and  imparts  to  it  a  renovated  immortality,  a;nd  that  he  clearly  calls 
him  the  demiurgus.    Hence,  if  it  is  Jupiter  who  conjointly  governs  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXV.  OF  PLATO.   .  S83 

period,  as  has  been  demonstrated,  he  will  be  the  demiurgus  of  the  world, 
and  the  supplier  of  immortality.  And  what  occasion  is  there  to  say 
much  on  the  subject  ?  For  if  the  same  God  is  the  cause  of  life,  and  is 
denominated  the  demhirgus,  again  the  Cratylus  will  present  itself  to 
us,  and  Jupiter  according  to  this  will  be  the  same  with  the  demiurgus. 
For  life  accedes  to  all  things  from  Jupiter,  as  it  is  asserted  in  that 
dialogue.  Moreover,  in  what  follows,  as  Timaeus  calls  the  cause  of  the 
circulation  of  Fate,  demiurgus  and  father,  after  the  same  manner  the 
Elean  guest  denominates  this  cause,  and  also  calls  it  the  maker.  ^'  For 
the  world,*' says  he,  **  revolves,  remembering  the  doctrine  of  the  demi- 
urgus and  father/*  Proj>erly,  therefore,  do  we  denominate  the  whole 
of  this  period  Jovian,  Because  the  world  moves  and  convolves  itself; 
according  to  the  doctrine  of  Jupiter,  and  the  order  imparted  to  it  from 
him.  Again,  therefore,  Jupiter  is  demiurgus  and  father.  And  here  also 
the  Elean  guest  preserves  the  samp  order  of  the  divine  names  as  Timaeus. 
For  he  does  not'  call  him  father  and  demiurgus,  but  on  the  contra;ry,  in 
the  same  manner  as  Timaeus,  demiurgus  and  father ;  because  the  demi- 
urgic peculiarity  in  him  is  more  manifest  than  the  paternal  deity.  These 
things,  however,  have  been  copiously  investigated  before ;  and  it  has 
been  shown  in  what  respect  the  demiurgic  is  different  from  the  paternal 
genus,  how  they  are  complicated  with  each  other,*  where  the  paternal 
subsists  essentially^  but  the  demiurgic  according  to  cause,  and  where 
again,  the  demiurgic  subsists  essentially,  but  the  paternal,  according  to 
participation. 

'  For  xeu  yaf  it  is  necessary  to  read  ou  ya^. 
*  For  iv  a?J\»ts,  it  is  requisite  to  read  tv  oAXiiXoif . 


Digitized  by 


Google 


884  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V: 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


It  will  remain^  therefore^  that  we  riiould  make  mention  of  what  is 
written  in  the  Laws  concerning  Jupiter.  For  perhaps  in  them  also  it 
will  appear  that  Plato  assigns  the  same  order  to  the  demiurgus  and  to 
Jupiter.  As  the  equalities^  therefore,  according  to  which  poUties  are 
adomedy  are  twofoU,  and  the  one  polity  indeed  proposes  the  equal 
according  to  number,  and  proceeds  through  things  which  difier  from 
Midi  other  according  to  an  equal  law ;  but  the  other  embraces  in  dl 
.tiungs,  the  equality  wfakh  is  accordii^  to  desert;  and  also,  since 
equality  subsists  according  to  ratio, — this  being  the  case,  each  of  these 
qualities  exists  in  the  providence  of  the  world.  For  the  essence  of  ihe 
«Hil,  indeed,  is  primarily  divided  by  its  fabricator  by  the  equality 
^according  to  ratio ;  but  it  is  also  consummately  filled  with  the  remaining 
middles,  and  bound  with  them  through  the  whole  of  itself.  The  several 
bodies  [of  the  world]  likewise,  participate  of  a  certain  common  essence, 
in  the  fabrication  of  things ;  and  on  this  account  they  are  allotted  the 
equality  which  is  according  to  number.  But  all  things  are  arranged  and 
adorned  through  the  best  of  analogies,  and  the  demiurgus  according  to 
this  inserts  both  in  wholes  and  parts,  an  indissoluble  order  in  the 
universe,  and  an  adaptation  of  them  to  ^ach  other. 

This  equality,  therefore,  the  Athenian  guest  exhorts  his  citizens 
particularly  to  honour,  in  consequence  of  assimilating  his  city  to  the 
universe.  He  also  says  that  it  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  but  that  it  is  not 
likewise  easy  for  every  one  to  perceive  the  most  true  and  excellent 
equality ;  for  it  is  the  judgment  of  Jupiter.  What  therefore  is  the  cause 
on  account  of  which  4he  Athenian  guest  asserts  this  analogy  to  be  the 
judgment  of  Jupiter.'^  What  other  cause  can  we  assign  than  its  con- 
tributing to  the  perfection  of  the  world,  and  its  power  and  dominion  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  XXVI.  OF  PLATO.  335 

the  fabrication  of  wholes  ?  For  that  which  gives  an  orderly  distinction  to 
the  genera  of  causes,  contrives  the  most  beautiful  bond  of  them,  and 
weaves  together  one  order  from  wholes,  is  according  to  Timeeus  the 
power  of  this  analogy.  For  it  established  soul  in  the  middle  (of  the 
universe)  analogous  to  intellect  and  a  corporeal  nature.  For  soul  is  the 
middle  of  an  impartible  and  partible  essence.  And  by  how  much  it 
surpasses  a  partible,  by  so  much  it  falls  short  of  an  impartible  hypostasis. 
The  power  of  this  analogy,  howev^,  binds  the  soul  from  double  and 
triple  ratios,  and  connects  the  whole  of  it  proceeding  from  and  at  the 
same  time  returning  to  (its  principles,)  by  the  primary  and  self-motiye 
boundaries  of  equality.  It  likewise  constitutes  the  corporeal  series  from 
the  four  first  genera.  And  it  adapts  indeed  the  extremes  to  each  other 
through  the  middles,  but  mingles  the  middles  according  to  the  pectin 
liarity  of  the  extremes.  It  reduces,  however,  all  things  to  one  worlds 
and  one  indissoluble  order  connectedly  comprehended  in  the  universe* 
If,  therefore,  we  acknowledge  that  this  equality  has  dominion  in  tl» 
whole  fabrication  of  things,  the  best  of  analogies  is  the  judgment  of  the 
demiurgus,  and  according  to  the  decision  of  him  who  generated  wh(^ 
it  is  allotted  that  great  dominion  in  the  fabrication  of  the  uni^^rse, 
which  we  have  before  shown  it  to  possess.  Hence  if  the  same  analogy 
is  the  judgment  of  Jupiter,  as  the  Athenian  guest  says  it  is,  it  is  obvious 
to  every  one  that  the  nature  of  Jupiter  is  demiurgic.  For  it  is  not  any 
thing  else  which  judges  of  the  dignity  of  this  analogy  than  that  which 
employs  it  in  the  arrangement  of  wholes.  And  to  this  the  legislator 
establishing  himself  analogous,  binds  and  in  a  particular  manner  adora^ 
the  city  which  is  assimilated  to  the  universe,  by  this  analogy. 


Proc.  Vol,  I.  3  C 


Digitized  by 


Google 


'386  OH  THE  THEOLOGY  JJOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  XXVIL 


From  these  things,  therefore^  and  from  all  that  has  been  previously  said, 
we  confidently  assert,  following  Plato  and  paternal  rumours,  that  Jupiter 
is  the  demiurgus  of  the  universe ;  and  we  may  collect  into  one,  the 
scattered  opinions  of  the  ancients  on  this  subject ;  of  whom,  some,  indeed, 
refer  the  paradigm  of  the  world,  and  the  'demiurgic  cause  to  the  same 
order;  but  others  divide  these  from  each  other.  And  some  place  all* 
perfect  animal  prior  to  the  demiurgus ;  but  others  afford  aa  hypostasis 
to  it  after  the  demiurgus.  For  if  the  demiurgus  is,  as  has  been  said,  the 
great  Jupiter,  and  the  paradigm  proposed  to  the  demiurgus  in  order  to 
the  generation  of  the  world,  is  all-perfect  animal,  these  are  at  the  same 
time  united  to  each  other,  and  are  allotted  an  essential  separation. 
And  animal  itself,  indeed,  intelligibly  comprehends  in  itself  the  wliole 
Jovian  series;  but  Jupiter  the  demiurgus  of  the  universe  intellectually 
pre-establishes  in  himself  the  nature  of  animal  itself.  For  animal  itself 
is  the  supplier  of  life  to  all  things,  and  all  things  primarily  live  on 
account  of  it,  and  Jupiter  being  the  cause  of  life,  possesses,  the  paradigm 
and  the  generative  principle  of  the  essence  of  all  animals,  Justly, 
therefore,  does  Timeeus,  in  Plato,  having  called  the  intelligible  paradigm 
animal,  conjoin  the  demiurgic  intellect  to  the  first  intelligible  animal ; 
and  through  the  all-perfect  union  of  the  demiurgus  and  father  with  it,  he 
also  arranges  and  adorns  this  universe.  For  Jupiter  binding  to  himself 
the  fabrication  of  the  universe,  and  being  an  intellectual  animal,  is 
united  to  intelligible  animal,  and  being  allotted  a  progression  analogous 
to  it,  constitutes  all  things  intellectually,  which  proceed  from  animal 
itself  intelligibly. 

For,  as  we  have  said,  the  intelligible  hypostases  being  triple,  and  one 
indeed,  being  allotted  its  hyparxis  according  to  existence  and  the  one 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVIl.  .  OF  PLATO.  387 

being ;  but  another  according  to  intelligible  life,  and  the  middle  centre 
of  the  intelligible  breadth,  where  eternity,  all  life,  and  intelligible  Ufc 
subsist,  as  Plotinus  somewhere  says;  and  another  according  to  intel- 
ligible multitude,  the  first  plenitude  of  life,  and  the  all-perfect  paradigm 
of  wholes, — this  being  the  case,  the  three  kingdoms  of  the  intellectual 
Gods  are  divided  analogous  to  the  three  intelligible  hypostases.  And 
one  indeed,  the  mighty  Saturn,  being  allotted  an  hyparxis  according  to 
the  summit  of  intellectuals,  and  having  a  paternal  transcendency} 
possesses  a  dominion  analogous  to  the  summit  of  the  intelligible  Gods, 
and  the  occult  order.  And  as  in  that  order,  all  things  are  uniformly, 
and  are  ineffably,  and  without  separation  united,  thus  also  this  God 
again  converts  to  himself,  and  conceals  in  himself  the  natures  that  have 
proceeded  from  him,  imitating  the  occult  of  the  first  summit.  But  again, 
the  order  which  comprehends  the  middle  genera  of  wholes,  and  is  filled 
indeed,  from  the  generative  power  of  Saturn,  but  fills  from  itself  the 
whole  fabrication  with  vivific  rivers,  has  the  same  order  in  intellectuals 
which  eternity  has  in  intelligibles,  and  the  uniform  cause  of  the  life 
which  is  there.  And  as  eternity  proximately  generates  intelligible 
animal,  which  is  also  denominated  eternal,  through  the  participation  of 
eternity,  thus  also  the  middle  bosom  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  unfolds 
the  demiurgus  of  the  universe,  and  the  vivific  fountain  of  wholes.  But 
the  third  king,  viz.  the  fabricator  and  at  the  same  time  father,  is  indeed 
co-ordinate  to  the  remainder  of  the  intelligible  triad,  viz.  to  all-perfect 
animal.  And  as  that  is  an  animal,  so  likewise  is  Jupiter.  And  Jupiter 
indeed  is  intelligibly  in  all-perfect  animal ;  but  alUperfect  animal  is 
intellectually  in  Jupiter.  The  extremities  likewise  of  the  intelUgible 
and  intellectual  Gods  are  united  to  each  other ;  and  in  them,  separation 
is  co-existent  with  union.  And  one  of  them,  indeed,  is  exempt  from 
fabrication ;  but  the  other  is  converted  to  the  intelligible,  is  filled  from 
thcQce  with  total  goods,  and  is  allotted  a  paternal  transcendency  through 
the  participation  of  it.  The  maker,  therefore,  and  father  of  the  universe, 
who  has  fimjly  established  in  himself  the  uniform  strength  and  power  of 
all  fabrication,  who  possesses  and  comprehends  the  primary  cause  of 
the  generation  of  wholes,  and  who  stably  fixes  in  himself  all  things,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


388  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

again  produces  them  from  himself  in  an  midefiled  manner^  being  allotted 
such  an  order  as  this  among  the  intellectual  fathers,  is  celebrated ,  as  I 
may  say,  through  the  whole  of  the  Timseus,  in  which  dialogue,  his 
prolific  and  paternal  power  is  unfolded,  and  his  providence  which 
pervades  from  on  high  as  far  as  to  the  extremities  of  the  universe.  He 
is  also  frequently  celebrated  by  Plato  in  other  dialogues^  so  far  as  it  is 
possible  to  celebrate  his  uniform  and  united  power,*  and  which  through 
transcendency  is  exempt  from  wholes. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


If  however  some  one  recollecting  what  is  said  in  the  beginning  of  the 
Timeeus  about  him,  viz.  that  it  is  difficult  to  discover  him,  and  when 
found,  impossible  to  speak  of  him  to  all  men,  should  enquire  in  the  first 
place,  why  since  the  Grecian  theology  ascribes  such  a  name  to  the 
demiurgus,  as  we  have  before  mentioned,  Timaeus  says  that  he  is  ineffable, 
and  estabUshed  above  all  the  indication  which  subsists  in  words.  In 
the  next  place,  if  he  should  inquire  why  intelligible  animal  which  is 
arranged  above  the  demiurgus  is  both  denominated,  and  is  made  known 
by  many  signs,  but  the  demiurgus  who  has  established  his  kingdom  in 
an  order  secondary  to  that  of  all-perfect  animal,  and  is  an  intellectual 
God,  (all-perfect  animal  receiving  an  intelligible  transcendency)  is  left  by 
Timaeus  inefiVible,  as  we  have  said,  and  unknown,  perhaps  we  also, 
following  Plato,  may  be  able  to  dissolve  all  such  doubts.  For  every 
order  of  the  Gods  originates  from  a  monad,  and  presides  over  its 

'  SuvAjuuv  is  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVIII.  OF  PLATO. 


389 


proper  series  according  to  the  first*effective  cause.  And  such  thii^gs 
indeed  as  are  nearer  to  this  principle  are  more  total  than  those 
that  are  more  remote  from  it.  But  more  total  natures  are  manifestly 
seen  to  be  less*  distant  from  the  monad,  and  conjoin  things  which 
are  diminished  according  to  essence  to  the  natures  that  are  prior 
to  them.  Every  order  of  the  Gods  likewise  is  a  whole  united  to 
itself  through  the  whole,  is  allotted  one  indissoluble  connexion,  both 
in  wholes  and  parts,  and  through  the  monad  which  collects  every  order 
into  one,  it  is  converted  about  itself,  is  suspended  from  this,  and  is 
wholly  convolved  according  to  it. 

If,  therefore,  we  assert  these  things  truly,  in  each  order  a  monad  is 
allotted  a  transcendency  with  respect  to  multitude,  analogous  to  the 
good.  And  as  the  unical  cause  of  whole  goods,  and  which  is  incom- 
prehensible by  all  things,  is  exempt  from  all  things,  constitutes  all  things 
about  itself,  generates  them  from  itself,  and  hastily  withdraws  the  unions 
of  all  things  to  its  own  ineffable  superunion,  thus  also  the  uniform  and 
generative  principle  of  every  co-ordinate  multitude,  connects,  guards  and 
perfects  the  whole  series  of  itself,  imparts  good  to  it  from  itself,  and 
fills  it  with  order  and  harmony.  It  is  likewise  that  to  its  own  progeny, 
which  the  good  is  to  all  beings,  and  is  the  object  of  desire  to  all  the 
natures  that  originate  from  itself.  Thus,  therefore,  the  union  of  the 
intelUgible  father  subsists  prior  to  the  whole  paternal  order;  the  one 
wholeness  of  the  Sy  noches  is  prior  to  the  connective  order ;  and  the  first 
effective  cause  of  life,  to  the  vivific  order. 

Hence  also,  of  every  demiurgic  series,  which  is  suspended  from  thi^ 
triad  of  the  sons  of  Saturn,  the  monad  which  proximately  fabricates 
wholes,  and  is  established  above  this  triad,  comprehends  in  itself  all  the 
demiurgic  Gods,  converts  them  to  itself,  and  is  of  a  boniform  nature. 
The  one  fountain  likewise  of  all  the  demiurgic  numbers,  subsists,  as  I 
may  say,  with  respect  to  all  this  order  analogous  to  the  one^  and  to  the 
one  principle  of  all  things.  Timaeus  therefore,  indicating  these  things 
lo  us,  asserts  directly  in  the  l^ginning  of  the  generation  of  the  world, 

'  For  irAeoir  it  is^  eridently  necessary  to  read  ijttov* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


390  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V- 

that  this  monad  which  proximately  fabricates  wholes,  is  difficult  to  be 
known,  and  is  indescribable,  as  having  the  same  ratio  as  the  ineffable 
and  unknown  c^use  of  all  beings.     Whence  likewise,  I  think,  he  calls 
the  demiurgus  the  best  of  causes,  and  the  father  of  this  universe,  as  being 
allotted  the  highest  order  among  the  demiurgi,  and  convolving  to  himself, 
and  producing  from  himself  all  the  effective  principles.     That  one  how- 
ever, Parmenides  demonstrates  to  be  perfectly  unknown  and  ineffable ; 
but  TimdBus  says  that  it  is  difficult  to  discover  the  maker  and  father  of 
the  world,  and  impossible  to  speak  of  him  to  all  men ;    which  assertion 
falls  short  of  the  cause  that  flies  from  all  knowledge,  and  all  language, 
and  appears  to  verge  to  the  nature  of  things  known  and  effable.     For 
when  he  sa3's  that  it  is  impossible  to  speak  of  him  to.  all  men,  he  does 
not  leave  him  entirely  ineffable  and  unknown.     And  the  assertion  that  it 
is  difficult  to  discover  him,  is  not  the  sign  of  a  pecuharity  perfectly 
unknown.     For    because    the  demiurgus  has    established  a  kingdom 
analogous  to  the  goody  but  in  secondary  and  manifold  orders  of  it,  he 
participates  indeed  of  the  signs  of  the  good^  but  is  allotted  the  participa- 
tion in  conjunction  with  an  appropriate  peculiarity,  and  a  communion 
with  beings  adapted  to  liim.     And  as  he  is  good,  but  not  the  good  itself ^ 
so  likewise  he  is  difficult  to  be  known  by  the  natures  posterior  to  him, 
but  is  not  unknown.     He  is  also  celebrated  in  mystic  language,  but  is 
not  perfectly  ineffable.     You  may  see  however,  the  order  of  things,  and 
the  remission  in  them  proceeding  in  a  downward  progression.     For  the 
good  indeed,  is  exempt  from  all  silence,  and  all  language.     But  the  genus 
Of  the  intelligible  Gods  rejoices  in  silence,  and  is  delighted  with  ineffable' 
symbols.     Hence  also,  Socrates  in  the  Phaedrus,  calls  the  vision  of  the 
intelligible  monads   the  most  holy  of  initiations,  as  being  involved  in 
silence,  and  perceived  intellectually  in  an   arcane  manner.     Bat  the 
vision  of  intellectuals  is  indeed  effable,  yet  is  not  effable  and  known  to  all 
men,  but  is  known  with  difficulty.     For  through  diminution  with  respect 
to  the  intelligible,  it  proceeds  from  silence  and  a  transcendency  which  is 
to  be  apprehended  by  intelligence  alon^into  the  order  of  things  which 
are  now  effable. 

'  For  ofio-To*^  it  is  necessary  to  read  ajjijTOjj. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIX.  OF  PLATO.  g^ 

If  however^  this  be  the  case,  all-perfect  animal  is  much  more  ineffaUe 
and  unknown  than  the  demiurgic  monad.  For  it  is  at  once  the  monad 
of  every  paradigmatic  order,  and  is  intelligible,  but  not  intellectual. 
How  therefore,  do  we  endeavour  to  denominate,  and  as  it  were  unfold  it, 
but  thus  magnificently  celebrate  the  demiurgic  cause  ?  And  how  do  we 
class  this  cause  in  the  same  rank  with  things  ineffable  ?  For  this  will  not 
be  acting  conformably  to  Plato,  who  arranges  animal  itself  beyond  the 
demiurgus ;  but  this  will  be  giving  an  hypostasis  to  it  in  a  secondary 
order  of  Gods,  where  it  will  be  ranked,  and  will  be  effable  and  known 
more  than  the  demiurgic  monad.  To  which  may  be  added,  that  to 
denominate  that  all-perfect  animal  most  beautiful,  but  the  demiurgus  the 
best  of  causes,  gives  indeed  the  same  analogy  to  these  causes  with 
respect  to  each  other,  as  there  is  of  the  good  with  respect  to  the  beautifuK 
And  as  the  good  is  prior  to  the  beautiful,  (for  the  first  beauty,  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Philebus,  is  in  the  vestibules  of  the  good)  so  likewise  the  best' 
is  prior  to  the  most  beautiful,  and  the  demiurgus  is  prior  to  all-perfect 
animal.  For  the  best  indeed,  remarkably  participates  of  the  good^  but 
the  most  beautiful,  of  beauty. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


In  addition  to  these  things  therefore,  it  must  also  be  asserted  by  us, 
that  the  most  beautiful  and  the  best,  are  simply  indeed  related  to  each 
other  according  to  order,  as  the  good  is  to  the  beautiful.  For  the  series 
of  the  whole  of  goodness  is  expanded  above  all  the  progression  and 
armngement  of  the  beautiful.     Every  where,  therefore,  the  best  is  prior 

'  For  nffirrov,  it  is  necessary  to  read  ft^iorov. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


502  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

to  the  most  beautiful.  And  the  one^  indeed,  with  reference  to  au  inferior 
order,  will  be  the  best,  but  the  other  with  reference  to  a  more  excell^it 
order,  will  be  the  most  beautiful.  I  say  for  instance,  that  the  most 
beautiful,  as  in  intelligibles,  will  have  this  peculiarity ;  but  the  best  as  in 
intellectuals.  And  if  the  most  beautiful,  in  supermundane  natures,  is  a 
thing  of  this  kind,  the  best  will  be  said  to  be  best  as  with  reference  to  the 
Gods  in  the  world.  Hence,  if  the  best  of  causes  is  the  deader  of  the 
demiurgic  series,  and  according  to  it  is  allotted  a  transcendency  of  this  kind, 
but  the  most  beautiful  of  intelligible  animals  preestablishes  the  illustrious 
power  of  beauty  in  a  higher  order,  by  what  contrivance  can  it  on  this 
account  be  shown  that  intelligible  and  all-perfect  animal  is  subordinate 
to  the  intellectual  cause  ?  And  that  the  demiurgus  is  converted  to  that 
which  is  posterior  to  himself?  Or  how  can  it  be  said  that  animal  itself  is 
visible  to  him,  and  all-perfect  animal,  and  that  which  is  comprehensive 
of  all  intelligibles,  if  it  is  made  to  be  comprehended  by  another?  For 
thus  the  demiurgus  will  be  more  comprehensive  than  animal  itself,  if  the 
former  indeed  being  characterized  according  to  the  best,  is  expanded 
above  the  paradigm,  but  the  latter  being  denominated  as  most  beautiful 
is  secondary  to  the  demiurgic  cause. 

Moreover,  as  that  all-perfect  and  intelligible  animal  is  particularly 
considered  by  Timaeus  according  to  a  formal  nature,  and  not  according 
to  the  union  which  is  in  it,  and  an  hypostasis  which  is  above  all  forms,'  he 
very  properly  grants  that  animal  itself  may  be  known  and  manifested  by 
words,  but  considers  the  df^miurgus  as  in  a  certaip  respect  ineffable,  and 
superior  to  knowledge.  For  both  indeed,  I  mean  the  demiurgus  and 
animal  itself^  participate  of  union,  and  prior  to  a  formal  essence,  are  con- 
tained in  the  one.  And  if  you  assume  the  unities  which  are  in  them,  you 
must  admit  the  unity  of  the  paradigm  to  be  intelligible^  but  the  demiurgic 
unity  to  be  intellectual,  and  that  an  intelligible  hyparxis  is  nearer  to  the 
first  one,  which  is  unknown  and  incomprehensible  by  all  things,  than  an 
intellectual  hyparxis.     But  if  you  are  willing  to  survey  the  forms  of  the 


*  Instead  of  rou  wetvros,  it  it  doabdess  i^ecessary  to  read  ra  vavru.    For  the  demiurgus  also  haa 
an  hjrpostans  which  is  above  the  forms  of  the  unirerse. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIX.  OFPLATa  395 

paradigm  by  themselves,  according  to  which  it  is  said  to  be  the  paradigm 
of  every  thing  in  the  world,  and  the  goodness  and  union  of  the  demiurgus, 
the  former  will  appear  to  you  to  be  known  and  effable  ;  but  the  demiur- 
gic cause  will  be  seen  to  participate  of  the  unknown  and  ineffable  pecu- 
liarity of  the  Gods.  For  again,  Tima^us  was  in  a  remarkable  degree  in 
want  of  the  demiurgus  and  father,  as  the  producing  cause  of  wholes,  and 
the  generator  of  the  world.  But  to  generate,  to  produce  and  provide  are 
the  peculiarities  of  Gods,  so  far  as  they  are  Gods.  Hence  also  Ti- 
madus  denominates  the  peculiarity  of  the  demiurgus  according  to  which  he 
is  a  God,  the  cause  of  the  generation  of  the  universe,  and  the  most  proper 
princi^e  of  the  arrangement  of  wholes.  But  he  denominates  the  pecu- 
liarity of  the  paradigm  to  be  that  which  comprehends  the  first  forms, 
according  to  which  the  world  also  is  invested  with  forms.  For  it  is  the 
image  of  the  paradigm,  but  the  effect  of  the  demiurgus.  It  belongs, 
therefore,  to  the  paradigm  to  be  the  first  of  forms,  but  to  the  demiurgus 
to  be  the  best  of  causes,  according  to  his  goodness,  and  the  hyp£u*xis  of 
essence.  For,  as  we  hare  said,  to  generate}  to  give  subsistence  to,  and  to 
provide  for  other  things,  especially  pertain  to  the  Gods^  and  not  to  the 
natures  which  are  primarily  suspended  *  from  them ;  but  the  latter  are 
alk)tted  through  the  former  an  abundance  prolific  of  secondary  natures. 
It  appears  tome  that  Socrates  in  the  Republic  indicating  these  things, 
does  not  say  that  the  sun  is  the  cause  of  generation,  till  he  had  declared 
him  to  be  the  progeny  of  the  superessential  principle  of  all  things ;  just  as 
Thnaeus  does  not  begin  the  fabrication  of  the  universe,  till  he  had  cele- 
brated the  goodness  of  the  demiurgus  of  wholes.  For  each  [i.  e.  the 
demiurgus  and  the  sun]  is  a  producing  cause  according  to  the  good^  the 
former  indeed  of  the  universe,  but  the  latter  of  a  generated  nature;  but 
not  according  to  the  intellect  which  is  in  tha^,  or  life,  or  any  other  form 
of  essence;  For  these  through  the  participation  of  the  good  constitute 
the  natures  posterior  to  themselves.  And  thus  through  these  things  we 
have  answered  the  before-mentioned  doubts. 

'  ¥br  9^^iuvois»  it  U  necetsarj  to  read  e^ni/My«if . 

Proe.  Vol.  I.  3  D 


Digitized  by 


Google 


394 


ON  THE  THEOtOGY  BOO*?. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


Of  the  problems  pertaining  to  total  fabrication,  it  now  remains  fi>r  mc 
to  relate  what  my  opinion  is  respecting  the  Crater,  and  the  genera  that 
are  mingled  in  it.     For  these  alsoTimseus  co-arranges  with  the  demiurgic 
monad,  in  the  generation  of  the  souL     The  demiurgus,  therefore,^  mio^^ 
the  elements  of  the  hypostasis  of  souls ;  but  the  middle  genera  of  being 
are  mingled.    The  much-celebrated  Crater^  however,  receives  this  mix- 
ture^  and  generates  souls  in  conjunction  with  the  demiurgus*     Hence^in 
the  first  place,  the  genera  of  being  must  be  admitted  to  be  twofold.  And 
it  must  be  granted  indeed,  that  some  of  them  give  completion  to  total 
Itypostases,  but  others,  to  such  as  are  partial;  and  that  the  hyparxes  of 
first  effective  and  united  causes,  are  established  in  the  intelligible  Gods^. 
Tor  there  essence  subsists  primarily  in  the  summit  of  intelligibles,  and 
motion  and  permanency  are  in  the  middle  centre.     For  intelligible  eter*^ 
nity  abides  in  one,  and  at  once  both  abides  and  is  the  occult  cause  of  alt 
life.     Hence,  Plotinus  also  calls  eternity  life  which  is  one  and  total :  and. 
again,  in  another  part  of  his  works  he  calls  it  intelligible  life.     But  the 
third  from  him,  Theodorus,  denominates  it  permanency.     And   both 
these  opinions  harmoniae  with  each  other ;  because  permanency  also  is  in. 
eternity,  (for  according  to  Timseus,  eternity  abides  in  one^and  motion. 
For  eternity  is  intelligible  Ufe,  and  that  which  participates  of  it  ifr  intelli- 
gible animal.      Moreover,  sameness  and  difference,  are  in  the  extremity 
of  intelligibles.     For  whence  does  multitude  originate,  but  from  difier- 
ence  ?     And  whence  is  the  communion  of  parts  with  wholes,  and  the 
hyparxis  of  things  which  are^  divided  in  each  other  derived  but  from  same- 
ness?    For  that  one  participates  of  being,  and  being  of  the  one.    All  the 
parts  likewise  of  the  one  being  pervade  through  each  other  in  an  uncon- 
fused  manner;  for  at  one  and  the  same  time  sameness  and  difference  are 
there  occultly.    And  the  whole  intelligible  breadth  is  allotted  its  hypo* 


Digitized  by 


Coogle 


€HAP-  XXX-  OP  PLATO.  .  355 

stesis  according  to  the  first  and  most  nnifbrm  genera.  As  essence  likewise 
preseots  itself  to  the  view  in  conjunction  with  tht  oncj  according  to  tlie 
first  tijad,  so  motion  nnd  permanency  shine  forth  in  the  second,  and 
sameness  and  difierence  in  the  third  triad.  And  all  things  are  essentially 
in  the  intelligible;  just  as  life  and  intellect  are  there  intelligibly.  For 
since  all  bangs  proceed  from  intelligibles,  all  things  preexist  there 
according  to  cause.  And  motion  and  permanency  are  there  essentially, 
and  sameness  and  drflference  uniformly. 

Again,  in  the  middle  genera  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  hypo- 
i^tasesy  the  same  tilings  subsist  secondarily  and  vitally.  In  the  summit  of 
them  indeed,  essence  subsists.  For  Socrates  in  the  Fhaedrus  speaking 
about  this  order,  characterizes  the  whole  of  it  from  essence.  For  the 
truly-existing  essence  which  is  without  colour,  without  figure,  and  without 
contact,  subsists  after  this  manner.  But  in  the  middle  centre  there  are 
aurtion  and  p^manency.  For  there  the  circulation  of  the  heaven  sub^ 
sists,  as  the  same  Socrates  says;  bdng  establbhed  indeed  undeviatingly, 
in  one  form  of  intelligence;  but  being  moved  in,  and  about  itself;  or 
father  being  motion  and  eternal  life.  But  in  the  extremity  of  this  order, 
sameness  and  difference  are  vitally  established.  Hence  it  is  converted  to 
ihp  beginning  according  to  the  nature  of  sameness,  is  divided  uniformly, 
proc^ds  into  more  numbers,  and  generates  from  itself  more  paitial 
monads. 

Again,  in  the  third  orders,  the  higliest  of  the  intellectual  Gods  possesses 
aW  things  according  to  essence,  and  is  the  intelligible  itself  and  true  being 
in  intellectuals,  again  recalling  the  separation  which  is  in  himself  into 
undivided  union.  But  the  middle  order  subsists  according  to  motion  and 
at  the  same  time  permanency.  For  it  is  a  vivific  deity,  abiding  and  Mt 
the  same  time  proceeding,  being  established  with  purity,  and  vivifying 
all  things  by  prolific  powers.  And  the  third  progression  subsists  accoi*d« 
ing  to  sameness,  together  with  difference.  For  this  separates  itself  from 
the  fathers,  and  is  conjoined  to  them  through  intellectual  conversion.  And 
it  binds,  indeed,  at  once  the  natures  posterior  to  itself,  to  each  other, 
according  to  the  common  powers  of  forms,  and  at  the  same  time  separates 
them  by  intellectual  sections.     But  in  this  order,  all  genera  and  species 


Digitized  by 


Google 


396  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

first'  «hine  forth  to  the  view;  because  it  is  especially  characterised 
according  to  difference,  being  allotted  the  end  of  all  the  total  hypostases^ 
From  this  likewise  it  proceeds  to  all  things,  viz.  to  participated  intdlect, 
the  multiform  orders  of  souls,  and  the  whole  of  a  corporeal  nature.  For,, 
in  short,  it  constitutes  triple  genera  of  the  natures  posterior  to  itself; 
some  indeed^  being  impartible  and  the  first;  others  being  media 
between  partible  and  impartible  natures;  and  others  being  divided  about 
bodies.  And  through  these  things  it  generates  all  the  more  partial  genera 
of  beings.  That  we  may  therefore  again  return  to  what  has  been  before 
said,  the  genera  must  be  admitted  to  subsist  every  where,  yet  not  every 
where  after  the  same  manner;  but  in  the  highest  orders^  of  divine  natures 
indeed,  they  subsist  uniformly,  without  separation,  and  unitedly,  where 
also  permanency  participates  of  motion,  and  motion  of  permanency,  and 
there  is  one  united  progression  of  both.  In  the  more  partial  orders,  however^ 
it  must  be  admitted  that  the  same  things  subsist  in  a  divided  manner,,  and 
together  with  an  appropriate  remission.  For  since  the  first  and  most 
total  of  forms  are  in  the  extremity  of  intelligibles,  it  is  indeed  necessary 
that  genera  should  have  the  beginning  of  their  hypostasis  in  intelligiblesw 
And  if  the  demiurgic  cause  is  generative  of  aU  the  parti'&l  orders,  it  com- 
prehends the  first  genera  of  the  hypostasis  of  them.^  As  likewise  the 
ibuntain  of  all  forms  subsists  in  this  cause,  though  there  are  intelligible 
forms,  so  the  genera  of  being  preexist  in  it,  though  there  are  other  whole 
genera  prior  to  it.  And  the  divine  Jambhchus  somewhere  rightly 
observes  that  the  genera  of  being  present  themselves  to  the  view  in  the  ex- 
tremity of  the  intelKgible  Gods.  The  present  theology  likewise,  following 
things  themselves,  gives  a  progression  to  these  as  well  as  forms  supernally, 
from  the  intelligible  Gods.  For  such  things  as  subsist  according  to  cause, 
occultly,  and  without  separation  in  the  first  essences  [i.  e.  in  intelligibles] 
these  subsist  in  a  divided  and  partible  manner,,  and  according  to  the  nature 
ofeach,in  intellectuals.  For  from  hence,  all  the  divisibleorders  of  beingsare 
filled  both  with  these  genera,  and  with  formal  byparxes.  And  on  this  ac-- 
count,  the  demiurgus  also  is  said  to  comprehend  all  genera,  and  to  have  the 
fountain  of  forms,  because  he  generates,  all  the  partial  rivers  [of  Hfe]  and 
imparts  to  them  from  himself  by  illumination  all  the  measures  of  subsistence^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXL  OF  PLATO.  397 

Hence  triple  genera  of  all  beings  proceed  from  the  demiurgus,  8(»ne 
indeed  being  impartible,  others  partible, '  and  others  subsisting  between 
these,  being  more  united  indeed  than  the  partible,  but  more  separated 
than  the  impartible  genera ;  but  subsisting  according  to  the  middle  of 
both,  and  connectedly  containing  the  one  bond  of  beings.  And  the 
deroiurgus  indeed  produces  the  intellectual  essence,  through  the  first  and 
impartible  genera;  but  the  corporeal  essence  through  the  third  and 
partible  genera ;  and  the  psychical  hypostasis  which  is  in  the  middle  of 
these,  through  the  middle  genera  in  beings.  Moreover,  he  generates 
every  intellectual  and  impartible  nature  from  himself,  and  fills  them  with 
total  generative  power.  But  he  constitutes  the  psychical  essence,  in 
conjunction  with  the  Crater ;  and  the  corporeal  essence,  in  conjunctioa. 
with  total  Nature. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


That  in  this  arrangement  likewise  we  follow  Hmseus,  any  one  may 
learn  from  the  following  considerations:  The  demiurgus  producing  the 
intellect  of  the  universe,  himself  produces  it  from  his  own  essence  alone, 
imfolding  it  at  once  according  to  one  union,  in  consequence,  of  consti- 
tuting it  eternally,  and  no  mention  whatever  is  here  made  of  the  Crater.^ 
But  the  demiurgus  in  arranging  and  adorning  soul  prior  to  body,  mingles 
the  genera,  and  energizes  in  conjunction  with  the  Crater.  And  in  fa- 
shioning the  body  of  the  universe,  and  describing  the  heaven,  he  fabri- 
cates it  in  conjunction  with  Necessity.  For  the  nature  of  the  universe, 
saysTimseus,  was  generated  mingled  from  intellect  and  necessity r  And  nei- 
ther does  he  here  assume  the  Crater  in  order  to  the  arrangement  of  bodies. 

*  The  vords  ra  hi  fnpirra  are  omitted  in  the  original,  but  eridentlj  ought  to  be  inaerttd.. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


398  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

But  it  bfts  been  abundantly  shown  by  us  elsjewlierci  that  Plato  calls 
physical  production^  a  production  through  necessity ,  and  does  not,  as 
same  suppose,  consider  necessity  to  be  the  saine  with  matter.  It  is 
evident,  therefore,  that  the  demiurgus  produces  the  generation  of  bodies 
tc^thcr  with  total  Nature,  mingles  the  partible  genera  in  the  first  Nature, 
and  thus  produces  bodies  from  intellect  and  necessity.  For  bodies 
receive'  from  intellect  indeed,  good  and  union;  but  from  necessity  a 
progression  which  terminates  in  interval  and  division.  He  arranges  and 
adorns,  however,  tlie  self-motive  essence  of  souls,  in  coitjunction  with  the 
Crater.  And  neither  intellect,  nor  bodies,  roquire  a  cause  of  this  kind. 
The  demiurgus  indeed  is  the  common  source  of  the  trij^  genera.  But 
the  Crater  is  the  peculiar  cause  of  souls,  and  is  co^arraoged  with  the  de«- 
miurgus  and  filled  from  him,  but  fills  souls.  And  receiving  from  thence 
indeed  the  powers  of  prolific  abundance,  it  pours  them  on  souls  according 
to  the  measures  of  their  respective  essences.  To  some  of  them  likewise  it 
orderly  distributes  the  summits  of  the  genera  \j}{  being],  to  others  the 
middle  progressions  of  the  genera,  and  to  others,  the  terminations  of 
them.  Hence  the  Crater  is  indeed  essentially  vivific,  since  souls  also  are 
certain  lives,  but  it  is  the  first-effective  cause  of  souls,  according  to  the 
peculiarity  of  hyparxis,  and  is  the  uniform  and  all-perfect  monad,  not 
of  every  life,  but  of  that  which  is  psychical.  For  from  this  Crater  the 
soul  of  the  universe  subsists,  and  likewise  the  second  and  third  genera  of 
partible  souls,  and  of  those  souls  that  are  allotted  a  progression  between 
these. 

The  whole  number,  therefore,  of  the  psychical  order  proceeds  from  the 
Crater,  and  is  divided  according  to  the  prolific  powers  which  it  contains. 
Hence  the  Crater  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  souls,  the  receptacle  of  their 
fabrication,  and  the  generative  monad  of  them,  and  the  like.  For  it  is 
said  to  be  so  rightly,  and  conformably  to  the  mind  of  Plato.  If,  how- 
ever, the  Crater  is  co-arranged  with  the  demiurgus,  and  equally  consti- 
tutes with  him  the  genera  of  souls,  it  is  indeed  necessary  that  this  Crater 
should  be  fontal,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  whole  demiurgus.     Hence 

*  For  iixPis^ei,  it  is  neoe8«ary  to  read  i$x/i^wou 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP-  XXXf.  OF  PLATO,  399 

tiie  Crater  is  tbe  feun taint  ofaoda,  but  it  uaited  ta  the  demiurgic  moaad. 
And  on  this  account^  Socrates  also  in  the  Phikbug  aays,  that  in  Jiipiter 
there  is  a  royal  soul,  and  a  royal  intellect  For  that  which  we  at  present 
denominate  fontal,  he  calls  royal;  though  tlie  name  of  fountain  when 
applied  to  souls  is  well  known  to  Vinto.  For  Socrates,  in  the  Ph»drus, 
fflys,  that  the  self-motive  nature  is  the  fbuntain  and  principle  of  motioi^ 
to  such  other  things  as  are  moved. 

And  you  see  that  as  a  twofold  divine  monad  prbr  to  souls  is  delivered 
by  tfaeologists,  the  one  being  indeed  fontal,  but  the  other  of  a  primary 
ruling  nature,  Plato  likewise  gives  to  the  progeny  of  these  twoftJd 
appellations,  assuming  one  name  irom  the  more  tbtal>  but  the  other  fronv 
the  more  partial  monad.  For  the  self-motive  nature,  is  a  fountain  indeed, 
as  being  the  offspring  of  the  fontal  soul,  but  it  is  a  principle,  as  participa-^ 
ting  of  the  primary  ruling  soul.  If  therefore,  the  name  of  fountain^  and 
abo  of  principle  is  assigned  by  Plato  to  souls,  what  occasion  is  there  ta 
wonder  if  we  denominate  the  exempt  monads  of  them,  fountains  and 
principles?  Or  rather  from  these  things  that  is  demonstrated.  For 
whence  is  a  ruling  power  imparted  to  all  souls  except  'from  the  ruling 
monad?  For  that  which  similarly  extends  to  all  souls,  is  necessarily 
imparted  to  them  from  one  and  the  same  cause.  If  therefore,  some  one 
should  say  it  is  imparted  by  the  demiurgus,  so  far  as  he  is  the  demiurgus,. 
it  is  necessary  that  in  a  similar  manner  it  should  be  inherent  in  all  other 
things  which  proceed  from  the  demiurgic  monad.  But  if  it  proceeds^ 
from  the  definite  and  separate  cause  of  souls,  that  cause  must  be 
denominated  the  first  fbuntain  and  principle  of  them. 

Moreover,  that  of  these  two  names,  the  ruling  is  more  allied  to  souls 
than  the  fontal^  as  being  nearer  to  them  according  to  order,  Plato* 
manifests  in  the  same  dialogue.  For  calling  the  self-motive  nature  the 
fountain  and  at  the  same  time  principle  of  the  motion  of  the  whole  of 
things,  he  nevertheless  frames  his  demonstration  of  its  unbegottea 
subsistence  from  principle  alone.  For,  says  he,  principle  is  unbegotteu.. 
For  it  is  necessary  that  every  thing  which  is  generated  should  be 
generated  from  a  principle.  If  therefore,  demonstrations  are  from  things 
proximate  to  the  things  demonstrated,  it  is  necessary  that  principle 


Digitized  by 


Google 


400  ON  THE  THEOIX)GY  BOOK  V. 

should  be  more  proximate  to  souls  than  fountain.  Farther  still,  if  every 
thing  which  is  generated  is  generated  from  a  principle,  as  Plato  says,  but 
souls  are  in  a  certain  respect  generated,  as  Timseus  says,  there  is  also  a 
precedaneous  principle  of  souls.  And  as  they  are  the  principles  of 
things  which  are  generated  according  to  time,  so  after  another  manner 
principle  subsists  prior  to  souls,  which  are  generated.  And  as  they  are 
unbegotten  according  to  the  generation  of  bodies,  thus  also  the  principle 
of  souls  is  exempt  from  all  generation.  Through  these  things  thereforCf  it 
is  demonstrated  by  us,  that  the  Crater  is  the  fountain  of  souls,  that  after  the 
fountain  there  is  a  primary  ruling  monad  of  them,  and  that  this  monad 
is  more  proximate  to  souls  than  the  fountain,  but  is  established  above 
them,  as  being  their  prolific  cause.  And  all  these  particulars  we  have 
demonstrated  from  the  words  of  Plato. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 


Again  therefore,  let  us  return  to  the  things  proposed,  and  teach  in  a 
greater  degree  the  lovers  of  the  contemplation  of  truth,  concerning  this 
Crater.  For  the  whole  vivific  deity  having  established  in  the  middle  of 
the  intellectual  kings  the  prolific  cause  of  divine  natures,  and  according 
to  her  highest,  most  intellectual  and  all'-perfect  powers,  being  occultly 
united  to  the  first  father,  but  according  to  more  partial  and  secondary 
causes  from  them»  being  conjoined  to  the  demiurgus,  and  establishing 
one  conspiration  together  with  him  of  the  generation  of  the  partial  orders, 
Timseus  mystically  mentions  those  more  ancient  powers  of  the  Goddess, 
and  which  abide  in  the  first  father.  But  with  respect  to  those  powers 
that  are  co-arranged  with  the  demiurgus,  and  adorn  together  with  him 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXIJ.  OP  PLATO.  401 

the  natures  in  the  universe,  some  of  these  he  delivers  more  clearly  but 
the  whole  of  others  through  indication.  For  the  secondary  monads 
themselves  of  the  Goddess  are  triple,  as  the  wise  assert,  one  of  them 
being  the  fountain  of  souls,  the  second,  being  the  fountain  of  the  virtues, 
but  the  third  being  the  fountain  of  Nature  which  is  suspended  from  the 
back  of  the  Goddess.  The  demiurgus  therefore,  also  assumes  tibese  Uiree 
hypostases  to  his  own  prolific  production.  And  the  Crater  indeed,  as 
we  have  said,  is  the  fountain  of  souls,  unically  containing  the  whole  and 
perfect  number  of  them/  And  as  the  demiurgus  is  allotted  a  paternal 
cause  with  respect  to  the  psychical  generation,  so  the  Crater  is  prolific, 
and  is  allotted  the  ratio  and  order  of  a  mother*  For  such  things  as 
Jupiter  produces  paternally  in  souls,  the  fountain  of  souls  produces 
maternally  and  generatively. 

Virtue  however,  energizes  by  itself,  and  adorns  and  perfects  wholes. 
And  on  this  account,  the  universe  having  participated  of  soul,  imroedi-* 
atdy  also  participates  of  virtue.  ^^  For  the  demiurgus,  says  Timaeus, 
having  placed  soul  in  the  middle,  extended  it  through  the  universe,  and 
besides  this  surrounded  the  body  of  it  externally  with  soul  as  with  a  veil, 
and  causing  circle  to  revolve  in  circle,  constituted  heaven  one,  alone  and 
solitary,  but  through  virtue  able  to  converse  with  itself,  and  being  in  want 
of  no  other  thing,  but  sufficiently  known  and  friendly  itself  to  itself.'*  At 
one  and  the  same  time  therefore  the  world  is  animated,  lives  through  the 
whole  of  its  life  according  to  virtue,  and  possesses  firom  the  virtues  as  its 
highest  end,  friendship  with  itself,  and  an  all-perfect  knowledge  of  itself. 
For  it  is  itself  sufficiently  known  and  friendly  to  itself  through  virtue. 

Moreover,  nature  also  is  consubsistent  with  the  generation  of  body. 
For  the  demiurgus  generates  body  through  necessity,  and  fashions  it 
together  with  its  proper  life.  And  on  this  account,  shortly  after,  having 
constituted  partial  souls,  he  shows  to  them  the  nature  of  the  universe, 
and  the  laws  of  Fate.  For  in  consequence  of  possessing  the  cause  of 
total  Nature  and  Fate,  he  also  exhibits  these  to  souls.  For  the 
demiurgus  is  not  converted  to  things  posterior  to  himself,  but  primarily 

'  For  oanov,  it  h  necessary  to  read  aorwv. 
Proc.  Vol,  I.  3  E 


Digitized  by 


Google 


403  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

contains  in  himself  the  things  whicli  are  exhibited,  and  unfolds  to  sonls 
the  powers  of  himself.  Hence,  the  paradigm  of  all  Nature,  and  the  one 
cause  of  the  laws  of  Fate  pre-subsist  in  him.  For  the  fountain  of 
Nature,  is  called  the  first  Fate  by  the  Gods  themselves.  "You  should 
not  look  upon  Nature,  for  the  name  of  it  is  fatal.''  Hence  also,  Timaeus 
says,  that  souls  at  one  and  the  same  time  see  the  laws  of  Fate,  and  the 
nature  of  the  universe,  viz.  they  see  as  it  were  mundane  Fate,  and  the 
powers  of  it.  And  the  Elean  guest  in  the  Politicus,  denominates  the 
motive  cause  of  the  more  physical  circulation  of  the  universe.  Fate, 
For  he  says  that  "Fate  and  connate  desire  convolve  the  world."  And 
the  same  person  likewise  clearly  acknowledges  that  the  world  possesses 
this  power  from  the  demiurgus  and  father*  For  he  says  that  all  th^ 
apparent  arrangement  and  circulation  are  derived  from  Jupiter.  It  is 
demonstrated  therefore,  that  according  to  these  three  causes  of  the  vivific 
Goddess  which  are  co-arranged  with  the  demiurgus,  the  world  is  perfec- 
ted by  him,  viz.  according  to  the  fontal  Crater,  the  fountain  of  the 
virtues,  and  the  first*efFective  cause  of  nature. 

It  is  likewise  manifest  that  again  in  these  things  Plato  does  not  refuse 
to  employ  the  name  of  fountain.  Fpr  in  the  Laws  he  calls  the  power 
of  prudence  which  is  essentially  inherent  in  souls,  and  which  is  productive 
of  the  virtues  in  us,  the  fountain  of  intelligence.  And  he  also  says,  that 
two  other  fountains  are  imparted  to  us  by  nature,  viz.  pleasure  and  pain. 
As,  therefore,  we  before  demonstrated  that  souls  are  called  the  fountains 
of  motions,  on  account  of  the  one  fountain  of  them,  of  which  they 
participate,  thus  also  when  Plato  calls  the  first  progeny  of  Nature 
fountains,  it  is  obvious  to  every  one,  that  he  will  permit  the  exempt 
cause  itself  of  them  to  be  denominated  a  fountain.  After  the  same 
manner,  likewise,  since  he  magnificently  celebrates  the  essential  power 
of  virtue  in  us,  as  the  fountain  of  intelligence,  he  will  not  be  compelled 
to  hear  a  name  which  does  not  at  all  pertain  to  his  philosophy,  if  some 
one  should  be  willing  to  denominate,  the  first  monad  of  the  virtues,  a 
fountain.  But  where  shall  we  have  the  name  of  fountain  posited  by  him 
in  the  intellectual  Gods.'^  In  the  Cratylus,  therefore,  he  says  that  Tethys 
is  the  occult  name  of  a  fountain,  ^nd  he  calls  Saturn  himself  and  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXIII.  OF  PLATO.  403 

queen  Rhea  fluxions.  For  these  divinities  are  rivers  of  the  intelligible 
fountains,  and  proceeding  from  fountains  placed  above  them,  they  fill 
all  the  natures,  posterior  to  themselves  with  the  prolific  rivers  of  life. 
And  the  Crater  itself  likewise  is  fontal.  The  Gods,  therefore,  also 
denominate  the  firsiUeflective  causes  of  partial  natures,  fontal  Craters. 
These  things,  however,  we  shall  more  fully  investigate  elsewhere.  Let 
it  be  considered  also,  that  we  have  here  sufficiently  examined  the 
particulars  concerning  the  demiurgic  monadj  according  to  the  narration 
of  Plato. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 


In  the  next  place,  let  us  survey  those  causes  and  leaders  of  uncon- 
taminated  purity,  and  see  if  Plato  any  where  appears  to  remind  us  of 
this  order  of  Gods,  and  of  the  inflexible  power  proceeding  from  them  to 
all  the  divine  genera.  For  the.  first-efiective  triad  of  the  immutable 
order,  is  united  to  the  triad  of  the  intellectual  kings  and  the  progressions 
of  the  former  are  co-divided  with  the  monads  of  the  latter.  And  the 
summit  of  the  triad,  and  as  it  were,  the  flower  of  the  inflexible  guard  of 
wholes  is  united  to  the  first  intellectual  king.  But  the  middle  centre  of 
the  triad,  is  in  a  kindred  manner  conjoined  to  the  second  intellectual 
king,  proceeds  together  with  him,  and  subsists  about  him.  And  the 
extremity"  of  the,  whole  triad  is  connected  with  the  third  intellectual 
king,  is  converted  with  him  to  the  principle  [of  the  intellectual  order,] 
and  together  with  him  is  convolved  to  the  one  union  of  the  "father  of  all 
the   intellectual  Gods.      And  after    this    manner,    indeed,  the    three 

*  TO  t0;p^«eroy  16  omitted  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


404  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

unpolluted  guardians  of  the  intellectual  fathers,  are  mooadicallj  divided* 
But  together  with  this  division  they  have  also  an  hypostasis  united  to 
each  other.  All  of  them,  likewise,  are  in  a  certain  respect  in  each  of 
.the  fatherst  and  all  of  them  energize  about  all.  And  after  a  certain 
manner  indeed  according  to  their  proper  hypostasis,  they  are  divided 
from  the  fathers ;  but  after  another  manner  they  are  impartibly  assumed 
with  them,  and  at  one  and  the  same  time  they  are  allotted  an  equally*- 
dignified  or^er  with  the  fathers,  and  appear  to  posses^  an  essence 
subordinate  to  them. 

Such,  therefore,  being  their  nature,  they  preserve,  indeed,  the  whole 
progressions  of  the  fathers  undefiled,  but  supply  them  with  inflexibility 
in  their  powers,  and  immutability  in  their  energies.  They  are  suspended, 
however,  from  total  purity.  And  if  some  of  the  ancients  have  in  any 
of  their  writings  surveyed  in  intellect  that  which  always  subsists  with 
invariable  sameness,  which  receives  nothing  into  itself  from  subordinate 
matures,  and  is  not  mingled  with  things .  inferior,  they  celebrate  all  such 
goods  as  these,  as  pervading  to  intellect,  and  other  natures,  from  these 
Gods.  For  the  oration  in  the  Banquet  of  Plato,  celebrates  in  a  remark- 
able manner  the  immiscibility  of  the  divine  essence  with  secondftry 
natures ;  and  that  which  transcends  the  whole  of  things  in  purity  and 
immutable  power,  arrives  to  the  Gods  through  the  guardian  cause.  And 
as  the  intellectual  fathers,  are  the  suppliers  of  proli6c  production,  both 
to  all  other  things,  and  to  the  inflexible  Gods,  thus  also,  the  undefiled 
Gods,  impart  the  power  of  purity,  both  to  the  fathers,  and  to  the  other 
divine  orders.  At  one  and  the  same  time,  therefore,  the  three  unpolluted 
Gods  subsist  with  the  three  intellectual  kings,  are  the  guardians  of  the 
fathers  themselves,  establish  about  them  an  immutable  guard,  and 
firmly  fix  themselves  in  them.  Hence  also,  the  Athenian  guests  as  he 
arranges  and  adorns  his  polity  through  the  best  analogy,  through  which, 
the  demiurgus  binds  and  constitutes  the  whole  number  []of  the  elements,] 
so  likewise  h$  appoints  a  guard  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  region^  that 
nothing,  as  much  as  possible,  may  be  without  defence  i  imitating  in  this 
the  intellectual  Gods  themselves  who  guard  all  things  by  the  undefiled 
leader^.    And  it  appears  to  me  that  on  this  account  he  calls  the  rulers 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  OF  PLATO.  405 

[of  his  polity]  guardians  of  the  laws,  or  [simply]  guardians,  because  the 
ii^xible  guardians  orp  consuhsistent  with  the  intellectual  leaders  of  the 
whde  worids. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


These  argumehts^  however,  will  be  more  remote  from  that  divine 
triad,  and  are  referred  to  it  from  ultimate  images.  But  perhaps 
omitting  these,  we  may  abound  with  greater  conceptions,  and  more 
conducive  to  the  investigation  of  the  thing  proposed,  and  speculating 
together  with  Plato  the  divine  genera,  we  may  discover  how  he  also 
cdebrates  this  order  of  Gods,  and  constitutes  them  together  with  the 
three  kings  that  are  now  discussed,  just  as  by  other  theologists  also,  we 
are  mystically  instructed  in  the  truth  concerning  them.  In  the  fable 
therefore  of  Protagoras,  Plato  indicating  to  us  the  exraapt  watch-tower 
of  Jupiter,  and  the  transcendency^of  his  essence  which  is  unmingled  with 
all  secondary  natures,  through  which  he  is  inaccessible  and  unrevealed 
to  the  partible  genera  of  Gods,  refers  the  f  ause  of  this  to  his  ^  immutable 
guard,  and  the  defensive  order  by  which  he  *  is  surrounded.  For  od 
account  of  this,  all  the  demiurgic  powers  indeed  are  firmly  established  in 
themselves.  But  all  the  forms  [that  are  in  him]  are  according  to  supreme 
tramscendency  exempt  from  secondary  natures.  And  in  short,  the 
demiurgic  intellect  [through  this  order]  abides  after  its  accustomed 
manner.  For  the  fable  says  that  the  guards  of  Jupiter  are  terrible  to 
all  things*    And  on  this  account  such  [partible]  genera  of  Gods  (one  of 

■  For  cunow,  h  is  necessarj  to  read  mmv. 
*  The  same  mumhdonU  ktre  ibe  mamaarf,  u  abote. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


406  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

whkh  also  Prometheus  is)  cannot  be  immediately  conjoined  with  the 
imdefiled  and  Olympian  powers  of  the  demiurgus.  If,  therefore^  Socrates 
himself  in  the  form  of  a  fable  clearly  delivers  to  us  the  guard  about  the 
demiurgus,  is  it  not  through  these  things  evident  that  the  guardian 
genus  is  consubsistent  with  the  intellectual  Gods  ?  For  as  the  Oracles 
say,  that  the  demiurgio  order  is  surrounded  with  a  burning  guard,  thus 
also  Plato  says  that  guards  stand  round  it,  and  defend  inflexibly  the 
summit  of  it  exempt  from  all  secondary  natures. 

But  in  the  Cratylus,  Socrates  unfolding  through  the  truth  which  is 
expressed  in  names,  who  Saturn  is,  demonstrates  indeed  his '  peculiar 
hyparxis,  according  to  which  he  subsists  as  the  leader  of  the  total  intel- 
lectual orders.  He  likewise  unfolds  to  us  the  monad  of  the  unpoUuted 
order,  which  is  united  with  Saturn.  For  Saturn,  as  he  says  in  that 
dialogue,  is  a  pure  intellect.  For,  he  adds,  the  karon  (ro  ato^oy)  of  him, 
does  not  signify  his  being  a  boy,  but  the  purity,  and  incorruptible  nature 
of  intellect.  After  an  admirable  manner  therefore,  the  fabricator  of  these 
divine  names,  has  at  one  and  the  same  time  conjoined  the  Saturnian 
peculiarity,  and  the  first  monad  of  the  unpolluted  triad.  For  the  union 
of  the  first  father  with  the  first  of  the  unpolluted  Gods,  is  transcendent, 
and  hence  this  inflexible  God  is  called  silent  by  the  Gods,  is  said  to  accord 
with  intellect,  and  to  be  known  by  souls  according  to  intellect  alone ; 
because  he  subsists  in  the  first  intellect  according  to  one  union  with  it. 
Saturn  therefore,  as  being  the  first  intellect,  is  defined  according  to  its 
proper  order,  but  as  a  pure  and  incorruptible  intellect,  he  has  the  unde- 
filed  conjoined  in  himself.  And  on  this  account,  he  is  the  king  of  all  the 
intellectual  Gods.  For  as  intellect  he  gives  subsistence  to  all  the 
intellectual  Gods,  and  as  a  pure  intellect,  he  guards  the  total  orders  of 
them.  The  two  fathers  therefore,  [Saturn  and  Jupiter]  are  shown  by  the 
words  of  Plato  to  be  co^rranged  with  the  immutable  Gods,  according  to 
union  indeed,  the  first,  but  according  to  separation  the  third. 

If  you  are  willing  however,  to  survey  the  one  inflexible  guard  of  them 
with  respect  to  each  other,  according  to  which  the  third  father  is  stably 

'  For  «Kmi(,  it  is  feqoiaite  to  retd  mn$u,   - 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  .OF  PLATO.  407 

ID  the  first,  as  being  the  intellect  of  him,  and  energizing  about  him,  again 
direct  your  attention  to  the  bonds  in  the  Cratylus,  of  which  indeed, 
partible  lives,  and  the  lives  deprived  of  intellect,  and  which  are  stupidly 
astonished  about  matter,  are  unable  to  participate.  But  a  divine  intel- 
lect itself,  and  the  souls  which  are  conjoined  to  it,  participate  of  these 
bonds  according  to  an  order  adapted  to  them.  For  the  Satumian  bonds, 
appear  indeed  to  bind  the  mighty  Saturn  himself,  but  in  reality,  they 
connect  about  him  in  an  undefiled  nianner  the  natures  that  throw  the 
bonds  around  him.  For  a  bond  is  the  symbol  of  the  connective  order  of 
the  Gods,  since  every  thing  which  is  bound  is  connected  by  a  bond. 
Again  therefore  from  these  things,  the  guardian  good  which  extends  from 
the  connective  Gods  to  the  intellectual  kings  is  apparent,  since  it  unites, 
and  collects  them  into  one.  Folr  a  bond  guards  that  which  is  connected 
by  it.  But  the  immutable  Gods  inflexibly  preserve  their  own  appropri- 
ate orders.  For  the  guardship  of  these  Gods  is  twofold;  the  one  indeed, 
being  primary  and  uniform,  and  suspended  from  the  triad  of  the 
connective  Gods;  but  the  other  being  co-existent  with  the  intellectual 
kings,  and  defending  them  from  a  tendency  to  all  secondary  natures. 
For  all  the  intellectual  fathers  ride  on  the  unpolluted  Gods,  and  are 
established  above  wholes,  through  their  inflexible,  undeviating,  and 
immutable  power. 

If  however,  it  be  not  only  necessary  that  these  two  fathers  should 
participate  of  this  guardian  order,  but  that  the  middle  vivific  deity  of 
them  should  be  allotted  a  monad  of  the  immutable  Gods  coordinate  to 
herself,  it  is  indeed  necessary  that  the  first  [guardianship]  of  the  unpol- 
luted leaders  in  the  intellectual  fathers,  should  be  triadic,  and  should  have 
the  same  perfect  number  with  the  three  intellectual  Gods.  It  is  likewise 
necessary  that  the  first  of  these  leaders  should  be  stably  united  to  the 
first  [of  the  intellectual  kings] ;  but  that  the  second  should  in  a  certain 
respect  be  separated  from  the  second  of  these  kings,  together  with  a 
union  with  him.  And  that  the  third  shotild  now  be  entirely  separated 
from  the  third  king.  And  thus  the  unpolluted  proceeds  conformably  to 
the  paternal  order,  and  is  .after  the  same  manner  with  it  triadically 
divided.    The  first  of  the  unpolluted  Gods  likewise  guards  the  occtrit 


Digitized  by 


Google 


408  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

nature  of  Saturn,  and  the  first^fiective  monad  which  transcends  wholes, 
and  establishes  perfectly  in  him  the  causes  that  proceed  from,  and  again 
return  to  him.  But  the  second,  preserves  the  generative  power  of  the 
queen  Rhea,  pure  from  matter,  and  undefiled,  and  sustains  from  the 
incursions  of  secondary  natures  her  progression  to  all  things,  on  which 
die  pours  the  rivers  of  life.  And  the  third  preserves  the  whole  fabrica- 
tiim  of  things  established  above  the  fabrications,  and  firmly  abiding  in 
itself.  It  likewise  guards  it  so  as  to  be  inflexible,  one,  and  all*perfect 
with  respect  to  the  subjects  of  its  providential  case,  and  expuided  above 
all  partial  production. 


CHAPTER  XXXV, 


L£T  US  now  then  from  this  indefinite  and  common  doctrine  about 
tiiese  Gods,  adduce  the  Grecian  rumour  concerning  it,  as  delivered  to  us 
by  Plato,  and  demonstrate  that  he  as  far  as  to  the  very  names  follows 
the  th»>logists  of  the  Greeks,  just  as  in  the  mystic  theory  of  the  three 
kings,  and  the  narration  of  the  unpolluted  Gods,  he  does  not  depart  from 
their  interpretation.  For  who  that  is  in  the  smallest  degree  acquainted 
with  the  divine  wisdom  of  the  Greeks,  does  not  know  that  in  their  arcane 
.  mysteries,  and  other  concerns  respecting  the  Gods,  the  order  of  the 
Curetes,  is  in  a  remarkable  manner  celebrated  by  them,  as  presiding 
over  the  undefiled  peculiarity,  as  the  leader  of  the  goddess  [[Rhea,]  and 
as  binding  in  itself  the  guardianship  of  wholes  ?  These  Gods  therefore, 
are  said  to  guard  the  queen  Rhea,  and  the  demiurgus  of  wholes,  and 
proceeding  as  far  as  to  the  causes  of  partible  vivification  and  fabrication, 
to  preserve  the  Proserpiqe  and  Bacchus  which  are  among  these  causes,' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAR  XXXV.  OP  PLATK).  409 

exempt  from  secondary  natures,  just  as  here  [i.e.  in  the  intellectual  order], 
thej  defend  the  vivifications  of  total  life^  and  the  first-eflfective  monads  of 
All-perfect  fabrication.  Not  only  Orpheus  therefore,  and  the  theologists 
prior  to  Plato  knew  this  Curetic  order,  and  knowing,  venerated  it,  but 
the  Athenian  guest  also  in  the  Laws  celebrates  it  For  he  says,  that  the 
armed  sports  of  the  Curetes  in  Crete,  are  the  principal  paradigms  of  all 
elegant  motion.  And  now,  neither  is  he  satisfied  with  having  mentioned 
this  Curetic  order,  but  he  also  adds  the  one  unity  of  the  Curetes,  viz.  our 
misti'ess^  Minerva,  from  which  the  mystic  doctrine  also  of  theologists 
prior  to  him,  suspends  the  whole  progression  of  the  Curetes.  He  like- 
wise, surrounds  them  above  with  the  symbols  of  Minerva,  as  presiding 
over  an  ever-flourishing  life,  and  vigorous  intellection ;  but  beneath,  he 
manifestly  arranges  them  under  the  providence  of  Minerva.  For  the 
first  Curetes  indeed,  as  being  the  attendants  of  the  intelligible  and  occult 
Goddess,  are  satisfied  with  the  signs  that  proceed  from  thence ;  but  those 
in  the  second  and  third  orders,  are  suspended  from  the  intellectual 
Minerval  monad. 

What  then  is  it,  that  the  Athenian  guest  says  concerning  this  monad, 
which  converts  to  itself  in  an  undd&Ied  manner  the  Curetic  progressions  ? 
"  The  core  {^^^)  i.e.  virgin,  and  mistress  that  is  with  us,  being  delighted 
with  the  discipline  of  dancing,  did  not  think  it  proper  to  play  with  empty 
hands;  but  being  adorned  with  an  all-perfect  panoply,  she  thus  gave 
perfection  to  dancing.'^  Through  these  things  therefore,  the  Athenian 
guest  clearly  shows  the  alliance  of  the  Curetic  triad  to  th&  Minerval 
monad.  For  as  that  triad  is  said  to  sport  in  armour,  so  he  says  that  the 
Goddess  who  is  the  leader  of  them  [i.e.  of  their  progression]  being 
adorned  with  an  all-perfect  panoply^  is  the  source  to  them  of  elegant 
niotion.  And  as  he  denominates  that  triad  Curetic,  from  purity,  so  like- 
wise he  calls  this  goddess  Core,  as  being  the  cause  of  undefiled  power 
itself.  For  koron  (to  xogov)  as  Socrates '  says  in  the  Cratylus,  signifies  the 
pure  and  incorruptible.  Whence  also  the  Curetes  are  allotted  their 
appellation,  as  presiding  over  the  undefiled  purity  of  the  Gods.    And 

'  Kgavfii  i$  enroneously  printed  in  the  original  for  S^Kgartig. 

Proc.  Vol.  I.  3  F 


Digitized  by 


Google 


410  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

the  mociacl  of  tkein  b  particularly  celebrated  as  a  mistress  and  as  Core 
[a  virgin}  she  being  the  supplier  of  an  inflexible  and  flourishing  donoinion 
to  the  Godsu  I'he  word  koron  therefore,  as  we  have  said,  is  a  symbol  of 
purity,  of  which  these  Gods  are  the  primary  leaders,  and  according  to 
which'  they  are  participated  by  others.  But  their  being  armed,  is  a 
symbol  of  the  guardian  power  according  to  which  they  connect  wholes, 
guard  them  exempt  from  secondary  natures,  and  preserve  them  estab* 
Ushed  in  themselves.  For  what  olher  benefit  do  no^i  derive  from  arms 
except  that  of  defence?  For  these  are  in  ^  particular  manner  the  safe- 
guard of  cities.  Hence  fables  also  ascribi&g  to  the  unpolluted  Grods  an 
uncooquerable  strength,  give  to  them  an  armed  apparatus.  Hence 
adoroing  the  one  unity  of  them  with  an  all-perfect  panoply,  they  estab* 
lish  it  at  the  summit  of  the  progression  of  these  Gods.  For  the  all-perfect 
precedes  things  which  are  divided  accot-ding  to  parts,  and  the  panoply 
exists  prior  to  the  partible  distribution  of  guardian  powers.  And  it 
appears  to  me  that  through  these  partictilars  Plato  again  asserts  the  same 
things  as  were  afterwards  revealed  by  the  Gods.  For  what  they  denomi- 
nate esoery  kind  ef  armour^  this  Plato  celebrates  as  adorned  with  an 
all^petfect  fanopiy^  [For  the  Gods  say,]  **  Armed  with  every  kind  of 
annoor,  he  resen^bl^  the  Goddess."  For  the  all-perfect  in  the  habit  of 
Pyrrhich  arms,  and  the  undefiled  in  power,  pertain,  according  to  Plato^ 
to  the  Minerval  monad ;  but  according  to  the  narration  of  the  Orucles 
they  pertain  to  that  which  is  furnished  with  every  kind  of  arms. 

Father  still,  rythm  and  dancing  are  a  mystic  sign  of  this  deity,  because 
the  Curetes  contain^  the  und«^led  pawer  of  a  divine  life ;  because  they 
preserve  the  whole  progressions  of  it  always  arranged  according  to  one 
divine  boundary ;  and  because  they  sustain  these  progressions  from  the 
incursions  of  matter.  For  the  formless,  the  indefinite,  and  the  privation 
of  rythm,  are  the  peculiarities  of  matter.  Hence,  the  immaterial,  the 
ddinite,  and  the  undefiled,  are  endued  with  rythm,  are  orderly,  and 
intellectual.  For  on  this  account,  the  heavens  also  are  said  to  form  a 
perpetual  dance,  and  all  the  celestial  orbs  participate  of  rythmical  and 

'  For  xat^  ty  it  i$  necessary  to  read  xof*  i)n 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXVl.  OF  l^LATO.  411 

harmonious  motioii^  being  filled  with  this  (>ower  supemally  from  the 
unpolluted  Gods.  For  because  they  are  moved  in  a  circle  they  express 
intellect,  and  the  intellectual  circulation.  But  because  they  are  moved 
harmonically,  and  according  to  the  first  and  best  rythms,  they  participate 
of  the  peculiarity  of  the  guardian  Gods.  Moreover,  the  triad  of  the 
unpolluted  leaders  is  suspended  from  the  summit  of  the  intellectual 
Gods.  And  that  it  proceeds  from  this  summit,  Plato  himself  teaches  us, 
by  placing  the  first  cause  of  purity  in  Saturn  the  king  of  all  the  ititfellet- 
tual  hebdomad.  For  putiti/  {t^  Hofw)  is  there  primarily,  as  he  informs  us 
in  the  Cratylus,  and  the  first^eflfective  cause  bf  purity,  preexists  unically 
in  Saturn.  For  on  this  account  also,  the  Minerval  monad,  is  called  C^e 
(a  virgin)  and  the  Ctoretic  triad  is  after  this  manner  celebrated,  being 
suspended  from  the  purity  in  the  intellectual  father. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 


CoNCEaNiNG  the  undefiled  leaders,  thus  much  we  have  had  to  say, 
according  to  the  narration  of  Plato.  The  monad  therefoi^,  now  remains^ 
which  closes  the  number  of  all  the  intellectual  hebdomad,  and  is  the  first 
and  uniform  cause  of  all  division,  which  must  in  the  next  place  be 
discussed  by  us.  The  sections  therefore,  of  the  intellectual  Gods  which 
are  celebrated  by  all  the  wise  in  divine  concerns  aniOBg  the  Greeks,  and 
which  obscurely  signify  the  separations  in  those  Gods,  are  efiected  in 
them  through  the  seventh  monad,  which  is  the  cause  of  division,  and 
according  to  which  they  separate  themselves  from  the  Gods  tbttt  a^e 
placed  above  them,  proceeding  into  another  order,  are  allotted  a  unioa 
exempt  from  subordinate  natures,  and  by  themselves  have  &  d^nite 


Digitized  by 


Google 


412  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

orderj  and  a  progression  bounded  according  to  number.  Plato  however^ 
allows  indeed  poets  that  are  inspired  by  Phcebus,  to  signify  things  of  this, 
kind  obscurely  and  mystically;  but  he  excludes  the  multitude  from 
hearing  these  things,  because  they  believe  without  examination  in  the 
fabulous  veils  of  truth.  And  this  is  what  Socrates  reprobates  in  Euthy* 
phron,  who  was  thus  affected  in  consequence  of  being  ignorant  of  divine 
concerns.  According  to  the  divinely-inspired  intellect  of  Plato  therefore, 
transferring  all  such  particulars  to  the  truth  concerning  wholes,  and 
unfolding  the  concealed  theory  which  they  contain,  we  shall  procure 
for  ourselves  the  genuine  worship  of  a  divine  nature.  For  Socrates 
himself  in  the  Cratylus,  unfolds  to  us  the  Saturnian  bonds,  and  their 
mystic  meaning,  and  in  a  remarkable  manner  demonstrates  that  the 
visions  of  those  ancient  and  illustrious  men  do  not  fall  off  from  the 
truth. 

After  the  same  manner  therefore,  he  will  permit  his  friends  to  assume 
intellectual  sections,  and  the  power  which  is  productive  of  these,  accord* 
ing  to  divinely-inspired  conceptions,  and  will  suffer  them  to  survey  these 
together  with  bonds  in  the  intellectual  Gods.  Farther  still,  the  fable  in 
the  Gorgias,  in  a  clearer  manner  separates  the  empire  of  Jupiter  from 
the  Saturnian  kingdom,  and  calls  the  former  the  second  from,  and  more 
recent  than  the  latter.  What  is  the  cause,  therefore,  which  separates 
these  paternal  monads?  What  intellectual  power  produced  the  intel- 
lectual empire  from  that  which  is  exempt  from  it  ?  For  it  is  necessary 
that  there  should  be  with  the  Gods  themselves  the  first-effective  fountain 
of  division,  through  which  Jupiter  also  separates  himself  from  the  monad 
his  father,  Saturn  from  the  kingdom  of  the  Heaven,  and  the  natures 
posterior  to  Jupiter,  proceeding  into  an  inferior  order,  are  separated 
from  his  all-perfect  monad. 

Moreover,  the  deAiiurgus  himself  ip  the  production  of  the  genera 
posterior  to  himself,  at  one  and  the  same  time  is  the  cause  to  them  pf 
union,  and  the  source  of  their  all-various  divisions.  For  fabricating  the 
soul  one  whole,  he  separates  it  into  parts,  and  all- various  powers.  And 
in  the  Timaeus  where  the  demiurgus  is  said  to  do  this,  Plato  himself 
does  not  refuse  to  call  these  separationsi  and  essential  divisions^  sections. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXVII.  OP  PLATO. 


413 


He  likewise  cuts  off  parts  from  thence,  places  them  in  that  which  is 
between  these,  and  again  separates  parts  from  the  whole,  and  thus  the 
mixture  from  which  he  had  cut  off  these  parts,  was  now  wholly  con- 
sumed. Is  it  therefore  any  longer  \ronderful  that  the  framers  of  fables 
should  denominate  the  divisions  of  the  intellectual  leaders,  sections,  since 
even  Tiraa&us  himself  who  does  not  devise  fables,  but  indicates  the 
essential  progression  of  souls  into  multitude,  uses  as  a  sign  the  word 
section  ?  And  does  not  also  Plato  in  the  greatest  degree  accord  with  the 
highest  of  theologists,  when  he  delivers  to  us  the  demiurgus  glittering 
with  intellectual  sections  ?  As  therefore  the  demiurgus,  when  producing 
the  essence  of  souls,  constitutes  it  according  to  true  being,  when  gene* 
rating  life,  be  generates  it  according  to  the  life  which  is  in  real  being^, 
and  {>roduces  the  intellect  which  is  in  souls  according  to  the  intellect 
which  is  in  himself, — thus  also  when  cutting  the  essence  of  the  soul  from 
itself,  and  separating  it,  be  energises  according  to  the  sections  and 
separations  which  are  in  the  intellectual  order,  and  according  to  the  one 
and  intellectual  cause  of  them.  According  to  Plato,,  therefore,,  there  is 
a  first  monad  of  the  total  divisions  in  intellectuals,  and  together  with 
the  twofold  triads,  I  mean  the  paternal  and  the  undefiled^  it  give» 
completion  to  the  whole  intellectual  hebdomad.  And  we,  following 
Plato,  and  other  theologists,  concede  the  same  things* 


CHAPTER  XXXVIi. 


Let  us  now,  however,  return  to  the  beginning,  and  demonstrate  that 
Parmenides  delivers  the  same  things  concerning  this  intellectual  hel> 
domad,  and  that  he  produces  this  hebdomadic  aion  {eternity)  and  the 
peculiarity  of  the  Gods  which  is  intellectual  alone,  in  continuity  with. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


414  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

the  triple  orders  of  tlie  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time  intellectual 
Gods,  And,  in  the  first  place,  let  us  survey  what  he  says  concerning 
the  father  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  and  the  undefiled  power  which  is 
co^rranged  with  him.  For  after  the  threefold  figure,  and  the  order  of 
the  Gods  which  perfects  all  things,  that  which  is  in  itself  and  in  another, 
becomes  apparent.  These  things,  however,  are  demonstrated  to  be 
signs  of  the  intellectual  summit  of  the  intellectual  monads.  For  the 
first  father  of  the  Gods  in  this  order,  at  one  and  the  same  time  is  allol4;ed 
a  paternal  transcendency  with  respect  to  those  posterior  to  him,  and  is  the 
intellect  of  the  first  intelligibles.  For  every  imparticipable  intellect  is 
said  to  be  the  intellect  of  the  natures  prior  to  itself,  and  towards  them, 
firom  whom  it  is  produced,  it  has  an  intellectual  conversion,  and  in  them 
as  first^^fiecttve  causes  it  establishes  itself.  Whence  also  the  demiurgic 
intellect  is  the  intellect  of  the  natures  above  itself,  and  proximately  indeed 
of  its  own  fiBtther,  from  which  likewise  it  proceeds,  but  eminently  of  the 
intelligible  unities  beyond  [Saturn]. 

The  first  king,  therefore,  in  intellectuals,  is  both  an  intellectual  father, 
«nd  a  paternal  intellect.  He  is,  however,  the  intellectual  father  indeed 
of  the  Gods  that  proceed  from  himself;  but  he  is  the  paternal  intellect 
of  the  intelligibles  prior  to  himself.  For  he  is  indeed  intellectual 
essentially ;  but  he  has  an  intelligible  transcendency  in  intellectuals ; 
because  he  is  also  established  analogous  to  the  unknown  order  of  the 
intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time,  intellectual  Gods,  and  to  the  oqcult 
order  of  the  intelligible  triads.  And  as  they  are  expanded  above  the 
triadic  hypostases  of  the  Gods  posterior  to  themselves,  thus  also  the 
father  of  intellectuals,  is  a  father  expanded  above  the  whole  intellectual 
hebdomad,  in  consequence  of  being  a  paternal  intellect.  And  analo- 
gously to  the  above-mentioned  orders  of  Gods,  he  establishes  himself  in 
them,  and  is  filled  from  them  with  paternal  and  intelligible  union.  On 
this  account  also,  he  is  occult,  shuts  in  himself  the  prolific  powers  of 
himself,  and  producing  from  himself  total  causes,  he  again  establishes 
them  in,  and  converts  them  to  himself. 

'  For  w  wn<ft  it  it  necessarj  to  read  tv  fnurop. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP-  XXXVli.  OF  PLATO.  415 

These  things^  therefore,  Parmeoides  also  indicating,  magnificentljr 
cekbrates  this  order  bj  these  twofold  signs,  and  characterizes  the  first 
king  and  father  of  the  intellectual '  Gods  through  these  peculiarities. 
For  he  is  in  himself,  and  in  another.  For  so  far  indeed  as  he  is  a  total 
intellect,  his  energy  is  directed  to  himself,  but  so  far  as  he  is  in  the  intel* 
ligibles  prior  to  himself,  he  establishes  in  another  the  all-perfect  intelli- 
gence of  himself.  For,  indeed,  this  subsistence  in  another,  is  more 
excellent  than  the  subsistence  of  a  thing  in  itself;  since,  as  Parmenides 
himself  concludes,  the  subsistence  of  Saturn  in  another,  pertains  to  him 
according  to  whole,  but  the  subsistence  of  him  in  himself,  according  to 
parts.  Where,  therefore,  does  tht  another  pre-exist  ?  And  to  what  order 
of  the  Gods  prior  to  Saturn  does  it  belong?  Or  is  not  this  also  divinely 
unfolded  by  our  preceptor  ?  For  he  says  that  this  another^  remarkably 
pertains  to  that  order,  according  to  which  the  power  of  difference  first 
shines  forth,  being  the  progeny  of  intelligible  and  paternal  power.  Hence 
in  the  first  triad  the  another  was  occultly,  so  far  as  pow^  aho  had  there 
an  occult  subsistence ;  but  it  particularly  shines  forth  in  the  first  order 
of  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time,  intellectual  Gods.  For  there 
the  first  difference^  the  feminine  nature  of  the  Gods,  and  the  paternal 
and  unvocal  power  subsist. 

[Saturn  therefore]  who  is  the  first  of  the  intellectual  fathers  being 
intelligible,  sd  far  as  he  is  a  whole,  establishes  himself  in  the  intelligible 
triads  prior  to  himself,  from  which  also  he  is  filled  with  united  and  occult 
goods.  And  on  this  account  he  is  said  to  be  in  another.  With  respect 
to  those  triads  indeed,  the  another  is  occultly  and  according  to  cause  in 
the  intelligible  [i.  e.  in  the  first  triad]  of  i ntel ligibles ;  but  according  to 
essence  in  the  intelligible  of  the  intelligible,  and  at  the  same  time, 
intellectual  Gods.  All  intelligibles  therefore  are  united  ;  the  intelligible 
indeed  of  the  intelligible  and  intellectual  Gods  being  united  to  the 
intelligible  of  the  intelligibles  prior*  to  intellectuals;  but  the  intelligible 
of  intellectuals,  to  both.     And  the  subsistence  indeed  in  another,  adheres 

'  For  Koi^rcovy  it  is  obviously  necessary  to  read  yocf  cok. 
*  For  wpmrm$  it  is  necessary  to  read  npo  rm. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


416  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

to  the  difference  which  is  according  to  unical  number.  But  unical 
number  is  suspended  from  the  occult  union  of  the  one  being ;  on  which 
account  also  it  is  unicaL 

Farther  still,  we  also  say,  that  there  is  a  twofold  conversion  in  those 
orders,  the  one  indeed  being  towards  themselves,  but  the  other  towards 
the  causes  of  them,  (for  it  neither  was  nor  will  be  lawful  for  divine  natures, 
to  convert  themselves  in  any  respect  to  natures  posterior  to  themselves). 
And  the  intelligible  Gods  generate  all  things  stably ;  but  the  intelligible 
and  intellectual  Gods  who  illuminate  imparticipable  life,  impart  the 
original  cause  of  progression  to  all  things;  and  the  intellectual  Gods 
arrange  and  adorn  wholes  according  to  conversion.  Hence,  it  is  indeed 
necessary  that  the  summit  of  intellectuals  which  pours  forth  from  itself 
the  whole  and  all-perfect  form  of  conversion,  should  be  characterized  by 
both  the  convertive  symbols,  and  should  be  at  one  and  the  same  time 
converted  to  itself,  and  to  the  natures  prior  to  itself.  Hence,  because 
indeed,  it  is  converted  to  itself,  it  is  in  itself;  but  because  it  is  converted 
to  the  intelligible  orders  beyond  itself,  it  is  in  another.  For  the  another 
is  more  excellent  than  the. whole  intellectual  order.  As,  therefore,  the 
summit  of  intelligibles  primarily  subsists  according  to  the  intelligible 
peculiarity  itself,  and  is  firmly  established  above  wholes ;  and  as  the 
summit  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals  primarily  unfolds  the  peculiarity 
of  this  order,  subsisting  according  to  divine  diversity,  and  being  to  all 
things  the  cause  of  all-various  progressions ;—  thus  also  the  intelligible 
deity  of  intellectuals,  exhibits  from  himself  according  to  union  the  twofold 
forms  of  conversion,  being  indeed  in  another  according  to  the  more 
excellent  form  of  conversion,  but  i?i  himself  according  to  the  less  excellent 
form.  For  to  be  converted  to  himself  is  inferior  to  the  conversion  to 
more  excellent  natures. 

Again,  therefore,  the  subsistence  in  another^  is  the  illustrious  prero- 
gative of  the  intelligible  and  paternal  peculiarity.  For  the  another  is 
intelligible,  and  difference  was  the  power  proceeding  from  the  intelligible 
fathers,  and  from  the  natures  firmly  established  in  them.  Hence,  that 
which  is  comprehended  in  this  power,  and  is  filled  from  it,  is  paternal 
and  intelligible.     But  the  subsistence  of  a  thing  in  itself  is  the  proper 


Dfgitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXVll.  OF  PLATO. 


417: 


sigQ  of  the  unpolluted  monacL  For  as  we  have  before  observed,  the 
summits  of  the  two  intellectual  triads  are  conjoined.  And  the  monad 
of  the  guardian  triad  has  eternally  established  itself  in  the  paternal 
monad,  and  again  establishes  in,  and  converts  to  itself  the  natures  which 
have  proceeded  from  itself.  And  the  first  intellectual  father  is  indeed 
father  on  account  of  himself,  but  on  account  of  the  unpolluted  j^monad,]] 
he  comprehends  in  himself  the  genera  of  himself,  stably  recalls  thenl 
[when  they  have  proceeded  from  him]  to  himself,  and  in  his  own 
allness  '  contains  the  intelligible  multitudes  of  intellectuals  in  unpro* 
ceeding*  union  with  their  monad. 

The  first  leader,  therefore,  of  the  guardian  order  subsists  in  conjunction 
with  the  father.  And  the  father  indeed  comprehends  the  unpolluted 
cause,  but  is  comprehended  by  the  first  intelligibles.  And  as  he  is 
intelligibly  established  in  them,  so  likewise  he  has  established  in  himself, 
and  constituted  about  himself,  the  one  summit  of  the  inflexible  Gods* 
In  the  Parmenides,  therefore,  also  the  same  God  appears  to  us  to  be  a 
pure  intellect.  Because,  indeed,  he  is  intellect,  being  extended  to  the 
intelligible  place  of  survey,  and  on  this  account  being  in  another ^  so  far 
as  he  is  wholly  established  in  it.  But  again,  because  he  is  pure  and 
immaterial,  being  converted  to  himself,  and  shutting  in  himself  all  his 
own  powers.  For  the  parts  of  this  wholeness,  are  more  partial  powers, 
whicli  hasten  indeed  to  a  progression  from  the  father,  but  are  on  all 
sides  established  and  comprehended  by  the  wholeness.  And  the  whole- 
ness itself  is.  a  deity,  connectedly  containing  in  itself  intelligible  parts, 
being  parturient  indeed  with  intellectual  multitude,  generating  all  Uiingft 
stably,  and  again  embosoming  and  collecting  to  itself  its  progeny,  and 
as  the  more  tragical  fables  say,  absorbing  and  depositing  them  in  itself. 
For  the  progeny  of  it  are  twofold ;  some  indeed,  being,  as  it  were,  analyzed 
into  it;  but  others  being  divided  from  it.  And  some  abiding  in  it 
through  the  first  unpolluted  monad ;  but  others  proceeding  according  to 
the  prolific  cause  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  siirmounting  the  union  of  the 

■  For  ioMTOTf^i  read  wornvr^Ti.  *  For  fx^oinjra  read  aimt^oinjTtf. 

Froc.  Vol.  I.  3  G 


Digitized  by 


Google 


418  ON  THX  THEOLOGY  SOOKT^ 

father,  and  being  the  primary  leaders  of  another  order,  and  of  the 
arrangement  and  ornament  of  secondary  natures*  The  first  order  there^ 
fore  of  the  intellectual  Gods,  is  thns  delivered  to  us  by  Pannenides^ 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 


Th£  second  order  however,  after  thb,  is  tiiat  which  comprehaids:  the- 

middle  goiera  of  wholes,  is  the  cause  to  all  things  of  progression  anci 

prolific  power^  and  is  in  continuity  with  the  first  order  of  the  intdilectual^ 

Crocfs*    What  else  therefore  than  life  is  «very  where  in  oontinutty  witb 

the  intelligible  and  true  being?  For  it  is  the  medium  between  intellect 

and  the  intelligible,  conjoining  intellect  to  the  intelligible,  and  expressing: 

the  intelligible  power  which  collects  together  t/ic  one  and  being.     As  the^ 

intelligible  therefore  is  to  the  one  and  hyparxis,  so  is  life  to  power,  and* 

intellect  to  being.     And  as  in  intelligibles,  the  one  is  the  object  of  desire^ 

but  being  aspires  after  the  participation  of  t^he  one^  and  power  collects* 

being  to  the  participation  of  the  one^  and  the  one  to  a  conrnuinion  with 

being,  (for  the  one  here  is  not  imparticipable,  and  exempt  from  all  power> 

so  likewise  the  intelligible  is  the  object  of  desire  to  intellect^  but  intellect 

is  filled  with  it.    And  life  binds  indeed  intellect  to  the  intelligible,  but 

unfolds  the  inteiligible  to  intellect.     Whence  also,  I  think,  those  who  are 

wise  in  all  divine  concerns,  call  the  one  and  hypar xis  intelligible.    But  that 

which  is  primarily  being,  they  call'  the  first  intellect,,  conformably  to  this 

analogy.    Life  therefore,  is  the  medium  between  being  and  intellect,^  ia 

the  same  manner  as  power  sub»sts  between  the  one  and  being.    And  all 

these,  viz.  the  intelligible,  life,  and  intellect  are  primarily  in  intelligibles  ; 

'  For  wcik(joni$,  it  is  neeeasarf  to  read  o(y«x«^Q9yr«^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XMAP.  xxxvm.  OP  l^LATa  419 

Imt  secondarily  io  intelligibles  and  intellectuals ;  and  according  to  a 
lihird  diminution^  in  intellectuals.  In  intelligibles  howe>'er,  being  is 
according  to  essence ;  for  there  intellect  is  primarily  according  to  cause. 
But  in  intellectuals,  intellect  indeed,  is  according  to  essence ;  but  the 
9)atures  prior  to  intellect,  are  according  to  participation.  Since  therefore, 
life  is  surveyed  in  a  threefold  respect,  in  intelligibles  indeed  according  to 
-cause;  but  in  intelligibles  and  intellectuals,  according  to  hyparxis^;  and 
in  intellectuals,'  according  to  participation,  it  is  indeed  necessary  that 
the  life  which  is  in  the  intellectual  order,  should  both  be  life,  and 
participate  of  the  causes  generative  of  life  prior  of  itself.  The  one 
therefore  of  the  intellectual  Gods  which  b  arranged  in  the  middle,  is 
not  motion,  but  that  which  is  moved.  For  prior  to  this,  it  has  been 
demonstrated  by  Plato,  that  all  life  is  motion.  For  soul  is  self*motive 
because  it  is  self-vital.  And  intellect  is  on  this  account  moved,  because 
it  has  the  most  excellent  life.  The  first  vivific  cause,  therefore,  o^fbe 
intellectual  Gods,  is  primarily  allotted  motion.  If,  however,  it  was  the 
iirst*efifective  and  highest  life,  it  would  be  requisite  to  denominate  it 
motion,  and  not  that  which  is  moved.  But  since  it  is  life  as  in  intd« 
fectuals,  but  is  filled  from  exempt  life,  it  is  at  the  same  time  motion,  and 
that  which  is  moved.  Very  properly,  therefore,  does  Parmenides 
demonstrate  that  the  one  in  this  order  is  moved,  because  it  proceeds  from 
the  causes  of  all  life  that  are  placed  above  it,  and  is  analogous  to  the 
middle  centre  of  intelligibles,  and  to  the  middle  triad  of  intelligibles  and 
intellectuals.  Hence  also,  Socrates  in  the  Phsedrus  calls  this  middle 
triad  Heaven ;  for  the  whole  of  it  is  life  and  motion.  But  that  which 
is  moTed,  is  the  middle  in  intellectuals,  as  being  filled  from  it,  [i.  e.  from 
the  life  in  the  middle  triad  of  intelligibles  and  intellectuals;]  since 
eternity  also,  which  is  arranged  according  to  the  intelligible  wholeness, 
is  all-perfect  life,  and  all  life,  according  to  Plotinus.  TTiere,  however, 
the  middle  is  life  according  to  cause ;  but  in  intellectuals,  it  is  life 
according  to  participation ;   and  in  the  order  between  these,  it  is  life 

'  In  the  original^  after  «y  t§  rots  vw^ots  lun  vo§fOi$p  it  U  necessary  to  sufplj  x«f  vwaf^iff  ^h  roif 

-VOI^OI^y  JC.  T.  A. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


420  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V, 

according  to  essence,  proceeding  indeed  from  intelligible  life,  (as  Parmenides 
also  manifests,  characterizing  both  according  to  wholeness,  though  the 
wholeness  in  intelligibles  is  different  from  that  which  is  in  intelligibVes^^and 
intellectuals,  as  we  have  before  observed,)  but  producing  after  this, 
intellectual  life.  For  that  which  is  moved,  is  indeed  entirely  allied  to 
the  circulation  of  the  Heaven,  and  to  intellectual  and  intelligible  life. 

Moreover,  the  permanency  which  is  coordinate  with  this^  motion,  is  not 
one  certain  genus  of  being,  as  neither  is  motion.  For  beings  indeed  are 
naturally  adapted  to  participate  of  the  genera  of  being;  but  the  s«per« 
essential  goods  of  the  Gods,  are  expanded  above  the  order  of  beings.  If, 
therefore,  Parmenides  here,  assuming  the  one  itself  by  itself,  surveys  in 
this  motion  and  permanency,  he  evidently  does  not  attribute  the  el^ 
ments  of  being  to  the  Gods,  but  assigns  to  them  peculiarities  apprc^riate, 
all-perfect,  and  transcending  wholes.  And  thus  asserting  that  the  one  is 
moved  and  stands  still,  according  to  motion,  indeed,  he  delivers  the  vivific 
hyparxis  of  the  Gods,  the  generative  fountain  of  wholes,  and  the  leading 
cause  of  all  things.  But  according  to  permanency,  he  delivers  the  un- 
polluted monad  coordinated  with  motion,  and  whicli  connectedly-contains 
the  middle  centres  of  the  guardian  triad.  For  as  the  summit  of  the 
guardian  triad,  is  united  to  the  first  father,  according  to  the  first  hypos- 
tasis, thus  also  the  deity  who  contains  the  middle  bond  of  the  unpolluted 
leaders,  is  by  a  congeniality  of  nature  consubsistent  with  the  motive 
cause  of  all  the  Gods,  which  moves  wholes,  and  is  primarily  moved  from 
itself.  And  through  this  deity,  the  prolific  power  of  this  Goddess  [^RheaJ 
is  firmly  established  in  herself.  Producing  likewise,  and  multiplying  all 
things,  she  is  [through  this  deity]  exempt  from  wholes,  and  inflexibly 
exists  prior  to  her  progeny.  With  respect,  therefore,  to  motion  here  and 
permanency,  the  former  indeed  is  the  fountain  of  the  life  and  generative 
power  that  proceeds  to  all  things;  but  the  latter,'  establishes  the  whole 
vivific  fountain  in  itself,  but  is  from  thence  filled  with  the  prolific  rivers  of 
life.  Parmenides,  therefore,  delivering  to  us  these  things,  and  the  pro- 
gression of  them,  demonstrates  fliat  t^jat  which  is  moved  is  generated 
from  that  which  is  in  another,  but  that  which  stands  still,  from  that  which 

'  In  the  origmal  ^  Ss  is  omitted. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXIX.  OF  PLATO.  421 

is  in  itself.  For  the  first  mooad  of  the  paternal  triad  constitutes  the 
natures  posterior  to  it.  And  after  the  Same  manner,  the  highest  of  the 
unpolluted  triad,  and  which  is  intelligible  as  in  this  triad,  imparts  at  one 
and  the  same  time  the  middle  and  last  monad  of  the  triad.  Oh  this 
account,  also,  motion  here  is  better  than  permanency.  For  as  a  subsist* 
ence  in  another  is  according  to  cause  more  ancient  than  the  subsistence 
of  a  thing  in  itself,  so  likewise  that  which  is  moved,  is  causally  more 
ancient  than  that  which  is  permanent.  For  the  unpolluted  Gods,  are  in 
power  subordinate  to  the  fathers,  and  are  comprehended  in  them. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 


The  third,  therefore,  to  the  Saviour,  as  they  say,  and  let  us  direct  our 
attention  to  the  demiurgic  monad,  unfolding  itself  into  light  together  with 
the  coordinate  Gods  it  contains.  In  the  first  place,  then,  here  also  the 
communion  of  the  one  with  other  things  is  apparent,  and  we  must  no 
longer  consider  the  one  alone  by  itself,  but  according  to  its  habitude 
towards  other  things.  Because,  therefore,  the  demiurgic  order  produces 
wholes  from  itself,  and  arranges  and  adorns  a  corporeal  nature,  it  also 
generates  all  the  second  and  ministrant  causes  of  the  Gods.  For  what 
occasion  is  there  to  say  that  the  term  other  t kings j  is  a  sign  of  a  corporeal 
condition  of  being,  since  formerly  the  Pythagoreans  thought  fit  to  cha* 
racterize  an  incorporeal  nature  by  the  one^  but  indicated  to  us  the  nature 
which  is  divisible  about  body,  through  the  term  others  ?  In  the  second 
place,  the  number  of  the  conclusions  [in  this  part  of  the  Parmenides]  is 
doubled*  For  the  one  is  no  longer  demonstrated  to  be  alone  same,  or 
different,  as  it  is  to  be  in  itself,  and  in  another,  or  to  be  moved,  and  stand 
still,  but  it  is  demonstrated  to  be  the  skme  with  itself,  and  different  from 


Digitized  by 


Google 


482  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

itself/  and  to  be  different  from  other  things,  and  the  same  with  other 
tMngs.  But  this  twice  appeared  to  us  before  to  be  entirely  adapted  to 
the  demiurgic  monad,  both  according  to  other  theologists,  and  to  Socrates 
in  the  Cratjlus,  who  says  that  the  demiurgic  name  is  composed  from 
two  words.  In  the  third  place,  therefore,  the  multitude  of  causes  is  here 
separated,  and  all  the  monads  of  the  Gods  present  themselves  to  the 
view,  according  to  the  demiurgic  progression.  For  the  demiurgic  order 
is  apparent,  the  prolific  power  co-ordinate  with  it,  the  undefiled  monad 
the  cause  of  exempt  providence,  and  the  distributive  fountain  of  wholes ; 
and  together  with  these,  as  I  may  say,  all  the  orders  about  the  demiurgus 
are  apparent^  according  to  which  he  produces  and  preserves  all  things, 
and  being  exempt  from  the  things  produced,  is  firmly  established 
in  himself,  and  separates  his  own  kingdom,  from  the  united  empire  of 
his  father. 

How,  therefore,  and  through  what  particulars  do  these  things  become 
apparent?  We  reply,  that  the  same  with  itself  (for  this  Parmenides  first 
demonstrates)  represents  to  us  about  the  nature  of  the  one^  the  monadic 
and  paternal  peculiarity,  according  to  which  the  demiurgus  also  subsists. 
Hence,  likewise,  the  oiie  is  said  to  be  the  same  with  itself.  For  the 
smother  is  in  the  demiurgus  according  to  the  transcendency  of  different 
causes;  but  the  ^ame,  appears  to  be  a  sign  of  his  proper,  viz.  of  his 
paternal,  hyparxis.  For  being  one,  and  the  exempt  father  and  demi« 
nrgus  of  wholes,  he  establishes  his  proper  union  in  himself.  And  in  this 
One,  Parmenides  in  a  remarkable  manner  shows  the  uniform,  and  that 
which  is  allied  to  bound.  But  the  same  tmth  other  things^  is  the  singular 
^ood  of  prolific  power,  and  of  a  cause  proceeding  to,  and  pervading 
through  all  things  without  impediment.  For  the  demiurgus  is  present 
to  all  things  which  he  produces,  and  is  in  all  things  the  same,  which  he 
arranges  and  adorns,  pre-establishing  in  himself  the  generative  essence 
of  wholes.  If,  therefore,  we  rightly  assert  th«e  things,  bound  and 
infinity  subsist  in  him  demiurgically.  And  the  one  indeed  is  in  the 
sameness  which  is  separate  from  other  things,  but  the  other  is  in  the 

'  After  xXXft  in  the  origtnsil  it  is  necetsary  to  Mipplf  the  wc^rcU  koM  rmtrw  tavrcp^  hcu  ire^ov  edcvrou. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXIX.  OF  PLATO.  42$ 

power  which  generates  j^ther  things.  For  every  where  power  is  prolific 
of  secondary  natures.  But  the  principle  which  subsists  according  to 
bound,  is  the  supplier  of  an  united  and- stable  hypostasis. 

Moreover,  i/j€  d^erent  from  other  things j  manifests  his  undefiled  ptwritp 
and  his  transcendaicy  which  is  exempt  from  all  secondary  natures.     For  . 
the  first^intellect  was  on  this  account  pure  and  incorruptible,  as  Socrates 
says  in  the  Cratyks,  because  it  is  established  above  codrdination  or 
communion'  with  all  sensible  natures.     For  as  some  one  of  the  Gods^ 
says,  he  does  not  incline  his  power  to  matter,  but  is  ^t  once  exempt  ^om 
all  fabrication.     But  the  demiurgic  intellect  receiving  from  thence  total 
power,  and  a  royal  dominion,  adorns  indeed  sensibles^  and  con^itutes^ 
the   whole  of  a  corporeal  nature.      Together    however,   with  prolific^ 
abundance,  and   the  providential  attention  to  secondary  natures,  he 
transcends  his  progeny,  and  abides  in  his  own  accustomed  mtinner,  as^ 
Timieus  says,  through  the  inflexible  guard  which  subsists  with  bim^aiid^ 
the  power  imparted  to  him  from  it,  which  is  uncentaminated'  with  other 
participants.     Hence,^  throu^  the  never-failing   supply  of  good,  and' 
providential  energies,   and  the  generation  of  subordinate  natures,  he- 
is  the  same  with  them.     For  he  is  participated   by  them,  and  fills  his^ 
progeny   with  his   own   providential  care.      But   through   his   purity, 
undefiled  power,  and  inflexible  energies,  he  is  separate  from  wholes,  is 
disjoined  fron^  them^  and  is  imparticipable  by  other  things.     And  as  the 
first  king  of  intellectuals  is  allotted  his  non*ineUnation^  to  matter^,  througlb 
the  guard  which  is  united  to  him,  and  through  the  undefiled  monad  r 
and   as  the  vivific  goddess  possesses  her  stable  and  inflexible   power 
from  the  second  cause  of  the  guardian  Gods ;    thus  also  the  demiurgic- 
intellect  preserves  a  trai^cendency  exempt  from  other  thin^,  and  a* 
union  separated  from  multitude,  through  the  third  monad  of  the  leaders- 
cf  purity.     For  the  cause  of  separate  providence  is  a  guard  coordinate^ 
with  the  demiurgus,  who  hastens  to  produce '  all  things,  and  to  pervade 
through  all  things.     But  the  guard  which  is  the  supplier  of  stable  power>. 

■  Tot  xoivooMoy,  it  is  necessary  to  read  xoimviag. 

*  The  wcMod  im^m^i»  ia  omitted  in  the  (uiginsilt  but  ou|^t  doubtless  to  6e  inseitedi 


Digitized  by 


Google 


424  ON  THE  THEOLOGY  BOOK  V. 

is  coordinate  with  the  vivific  deity,  who  is  moved  to  the  generation  of 
wholes.  And  with  the  intellect  tliat  is  multiplied  according  to  intellec- 
tual conceptions  [i.  e.  with  Saturn,]  the  guard  is  coordinate,  that  imparts 
an  undefiled  union  of  the  conversion  of  all  his  energies  to  himself.  The 
monad,  therefore,  remains,  which  is  arranged  as  the  seventh  of  these 
intellectual  monads,  which  is  present  with,  and  energizes  with  all  of 
them,  but  particularly  unfolds  itself  into  light  in  the  demiurgic  order, 
and  which  Parmenides  also  producing  for  us  together  with  the  whole 
demiurgus,  defines  it  in  difference^  in  the  same  manner  as  he  does  the 
undefiled  cause  in  the  demiurgus.  He  says  however,  that  this  difference 
separates  the  demiurgic  monad  itself  from  itself.  For  we  have  before 
observed  that  this  order  is  the  supplier  of  separation  to  all  the  Gods. 
As  therefore,  the  demiurgus  is  the  same  with,  himself,  through  the  pater- 
nal union,  after  the  same  manner  he  is  separated  from  himself  and  his 
father  through  this  difference.  Whence  therefore,  does  he  derive  this 
power  ?  From  being  in  himself,  says  Parmenides,  and  in  another.  For 
these  were  indeed  unitedly  in  the  first  father,  but  separately  in  the  third* 
Separation  therefore,  preeidsted  there  according  to  cause ;  but  in  the 
demiurgus  it  shines  forth,  and  unfolds  the  power  of  itself. 

That  the  cause  however  of  division,  is  in  a  certain  respect  in  the  first 
father,  Parmenides  manifest*  in  the  first  hypothesis,  when  he  says,  "  tliat 
every  thing  which  is  in  itself  is  in  a  certain  respect  a  duad>  and  is 
separated  from  itself.''  There  liowever,  the  duad  is  occultly ;  but  here  it 
subsists  nwre  clear!}',  where  also  all  intellectual  multitude  shines  forth  to 
the  view.  For  difference  is  the  progeny  of  the  firmly-abiding  duad 
which  is  there.  This  therefore  separates  the  demiurgic  intellect  from  the 
Cods  prior  to  it,  and  divides  the  monards  in  it  from  each  other.  For  if 
so  far  as  it  is  in  another,  it  is  united  to  the  intelligible  of  itself,  but  so  far 
as  it  is  in  itself  it  is  separated  from  it,  because  it  proceeds  according  to 
each  order  of  its  own  intelligible, — if  this  be  the  case,  it  is  necessary  that 
this  difference  should  be  the  cause  to  it  of  separation  from  its  father. 
All  the  intellectual  monads  therefore;  have  appeared  to  us  to  subsist 
coordinately  with  each  other.  And  the  subsistence  indeed,  in  another  is 
the  sign  of  the  fat];^^r.     But  the  subsistence  in  itself^  is  the  sign  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXXIX.  OF  PLATO,  425 

first  unpolluted  monad.  Ageixn^  motion  is  the  sign  of  vivific  goodness; 
but  permanency  of  the  inflexible  power  conjoined  with  motion.  And  same^ 
fiess  zmth  itself ^  and  with  another^  is  the  sign  of  the  demiurgic  peculiarity ; 
but  the  being  different  from  other  things^  is  the  sign  of  the  guard  about 
the  demiurgus.  And  in  the  last  place,  the  being  different  from  itself^  is 
the  sign  of  the  seventh  intellectual  monad,  which  is  according  to  cause 
indeed,  and  occultly  in  the  first  father,  but  is  allotted  its  hypostasis  more 
clearly  in  the  demiurgus.  Parmenides  likewise  appears  to  me,  when 
dividing  the  signs  of  fabrication,  to  have  unfolded  in  the  middles 
themselves,  the  peculiarities  of  the  undefiled  monad,  and  of  the  dividing 
monad,  so  far  as  they  also  are  in  a  certain  respect  comprehended  in  the 
fabrication.  For  he  shows  in  the  first  of  the  conclusions  that  the  one  is 
the  same  with  itself;  in  the  second,  that  it  is  different  from  itself;  in  the 
third,  that  it  is  different  from  other  things ;  and  in  the  fourth  that  it  is 
the  same  with  other  things.  For  he  co-arranges  indeed,  the  dividing 
power  with  the  paternal  union;  but  connects  with  a  transcendency 
separate  from  secondary  natures,  the  providential  cause  of  them.  For  in 
the  Gods,  it  is  necessary  that  union  should  exist  prior  to  separation,  and 
and  a  purity  unmingled  with  secondary  natures,  prior  to  a  providential 
inspection  of  them  ;  through  which  likewise,  being  every  where,  they  are 
no  where,  being  present  with  all  things,  they  are  exempt  from  all  things^ 
and  being  all  things^  they  are  not  aay  of  their  progeny. 


END  OF  VOL.  I. 


Proc.  Vol.  I.  3  H 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Just  J?uhlishedf  Price  6s.  [Continued  Quarterbf.'] 

Xt)e  Cld00ieal  Jottrnal, 

NO.  XXVI. 

CONTAINING    AVABIETTOF     • 

CLASSICAL,  BIBLICAL.  AND  OKIENTAL  LITERATURE. 
THE  FOLLOWING  SCARCE  TRAC^ 

jire  inserted  in  Me  Numbers  already  Published. 
^  Complete  Set  of  which  may  be  had,  in  27  Nos.  or  13  Vols.    Pr.  8/.  3s. 


I.  De  Gr^corum  Vcrbitex  BeguldJUctendu  ;  aC.  S.  G.  Hauptniann. 

II.  An  Introductory  Essay  on  the  Prepositions  of'  the  Greek  Language  ; 
By  James  Moor,  LL.  D.  Gr.  Prof,  in  the  Univ.  of  Glasgow. 

III.  A  Chart  often  Numerals^  in  200  Languages,  with  a  Descriptive  TAsay. 
By  the  Ilev.  R.  Patrick,  Hull. 

IV^  Bishop  Pearson's  minor  Tracts,  chronologically  arranged, 

V.  Account  of  Herculaneum :  By  the  Rev.  Mr.  Hayter. 

VI.  G.  Canteri  de  ratione  Emendandi  Grstcos  Auctores,  Syntagma  recent 
auclum, — VII.  Wasse  On  Latin  SchoUusts, 

VIII.  Carmlna  Homerica,  Ilias  etOdyssea,  a  Rhapsodotum  Interpolations 
ha  repurgatu,  et  infristinam  formam,  quatenus  recuperanda  esset,  tarn  ex  vetC" 
rum  monumentorumjide  et  auctoritate,  fuam  ex  mntigui  sermonii  Indole  ae  Ra-- 
tione,  redacta  :  cum  Notts  ac  Prolegomenis,  in  quilms  de  eorum  origine,  auetore, 
et  4ttate,  Uemque  de  prised  maturitate,  diitgenter  inqumtur^  operA  et  itudio 
Ricardi  Payne  Knight.    EdiOo  Secunda. 

%*  This  Edition,  with  many  additions,  is  printed  exclusively  in  the  Class, 
J<mr.«— A  copy  of  the  first  edition,  of  which'only  50  were  printed,  was  lately 
sold  by  auction  f*>r  above  7/. 

IX.  T.  Falcooer's  two  LeUers  on  the  Oxford  Straho. 

X .  Oratio  de  Pubhcis  Aihenictuium  Morilms  k  Valckenaer. 

XI.  Lamberti  Bos  regula  pr^pua  accentuum, 

XII.  Ruhnken*s  Animadw.  in  Aenophantis  Memorabilia, 

XIII.  OraHo  de  Littgu^  Arabiat  viilitatef  antiquitate,  et  prastantid :  k 
Ayde. — XIV.  De  Ludis  privatit  ae  domesticisveterum ;  k  J.  C.  Bulengtro. 

X  V(  Fontet  quos  Tacitus  in  tradendis  rebus  ante  se  gestis  videatur  sequutus 
paucis indicat  J, ILL, Meierotto.  1795. 

XVI.  Notafum  Remanarum  oeLUerarum  xtngularium  cempendiique  script^ 
enie  in  antiquii  codicibus  ei  mamtmemiii  okvii  Interpretation  ex  variis  auctortbus' 
collecta, — ^XVIL  Fragment  ofLeiunu — with  Latin  translation. 

XVIII.  Oratio  de  constitutione  'u'agttdiarum  et  Sapientia  civili,  atque  eloquenr. 
tin  ex  earum  Lectione  haurienda. 

XIX.  Remarks  on  the  Miscellaneous  Observations  on  Authors,  ancient  and 
modern, 

XX.  An  Answer  to  a  late  Book  written  against  Dr,  Bentley,  relative  to  some 
Manuscript  Notes  on  CfoUimachus, — XXI.  Ricardi  Bentleii  Oratiuncula, 

XXII.  Tentamen  de  Poetis  Elegiaeie ;  auctore  J,  Addisoro. 

XXIII.  An  Inquiry  into  the  rent^ation  of  Homer,  and  the  use  qf  the  Di- 
gamma  in  his  Poems  ;  by  Professor  Dcnbab. 

XXIV.  TwEtvs  Plates  ^the  various  forms  if  the  Greek  Alphabet  in  differ^ 
ent  ages ;  with  the  Abbreviations  and  Connexionu 

XaV.  a  Discourse  on  AncietU  and  Modern  Learning,  By  the  late  ^t,  Hon. 
Jos.  Addison. — XXVI.  Ricardi  Bentleii  EpistoU  Dus  ad  1%,  Hemsterhutium. 

XXVII.  D.  Heinsii  Oratio  de  Utilitate,  qua:  e  lectione  TVa^aediarum  per- 
cipitur; 

With  many  Universky  Prise  Esm^s  and  Poems, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


3Cht  j^ampjleteer ; 

CONTAINING  THE  BEST  PAMPHLETS  OF  THE  DAY. 
Each  No.  on  the  average,  will  contain  ten  or  tnoelve  Pamphlets :  thus 
reducing  the  price  of  each  to  about  sirpence.'^The  peculiar  advantage 
of  this  plan  is,  that  it  will  form  an  imperishable  Record  of  the  most  valu- 
able pamphlets,  and  will  also  offer,  through  the  means  of  Clubs  and  In- 
stitutions, a  very  extensive  circulation.— ^Id  Pamphlets  will  be  inserted, 
if  very  valuable  and  scarce. — Very  celebrated  French  Pamphlets  will  be 
occasionally  translated  and  inserted. — Communications  are  requested  to 
be  sent  to  Tooke's  Courts  for  the  Editor.     [Post-paid.]. 

NO.  15.  IS  JUST  PUBLISHED. 

The  Pamphleteer  contains  the  following  Pamphlets  which  are 

at  the  present  Time  particularly  interesting. 

XIV.  History  of  ToussAjKT  lx)uvERTrRE. 


I.  Cahkot's  Memorial  to  Ix>i;is  XVIII 

II.  C  iiAicAL'BRiAND  on  Bco)»APARTE  and 

tilt*  Bot'RBONS. 

III.  MusGRAVE  ou  the  Balance  of  Power 
In  Europe. 

IV.  Prussia  and  Saxowy,  by  Counsellor 
Ghcntz. 

V.  Prince  Talleyrand  on  the  Commercial 
Intercourse  ofGREAT  Britain  with  America. 

VI.  FoRSTER  on  the  Use  and  Tendency  of 
Dr.  Gall^  System  of  Craniolooy  asapper- 
laining  to  Education,  &c. 

VII.  Mr.  Vansittart's  Outline  of  a  Plan 
OF  Finance. 

VIII.  Mr.  UusKissov  on  Mr.  Vaksittart's 
Plan  of  FiNAMCE. 

iX.  Lord  Sheffield  on  the  Couuercial 
RiTt'ATiOM  of  Great  Britain. 

X.  Mr.  P.  Eliot  on  the  Political  and 
Fina)(Cial  State  of  the  Nation. 

XI.  Sir  P.  F&AKCts's  Letter  Missive  to  Lord 
Grey. 

XII.  Various  Pamphlets  on  the  Corn  Laws. 
Xni.  Narrative  or  the  Journey  ami  Impri- 
sonment of  Piua  VII.  with  his  Portrait. 


XV.  Judge  Fletcher's  Celebrated  Charge 
to  the  Grand  Jury  of  Wexford. 

XVI.  The  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  Lord  Giifn- 
viLLE,  Bishop  MiLNERy  Mr.  C.  Butler,  Mr. 
Le  Mesurier,  and  others,  on  the  Catholic 
Question. 

XVII.  SirS.RoMiLLY  on  theSLAVETRADE. 

XVIII.  M.  Benj.  Constant's  Pamphlets 
on  Minister! At  Responsihility — 1  heLisER- 
TY  of  the  Press,  &c.  &c. 

XIX.  American  Encroachments  on  Bri- 
tish Rights ;  a  new  Edition.  By  N.  Atcbe- 
son,  Esq. 

XX.  A  Brief  Account  of  the  Jesuits,  with 
Historical  Proofs  in  support  of  it,  tending  to 
establish  the  Danzer  or  the  Revival  of  that 
Order  to  the  World  at  large,  and  particularly 
to  the  United  Kingdom. 

XXI.  An  Inauiry  into  the  Rise  of  Prices 
in  Europe,  during  the  last  twenty-five  years, 
compared  with  that  which  has  taken  place 
in  England ;  with  Observations  on  High  and 
Low  Prices.  By  Arthur  You  kg,'  Esq. 
F.R.S. 


S;c.  Sgc.  S:c. 
A  SECOND  EDITION  of  No.  I.  is  just  published. 

TkU  Work  h0M  also  recorded  the  best  PanwUet$  of  the  following  NobU  and 

distinguished  Anthers. 
Sir  T.  Bernard,  Bart. 
Judge  J'lclcfier, 
Baron  Smith,  F.R.S. 
Bishop  Milner,  D.  D. 
Archdeacon  Daubeny^ 
Dr.  H.  Marsii, 
Dr.  Valpy, 
Dr.  Maclean,     , 
Dr.  Pellet, 
Dr.  I.  Johnstone, 
Rev.  P.  Gandolphy, 
Rev.S.T.  Wylde, 
Rev.  T.  Lc  Mesurier, 
Rev.  J.  C.  Eiutace, 
A.  Young,  Esq.  F.  R.S. 
J.  Wardrop,  Em.  F.R.S. 
N.  Atcheson,  Esq.  F.ILS. 

Complete  Sets,  in  7  vols,  masf  be  had  in  bds.  Pr.  4l.  1 U.  Estrfy  Nos.  6s.  6d.  eaoh. 


The  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer, 
Rt.  H.  Lord  Grenville, 
Rt.  H.  Lord  Sheffield, 
The  Bishop  of  Lincoln, 
Sir  H.  Pamell,  Bart 
Sir  J.  Banks,  Bart  R.  B. 
3ir  P.  Francis,  K.  B. 
Sir  S.  Romilly,  Bart. 
Rt  H.  W.  Wilberforie,  M.  P. 
J.  Bruce,  Esq.  M.  P. 
W.  Huskisson,  Esq.  M.P. 
C.  Marsh,  Esq.  M.  P. 
Mr.  Serj.  Onslow,  M.  P. 
J.  Stephen,  Esq.  M.  P. 
H.  Wrottesley,  Esq.  M.  P. 
Sir  H.  B.  Dudley,  Bart 


T.  Forster,  Esq.  F.LS. 

F.  Percival  Elliot,  Esq. 

B.  Montague,  Esq. 
R.  M.  Kerrison,  Esq. 

C.  Butler,  Esq. 
C.  Duppa,  Esq. 
J.  Longley,  Eiiiq. 

G.  Joy,  Esq. 
A.  Becket,  £sq. 
John  Naismith,  Esq. 
W.  C.  Jackson,  Esq. 
T.  M.  Musgrave,  Esq. 
J.  Philippart,  Esq. 

J.  Baverstock,  Esq. 

J.  Feam,£sq. 

T.  N.  Talfourd,  Esq. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by  V3OOQ IC 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SSH 


% 

''L 

1 

< 

i 

a 

-.ii»»,».«- 

^ 

^^gR^\JK 

>^,^m^^ '    ^ 

1 

i 

^gL\^"          ^B^^^^^IEtf 

,#^»'>'-^ 

i 

It  , 

_W      -'            '     'X4        >^ 

3 

:,?  ^ 


