THE 


ELEMENTS OF THEOLOGY. 


PROPOSITION I. 

All multitude participates in a certain respect of the one. 

For if it in no respect participates of the one, neither will the whole be 
one whole, nor each of the many of which the multitude consists; but 
there will also be a certain multitude arising from each of these, and this 
will be the case to infinity. Each of these infinites, likewise, will again 
be infinite multitude. For participating in no respect of any one, neither 
according to the whole of itself, nor according to each of the many which 
it contains, it will be in every respect, and according to the whole, infi¬ 
nite. For each of the many which you may assume, will either be one, 
or not one, will either be many or nothing. But if each is nothing, that 
also which consists of these will be nothing. And if each is many, each 
will consist of infinites infinitely: [and this not in capacity, but in energy]. 
These things, however, are impossible. For neither does any being 
consist of infinites infinitely assumed; since there is not more than the 
infinite; but that which consists of all is more than each. Nor is it 


Digitized by 


Google 



prop. II. in. 


ELEMENTS OF THEOLOGY. 


301 


possible for any thing to be composed from nothing. All multitude, 
therefore, participates in a certain respect of the one. 

PROPOSITION II. 

Every thing which participates of the one , is both one and not one. 

For if it is not the one itself (since it participates of the one) being 
something else besides the one , it suffers, or is passive to it according to 
participation, and sustains to become one. If, therefore, it is nothing 
besides the one , it is one alone, and does not participate of the one , but 
will be the one itself. But if it is something besides the one y which is not 
the one , but its participant, it is both not one, and one, not indeed such a 
one as the one itself, but one being , as participating of the one. This, 
therefore, is not one, nor is it that which the one is. But it is one, and at 
the same time a participant of the one. Hence, being of itself not one, 
it is both one and not one, being something else besides the one. And so 
far indeed as it abounds, it is not one, but so far as it is passive [to the 
one] it is one. Every thing, therefore, which participates of the one, is 
both one, and not one. 


PROPOSITION III. 

' i 

Every thing which becomes one, becomes so through the partici¬ 
pation of the one, and is one, so far as it suffers the participation of the 
one. 

For if things which are not one become one, they doubtless become so 
by a conjunction and communication with each other, and they sustain 
the presence of the one, not being that which the one itself is. Hence, 
they participate of the one so far as they suffer to become one. For, if 
they are already one they will not become one; since that which is does 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



302 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. IV. V. 


not become that which it is already. But if they become one from nothing, 
i. e. from the privation of the one, since a certain one is ingenerated in 
them, the one itself is prior to them. [And this ingenerated one must be 
derived from the one itself. Every thing, therefore, which becomes one, 
becomes so through the participation of the one , &c. '3 

PROPOSITION IV. 

Every thing which is united is different from the one itself 

For if it is united, it will participate in a certain respect of the one , so 
far as it is said to be united. That, however, which participates of the 
one, is both one and not one. But the one itself is not both one and not one. 
For if this were the case, again the one which is in it would have both 
these, and this would take place to infinity, there being no one itself at 
which it is possible to stop; but every thing being one and notone, there 
will be something united which is different from the one. For if the one 
is the same with the united, it will be infinite multitude. And in a 
similar manner each of the things of which the united consists will be 
infinite multitude. [Every thing, therefore, which is united is different 
from the one itself. M 


PROPOSITION V. 

All multitude is posterior to the one. 

For if multitude is prior to the one, the one indeed will participate of 
multitude, but multitude which is prior to the one will not participate of 
the one, since that multitude existed prior to the subsistence of the one. 

1 The part within the brackets is wanting in the original, in which there is evidently a defect, 
as the stars at the end of the proposition indicate. 

* Here also the part within the brackets is wanting in the original. 


Digitized by 


pkop. v. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


303 


For it will not participate of that which is not; because that which parti* 
cipates of the one, is one and at the same time not one; but the one will 
not yet subsist, that which is first being multitude. It is, however, im¬ 
possible that there should be a certain multitude, which in no respect 
whatever participates of the one. Multitude, therefore, is not prior to 
the one. 

But if multitude subsists simultaneously with the one , and they are 
naturally co-ordinate with each other; for nothing of time will prevent 
them being so; neither will the one of itself be many, nor will multitude 
be one, as being at one and the same time oppositely divided by nature, 
if neither is prior or posterior to the other. Hence, multitude of itself 
will not be one, and each of the things that are in it will not be one, and 
this will be the case to infinity, which is impossible. Multitude, there¬ 
fore, according to its own nature, participates of the one, and it will not 
be possible to assume any thing of it which is not one. For not. being 
one, it will be an infinite consisting of infinites, as has been demon¬ 
strated. Hence, it entirely participates of the one. If, therefore, the one 
which is of itself one, in no respect participates of multitude, multitude 
will be entirely posterior to the one; participating indeed of the one, but 
not being participated by the one. 

But if the one also participates of multitude, s ubsisting indeed as one 
according to hyparxis, but as uotone, according to participation, the one 
will be multiplied, just as multitude is united on account of the one. The 
one, therefore, will communicate with multitude, and multitude with the 
one. But things which coalesce, and communicate in a certain respect 
with each other, if indeed they are collected together by something else, 
that something else is prior to them. But if they themselves collect them¬ 
selves, they are not opposed to each other. For opposites do not hasten 
to each other. Hence, if the one and multitude are oppositely divided, 
and multitude so far as multitude is not one, and the one so far as one is 
not multitude, neither will one of these subsisting in the other be one and 
at the same time two. If, also, there is something prior to them which 
collects them, this will either be one, or not one. But if it is not one, it 
will either be many or nothing. It will not however be many, lest multi- 


\ 


Digitized by boogie 



304 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. VI. VII. 


tude should be prior to the one, nor jet will it be nothing. For how can 
nothing congregate ? It is, therefore, one alone. For this which is the 
one cannot be many, lest there should be a progression to infinity. It is, 
therefore, the one itself, and all multitude is from the one itself 

PROPOSITION VI. 

Concerning Unity. 

Every multitude consists either of things united, or of unities. 

For that each of things many will not be itself multitude alone, and 
again that each part of this will not be multitude alone is evident. But 
if it is not multitude alone, it is either united, or unities («w&«r). And if, 
indeed, it participates of the one it is united; but if it consists of things 
of which that which is primarily united consists, it will be unities. For if 
there is the one itself, there is also that which primarily participates of it, 
and which is primarily united. But this consists of unities. For if R 
consists of things united, again things united consist of certain things, and 
this will be the case to infinity. It is necessary, however, that what is 
primarily united should consist of unities. And thus we have discovered 
what we proposed at first, [viz. that every multitude consists either of 
things united, or of unities.] 

PROPOSITION VII. 

Concerning producing causes and things produced . 

Every thing productive of another is more excellent than the nature 
of the thing produced. 

For it is either more excellent, or less excellent, or equal. Hence, that 
which is produced from this, will either also itself possess a power produc- 


Digitiz ed by boogie 


PROP. VII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


305 


tive of something else, or it will be entirely unprolific. But if it is unpro- 
lific, according to this very thing it will be inferior to that by which it was 
produced. And through its inefficacy it is unequal to its cause which is 
prolific, and has the power of producing. But if it also is productive of 
other things, it either likewise produces that which is equal to itself, and 
this in a similar manner in all things, and all beings will be equal to each 
other, and no one thing will be better than another, that which produces, 
always giving subsistence in a consequent series to that which is equal to 
itself; or it produces that which is unequal to itself, and thus that which 
is produced, will no longer be equal to that which produces it. For it is 
the province of equal powers to produce equal things. The progeny of 
these, however, will be unequal to each other, if that which produces 
indeed, is equal to the cause prior to itself, but the thing posterior to it is 
unequal to it. Hence, it is not proper that the thing produced should be 
equal to its producing cause. 

Moreover, neither will that which produces ever be less than that 
which is produced by it. For if it imparts essence to the thing produced, 
it will also supply it with essential power. But if it is productive of all 
the power which that posterior to it possesses, it will also be able to pro¬ 
duce itself such as that posterior nature is. And if this be the case it will 
also make itself 1 more powerful. For impotency cannot hinder, pro¬ 
ductive power being present, nor a defect of will; since all things natu¬ 
rally aspire after good. Hence, if it is able to render another thing more 
perfect, jt will also perfect itself before it perfects that which is posterior 
to itself. Hence, that which is produced, is not equal to, nor more excel¬ 
lent than, its producing cause. The producing cause, therefore, is in 
every respect better than the nature of the thing produced. 


1 For tat nm here it is necessary to read four*. 


Proc, 


Vol. II. 


2 Q 


Digitized by boogie 



8Q6 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. VIII. IX. 


PROPOSITION VIII. 

Concerning the first good , which is called the good itself. 

That which is primarily good, and which is no other than the good itself 
is the leader of all things that in any way whatever participate of good. 

For if all beings aspire after good, it is evident that what is primarily 
good is beyond beings. For if it is the same with some one being, either 
being and the good are the same, and this particular being will no longer 
be desirous of good, since it is that to which it is passive, [i. e. since it is 
the goocQ- For that which aspires after any thing is indigent of that after 
which it aspires, and is different from it. And [if some one being and 
the good are the same] being indeed will participate, and that which is 
participated in being will be the good. Hence, the good is a certain good 
inherent in a certain participant, and after which the participant alone 
aspires, but is not that which is simply good, and which all beings desire. 
For this isrthe Common object of desire to all beings. But that which is 
inherent in a certain thing, pertains to that alone which participates of it. 
Hence, that which is primarily good, is nothing else than good. For what¬ 
ever else you may add to it, you will diminish by the addition the goody and 
will make it to be a certain good, instead of that which is simply good. 
For that which is added not being the goody but something less than it, 
will by its own essence diminish the good. 


PROPOSITION IX. 

Concerning that which is sufficient to itself. 

Every thing which is sufficient to itself, either according to essence, or 
according to energy, is more excellent than that which is not sufficient to 
itself, but has the cause of its perfection suspended from another cause. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



fcROP. X. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


307 


For if all beings naturally aspire after good, and one thing supplies 
well-being from itself, ‘ but another is indigent of something else, the one 
indeed will have the cause of good present, but the other separate and 
apart. By how much the nearer, therefore, the former is to that which 
supplies the object of desire [i. e. to the good], by so much the more 
excellent will it be than that which is indigent of a separate cause, and 
externally receives the perfection of its hyparxis, or its energy. For since 
that which is sufficient to itself is both similar and diminished, it is more 
similar to the good itself [than that which is not self-sufficient]. It is 
diminished indeed through participating of the good, and because it is not 
primarily the good. Yet it is in a certain respect allied to it, so far as it 
is able to possess good from itself. But to participate, and to participate 
through another, are more remote from that which ist primarily good, and 
which is nothing else than good. 


PROPOSITION X. 

Every thing which is sufficient to itself is inferior to tHat which is 
simply good. 

For what else is a thing sufficient to itself, than that which from 
itself and in itself possesses good ? But this is now full of good, and 
participates of it, but is not that which is simply good. For that is 
better than participation and plenitude, as has been demonstrated. If, 
therefore, that which is sufficient to itself, fills itself with good, that from 
which it fills itself, will be more excellent than the self-sufficient, and will 
be above self-sufficiency. And neither will that which is simply good be 
indigent of any thing. For it does not aspire after any thing else; since 
by aspiring after it would be deficient of good. Nor is that which is 
.simply good sufficient to itself. For thus it would be full of good, and 
would not be primarily the good. 

1 It is here necessary to supply the words of’iayrou. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



SO* 


ELEMENTS 


PROF. XI. 


PROPOSITION XI. 

Concerning Cause. 

All beings proceed from one first cause. 

For either there is not any cause of beings, or the causes of all finite 
thin gs are in a circle, or the ascent is to infinity, and one thing is the cause 
of another, and the pre>subsistence of essence will in no respect stop. 
If, however, there is no cause of beings, there will neither be an order of 
things second and first, of things perfecting and perfected, of things 
adorning and adorned, of things generating and generated, and of agents 
and patients, nor will there be any science of beings. For the knowledge 
of causes is the work of science, and we are then said to know scientifically, 
when we know the causes of things. 1 

But if causes revolve in a circle, the same things will be prior and 
posterior, more powerful and more imbecil. For every thing which 
produces is better than the nature of that which is produced. It makes, 
however, no difference to conjoin cause to effect, and to produce from 
cause, through many, or through fewer media. For cause will be more 
excellent than all the intermediate natures of which it is the cause. And 
by how much the more numerous the media, by so much greater is the 
causality of the cause. 

And if the addition of causes is to infinity, and there is always again 
another cause prior to another, there will be no science of any being. For 
there is not a knowledge of any thing infinite. But causes being unknown, 
neither will there be a science of the things consequent to the causes. If, 
therefore, it is necessary that there should be a cause of beings, and 
causes are distinct from the things caused, and there is not an ascent to 
infinity, there is a first cause of beings, from which as from a root every 
thing proceeds; some things indeed being nearer to, but others more 
remote from it. For that it is necessary there should be one principle has 
been demonstrated; * because all multitude subsists posterior to the one. 

* This is asserted by Aristotle in his Posterior Analytics. 

1 In Prop. ff. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. XII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


S 09 


PROPOSITION XII. 

The principle and first cause of all beings is the good. 

For if all things proceed from one cause, [as has been above demon¬ 
strated] it is requisite to call that cause either the good, or that which is 
more excellent than the good. But if it is more excellent than the good, 
whether is any thing imparted by it to beings, and to the nature of beings, 
or nothing? And if indeed nothing is imparted by it an absurdity will 
ensue. For we shall no longer preserve it in the order of cause; since it 
is every where requisite that something should be present from cause to 
things caused, * and especially from the first cause from which all things 
are suspended, and on account of which every being exists. But if 
something is imparted by it to beings, in the same manner as there is by 
the good, there will be something better than goodness in beings imparted 
to them by the first cause. For being more excellent than, and above 
the good, it can never bestow on secondary natures any thing subordinate 
to that which is imparted by the nature posterior to itself.* But what 
can be more excellent than goodness ? Since we say that the more ex¬ 
cellent itself is that which participates of a greater good. Hence, if that 
which is not good cannot be said to be more excellent than, it must 
entirely be secondary to the good. If, likewise, all beings aspire after 
the good, how is it any longer possible that there should be something 
prior to this cause? For if they also aspire after that which is prior to 
the good, how can they especially aspire after the good? But if they do 
not aspire after it* how is it possible that things which proceed from it 
should not desire the cause of all ? Hence, if it is the good from which 
all beings are suspended, the good is the principle and first cause of all 
things. 

1 For toi ; 6UTWi$ here, it is obviously necessary to read rots amar 01$. 

1 For cm to fw ctvrrjv St$0)0*1, it is necessary to read m ro jatr cum\v $18 «kti. 


Digitized by boogie 



310 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XIII. XIV. 


PROPOSITION XIII. 

Every good has the power of uniting its participants, and every union 
is good; and the good is the same with the one. 

For if the good is preservative of all beings, (on which account also it 
is desirable to all things) but that which is preservative and connective 
of the essence of every thing, is the one; for all things are preserved by 
the one , and dispersion removes every thing from essence;— if this be the 
case, the good will cause those things to which it is present, to be one, and 
will connect and contain them according to union. And if the one is 
collective and connective of beings, it will perfect every thing by its 
presence. Hence, therefore, it is good to all things to be united. If, 
however, union is of itself good, and good has the power of uniting, the 
simply good, and the simply one are the same, uniting and at the same 
time benefiting beings. Hence it is that those things which after a 
manner fall off from the goody are at the same time also deprived of the 
participation of the one. And those things which become destitute of 
the one , being filled with separation, are after the same manner likewise 
deprived of the good. Hence, goodness is union, and union is goodness, 
and the one is that which is primarily good. 

PROPOSITION XIV. 

Concerning the immoveable and self-motive principle , or cause. 

' Every being is either immoveable or moved. And if moved, it is either 
moved by itself, or by another. And if indeed it is moved by itself, it is 
self-motive; but if by another, it is alter-motive. Every thing therefore, 
is either immoveable, or self-motive, or alter-motive. 

For it is necessary since there are alter-motive natures, that there 
should also be that which is immoveable, and that the self-motive nature 
should subsist between these. For if every thing alter-motive is moved in. 
consequence of being moved by another thing, motions will either be in 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. XV. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


311 


a circle, or they will proceed to infinity. 1 But they will neither be in a 
circle, nor have an infinite progression, since all beings are bounded by 
the principle of things and that which moves is better than that which ia 
moved, fience there will be something immoveable which first moves.* 
But if this be the case, it is also necessary that there should be some¬ 
thing which is self-motive. For if’ all things should stop, what will that 
be which is first moved ? It cannot be that which is immoveable ; 4 for it 
is not naturally adapted to be moved ; nor that which is alter-motive; 
for that is moved by something else. It remains therefore, that the 
self-motive nature is that which is primarily moved. For it is this 
also which conjoins alter-motive natures to that which is immoveable, 
being in a certain respect a middle, moving and at the same time being 
moved. For of these, the immoveable moves only, but the alter-motive 
is moved only. Every thing therefore, is either immoveable, or self-motive, 
or alter-motive. 

COROLLARY. 

From these things likewise, it is evident, that of things which are 
moved, the self-motive nature is the first; but that of things which move 
the immoveable is the first. 

PROPOSITION XV. 

Concerning an incorporeal essence , and what the peculiarity of it is. 

Every thing which is converted to itself is incorporeal. 

For no body is naturally adapted to revert to itself. For if that which 
is converted to any thing is conjoined with that to which it is converted, 
it is evident that all the parts of the body which is converted to itself, will 
be conjoined with all the parts. For this it is for a thing to be converted 
to itself, when both that which is converted, and that to which it is 
converted, become one. This however is impossible in body, and in 

* From the 11th Proposition. 1 From the 7th Proposition. 

* h is wanting in the original. 4 This is asserted in the Phxdrus of Plato. 


Digitized by v^ooQie 



312 


ELEMENTS 


prop. xvi. xvn. 


short, in all partible things. For the whole of that which is partible is 
not conjoined with the whole, on account of the separation of the parts, 
some of which are situated differently from others. No body therefore, 
is naturally adapted to revert to itself, so aa that the whole may be 
converted to the whole. Hence if there is any thing which has the 
power of reverting to itself it is incorporeal and impartible. 

PROPOSITION XVI. 

Every thing which is converted to itself, has an essence separate from 
all body. 

For if it was inseparable from any body whatever, it would not have a 
certain energy separate from body.' For thus energy would be more 
excellent than essence; since the latter indeed would be indigent of 
bodies, but the former would be sufficient to itself, and would not be in 
want of bodies: If therefore any thing is essentially inseparable from 
body, it is also in a similar manner inseparable according to energy, or 
rather it is in a still greater degree inseparable. But if this be the case, 
it will not revert to itself. For that which is converted to itself being 
something different from body, has an energy separate from body, and 
not either through, or together with body, since the energy, and that to 
which the energy is directed, are not at all in want of body. Hence, that 
which is converted to itself, is entirely separate from bodies. 

PROPOSITION XVII. 

Every thing which moves itself primarily, is convertive to itself. 

For if it moves itself, and its motive energy is directed to itself, that 
which moves, and that which is moved are at the same time one. For 
it either moves in a part but is moved in a part, or the whole moves and 

* That if an essence is inseparable from body, it is impossible that the energy proceeding from 
this essence should be separate from body, Aristotle also demonstrates in his treatise On the Soul. 


N 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP." XVIII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


313 


is moved, [or the whole moves, but a part is moved, or'] the Contrary. 
But if one part indeed, is that which moves, and another part is that 
which is moved, it will not be essentially self-motive, since it will consist 
of things which are not self-motive, but which appear indeed to be so* yet 
are not so essentially. 

If however, the whole moves, but the part is moved, or the contrary, 
there will be a certain part in both which according to one, moves and at 
the same time is moved/ And this is that which is primarily self-motive. 
If however, one and the same thing moves and is moved, it will have the 
energy of moving to itself, being motive of itself. But it is converted to 
that towards which it energizes. Every thing therefore which primarily 
moves itself, is converted to itself. 

PROPOSITION XVIII. 

Every thing which imparts existence to others, is itself that primarily 
which it communicates to the natures that are supplied by it with 
existence. 

For if it gives existence, and makes the communication from its own 
essence, that which it gives is subordinate to its own essence [by the 7th 
Proposition]. But that which it is, it is in a greater and more perfect 
degree; since every thing which gives subsistence to a certain thing, is 
better than and not the same with it. For it is primarily, but the other 
is secondarily that which it is. For it is necessary either that each should 
be the same, and that there should be one definition of both, or that there 
should be nothing common and the same in both, or that the one should 
subsist primarily, but the other secondarily. If however indeed, there is 
the same definition of both, the one will no longer be cause, but the oth^r 
effect; nor will the one subsist essentially, but the other by participation ; 

- r» 

* The words within the brackets are wanting in the original, though perfectly necessary to the 
demonstration of the Proposition. Hence, the words oXov ww, ptgo t Si xivmai, >j, must be supplied 

* For if the whole mores, the part winch is moved will at the satoe time be motive. • 

Proc. Vox,. II. 2 R 


Digitized by boogie 



314 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XIX. XX. 


nor will the one be the maker, but the other the thing made., But if they 
have nothing which is the same, the one will not give subsistence to the 
other by its very being, in consequence of communicating nothing to the 
existence of the other. Hence, it remains that the one should be 
primarily that which it gives, but that the other should be secondarily 
that to which existence is given; the fqrmer supplying the latter from its 
very being. 


PROPOSITION XIX. 

Every thing which is primarily inherent in a certain nature of beings, 
is present to all the beings that are arranged according to that nature, and 
this conformably to one reason, and after the same manner. 

For if it is not present to all of them after the same manner, but to 
some and not to others, it is evident that it was not primarily in that 
nature, but that it is in some things primarily, and in others secondarily, 
that sometimes participate of it. For that which at one time exists, but 
at another time does not, does not exist primarily, nor of itself. But it 
is adventitious, and is imparted from some other place to the things in 
which it is thus inherent. 


PROPOSITION XX. 

The essence of soul is beyond all bodies, the intellectual nature is 
beyond all souls, and the one is beyond all intellectual hypostases. 

For every body is moveable by something else, but is not naturally 
adapted to move itself, but by the presence of soul is moved of itself, 
lives on account of soul, and when soul is present, is in a certain respect 
self-moveable, but when it is absent is alter-moveable, as deriving this 
nature from soul which is allotted a self-moveable essence. For to 
whatever nature soul is present, to this it imparts self-motion. It is 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. XX. XXI. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


315 


however, by a much greater priority that which it imparts by its very 
being. Hence, it is beyond bodies, which become self-moveable by 
participation as being essentially self-moveable. 

Again however, soul which is moved from itself, has an order secondary 
to the immoveable nature, which subsists immoveable according to energy. 
Because of all the natures that are moved, the self-moveable essence is 
the leader; but of all that move, the immoveable is the leader. If there¬ 
fore soul being moved from itself, moves other things, it is necessary that 
prior to it, there should be that which moves immoveably. But intellect 
moves being immoveable, and energizing always with an invariable 
sameness of subsistence. For soul on account of intellect participates of 
perpetual intellectual energy, just as body on account of soul possesses the 
power of moving itself. For if perpetual intellection was primarily in 
soul, it would be inherent in all souls, in the same manner as the self¬ 
motive power. Hence, perpetual intellection is not primarily in soul. 
It is necessary therefore, that prior to it, there should be that which is 
primarily intellective. And hence, intellect is prior to souls. 

Moreover, the one is prior to intellect. For intellect though it is 
immoveable yet is not the one; for it intellectually perceives itself, and 
energizes about itself. And of the one indeed, all beings in whatever way 
they may exist, participate; but all beings do not participate of intellect. 
For those beings to whom intellect is present by participation, necessarily 
participate of knowledge; because intellectual knowledge is the principle 
and first cause of the gnostic energy. The one therefore, is beyond intel¬ 
lect ; and there is no longer any thing else beyond the one. For the one 
and the good are the same. But the good, as has been demonstrated, is 
the principle of all things. 

PROPOSITION XXI. 

That intellect is not the first cause. 

Every order beginning from a monad, proceeds into a multitude 
co-ordinate to the monad, and the multitude of every order is referred 
to one monad. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



$16 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XXL 


For the monad having the relation of a principle, generates a multitude 
allied to itself. Hence one series, and one whole order has a decrement 
into multitude from the monad. For there would no longer be an order, 
or a series, if the monad remained of itself unprolific. But multitude is 
again referred to the one common cause of all coordinate natures. For 
that in every multitude which is the same, has not its progression from 
one of those things of wbioh the multitude consists. For that which 
subsists from one alone of the many, is not common to all, but eminently 
possesses the peculiarity of that one alone. Hence, since in every order 
there is a certain communion, connexion, and sameness, through which 
some things are said to be co-ordinate, but others of a different order, it 
is evident that sameness is derived to every order from one principle. 1 
In each order, therefore, there is one monad prior to the multitude, 
which imparts one ratio and connexion to the natures arranged in it, both 
to each other, and to the whole. 

For let one thing be the cause of another, among things that are under 
the same series: but that which ranks as the cause of the one series, 
must necessarily be prior to all in that series, and all things must be 

r 

1 The truth of this may be exemplified in light* Thus lor instance we see many species of 
light) one kind emanating from the sun, another from fire and the stars, another from the moon* 
and. another from the eyes of many animals. But this light though various, is every where 
similar, and discovers in its operations a unity of nature. On account of its uniformity therefore, 
it requires one principle and not different principles. But the sun is the only principle of all 
msfevUne light. And though there are many participants of light posterior to the solar orb, yet 
they scatter their uniform light, through one solar nature, property and power. But if we again 
seek for the principle of light in the sun, we cannot say that the solar orb is this principle; for 
the various parts of it diffuse many illuminations. There will therefore, be many principles. 
But we now require one first principle of light. And if we say that the soul of the sun generates 
light, we must observe that this is not effected by her psychical multiplicity, or she would diffuse 
different lights. Hence we must assert that she generates visible by intellectual light. But again 
this production does not subsist through intellectual variety, but rather through the unity of 
intellect which is its flower and summit. This unity is a symbol of that simple unity which is the 
principle of the universe. And to this principle the solar intellect is united by its unity; and 
through this it becomes a God. This divine unity of the sun therefore, is the principle of the 
uniform light of the world, in the same manner as simple unity and goodness is the source of 
intelligible light to all intelligible natures. 





Digitized by 


Google 



OF THEOLOGY. 


PROP. XXII. 


317 


generated by it as co-ordinate, not so that eacb will be a certain 
particular thing, but that each will belong to this order. 


COROLLARY. 

From these things it is evident that both unity and multitude are 
inherent in the nature of body; that one nature has many natures 
co-suspended from it; and that many natures proceed from the one 
nature of the universe. It follows also, that the order of souls originates 
from one first soul, and proceeds with diminution into the multitude of 
souls. That in the intellectual essence also, there is an intellectual 
monad ; and that a multitude of intellects proceeds from one intellect, 
and is converted to it. That a multitude of unities likewise originates 
from the one which is prior to all things; and that there is an extension 
of these unities to the one. Hence, after the first one there are unities; 
after the first intellect, there are intellects; after the first soul there are 
souls ; and after total nature, there are natures. 


PROPOSITION XXII. 

Every thing which subsists primarily and principally in each order is 
one, and is neither two, nor more than two, but is only begotten. 

For, if it be possible, let there be two things which thus subsist ; since 
there will be the same impossibility if there are more than two; or let 
that which subsists primarily consist of both these. But if indeed it 
consists of both, it will again be one, and there will not be two things 
that are first. And if it be one of the two, each will not be first. Nor if 
both are equally primary, will each have a principal subsistence. For if 
one of them is primary, but this is not the same with the other, what will 
it be in that order? For that subsists primarily, which is nothing else 
than that which it is said to be. But each of these being different is, 
and at the same time is not that which it is said to be. 

If, therefore, these differ from each other, but they do not primarily 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



318 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XXIII. 


differ so far as they are that which they are said to be; for this primarily 
suffers that which is the same; both will not be first, but that of which 
both participating, are said to subsist primarily. 

COROLLARY.. 

From these things it is evident, that what is primarily being is one 
alone, and that there are not two primary beings, or more than two; that 
the first intellect is one alone, and that there are not two first intellects; 
and that the first soul is one. This is also the case with every form, such 
as the primarily beautiful, and the primarily equal. And in a similar 
manner in all things. Thus also, with respect to the form of animal, and 
the form of man, the first of each is one ; for the demonstration is the 
same. 


PROPOSITION XXIII. 

Concerning the Imparticipable? 

Every imparticipable gives subsistence from itself to things which are 
participated. And all participated hypostases are extended to imparti¬ 
cipable hyparxes. 

For that which is imparticipable having the relation' of a monad, as 
subsisting from itself, and not from another, and being exempt from 
participants, generates things which are able to be participated. For 
either * it remains of itself barren, and possesses nothing honourable; or 
it gives something from itself. And that which receives indeed from 
it participates, but that which is given subsists in a participated 
manner. But every thing which is something belonging to a certain 

‘ The imparticipable is that which is not consubsistent with a subordinate nature. Thus 
imparticipable intellect is the intellect which is not consubsistent with soul, but is exempt from it. 
And imparticipable soul is the soul which is not consubsistent with body. And so in other 
things. 

* Instead of « aysw, it is necessary to read >j y«g «yoros. 


Digitized by boogie 



PROP. XXIV. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


319 


thing by which it is participated/ is secondary to that which is similarly 
present to all things, and which fills all things from itself. For that which 
is in one thing is not in others. But that which is similarly present to 
ay things, in order that it may illuminate all things, is not in one thing, 
but is prior to all things. For it is either in all things, or in one of all, or 
it is prior to all. * But that indeed which is in all things being distributed 
into all, will again require another thing which may unite that which is 
distributed. And all things will no longer participate of the same thing, 
but this of one thing, and that of another, the one being divided. But if 
it is in one of all things, it will no longer be common to all, but to one 
thing. Hence if it is common to things able to participate, and is common 
to all, it will be prior to all. But this is imparticipable. 

PROPOSITION XXIV. 

Every thing which participates is inferior to that which is participated ; 
and that which is participated is inferior to that which is imparticipable. 

For that which participates, being imperfect prior to participation, but 
becoming perfect through participation, is entirely secondary to that 
which is participated, so far as it is perfect by participating. For so far 
as it was imperfect, it is inferior to that which it participates, which 
makes it to be perfect. That however which is participated since it 
belongs to a certain thing, and not to all things, is again allotted an 
hyparxis subordinate to that which is something belonging to all things, 
and not to a certain thing. For the latter is more allied to the cause of 
all; but the former is less allied to it. 

The imparticipable, therefore, is the leader of things which are parti¬ 
cipated ; but the latter are the leaders of participants. For, in short, the 
imparticipable is one prior to the many; but that which is participated 

* The original here is both defective and incorrect. Instead therefore of nw; y*y«/un> vf’ «u 
futj^neu, I read tea St Tiro? ymptm ov fUTt^rra i. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



320 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XXV. 


in the many, is one and at the same time not one; and every thing 
which participates is not one, and at the same time one. 

PROPOSITION XXV. 

Concerning the Perfect. 

Every thing perfect proceeds to the generation of those things which 
it is able to produce, imitating the one principle of all. 

For as that on account of its own goodness, unically gives subsistence 
to all beings; for the good and the one are the same, so that the boniform 
is the same with the unical; thus also those things which are posterior 
to the first, on account of their perfection, hasten to generate beings 
inferior to their own essence. For perfection is a certain portion of 
the good, and the perfect, so far as it is perfect, imitates the good. But 
the good gives subsistence to all things. So that the perfect likewise, is 
productive according to nature of those things which it is able to produce. 
And that indeed which is more perfect, by how much the more perfect it 
is, by so much the more numerous are the progeny of which it is the 
cause. For that which is more perfect, participates in a greater degree 
of the good. It is, therefore, nearer to the good. But this being the 
case, it is nearer to the cause of all. And thus, it is the cause of a 
greater number of effects. That, however, which is more imperfect, by 
how much the more imperfect it is, by so much the less numerous are the 
effects of which it is the cause. For being more remote from that which 
produces every thing, it gives subsistence to fewer effects. For to that 
which gives subsistence to, or adorns, or perfects, or connects, or vivifies, 
or fabricates, all things, that nature is more allied which produces a 
greater number of each of these; but that is more remote which 
produces a less number of each. 

«. COROLLARY. 

From these things it is evident, that the nature which is most remote 
from the principle of all, is unprolific, and is not the cause of any thing. 


Digitized by 



PROP. XXVI. XXVII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


321 


For if it generated a certain thing, and had something posterior to itself, 
it is evident that it would no longer be most remote, but that which it 
produced would be more remote than itself, from the principle of all 
things, but it would be nearer to productive power, and besides^ this, 
would imitate the cause which is productive of all beings. 

T>ROPOSITION XXVI. 

t 

Every cause which is productive of other things, itself abiding in itself, 
produces the natures posterior to itself, and such as are successive. 

For if it imitates the one , but that immoveably gives subsistence to 
things posterior to itself, every thing which produces will possess in a „ 
similar manner the cause of productive energy. But the one gives 
subsistence to things immoveably. For if through motion, the motion 
will be in it, and being moved, it will no longer be the one , in consequence 
of being changed from the one. But if motion subsists together with it, 
it will also be from the one , and either there will be a progression to 
infinity, or the one will produce immoveably; and every thing which 
produces will imitate the producing cause of all things. For every 
where, from that which is primarily, that which is not primarily derives 
its subsistence; so that the nature which is productive of certain things 
originates from that which is productive of all things. Hence every 
producing cause produces subsequent natures from itself. And while 
productive natures abide in themselves undiminished, secondary natures 
are produced from them. For that which is in any respect diminished, 
cannot abide such as it is. 

PROPOSITION XXVII. 

Every producing cause, on account of its perfection, and abundance 
of power, is productive of secondary natures. 

For if it produced not on account of the perfect, but through a defect 
* Instead of xa* on «XAo in this place, it appears to me to be necessary to read xa* on 

Proc. Vol. II. 2 S 


Digitized by boogie 



S&2 


ELEMENTS, 


PEOP. xxym. 


according to power, it would not b.e able to preserve its own- order 
immoveable. For that which imparts existence to. another thing through 
defect and imbecility, imparts subsistence to it, through its. own mutation 
and change in quality. But every thing which produces remains such as 
it is, and in consequence of thus remaining, that which is posterior to'it* 
proceeds into existence. Hence, being full and perfect, it gives subsist¬ 
ence to secondary natures immoveably and without diminution, it being 
that which it is, and neither being changed into them, nor diminished. 
For that which is. produced, is not a distribution into parts of the producing 
cause; since this is. neither appropriate to the generating energy, nor to 
generating causes. Nor is it a transition. For it does not become the 
matter of that which proceeds; since it remains such as it is, and that 
which is produced is different from it. Hence that which generates is 
firmly established undiminished ; through prolific power multiplies itself; 
and from itself imparts secondary hypostases. 

PROPOSITION XXVIII. 

Every producing cause gives subsistence to thing} similar to itself, 
prior to such as are dissimilar. 

f 

For since that which produces is necessarily more excellent than that 
which is produced, they can never be simply the same with each other, 
and equal in power. But if they are not the same and equal, but different 
and unequal, they are either entirely separated from each other, or they 
are both united and separated. If, however, they are entirely separated, 
they will not accord with each other, and no where will that which 
proceeds from a cause sympathize with it. Hence neither will one of 
these participate of the other, being entirely different from it. For that 
which is participated, gives communion to its participant, with reference 
to that of which it participates. Moreover, it is necessary that the thing 
caused should participate of its cause, as from thence possessing its 
essence. 


*' Instead of prr' oorto here, it is necewarytoread jmt* mvto. 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. XXIX. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


323 


But if that which is produced, is partly separated from and partly 
united to its producing cause, if indeed, it suffers each of these equally, 
it will equally participate and not participate. So that after the same 
manner, it will both have essence and not have it from the producing 
cause. And if it is more separated from than united to it, the thing 
generated will be more foreign than allied to that by which it is generated, 
will be more unadapted than adapted to it, and be more deprived of, 
than possess sympathy with it. If, therefore, the things which proceed 
from causes are allied to them according to their very being, have 
sympathy with them, are naturally suspended from them, and aspire 
after contact with them, desiring good, and obtaining the object of their 
desire through the cause of their existence,—-if this be the case, it is 
evident that things produced are itt a greater degree united to their 
producing causes, than separated front them. Things, however, which 
are more united, are mote similar than dissimilar to the natures to which 
they are especially United. Every producing cause, therefore, gives sub¬ 
sistence to things similar to itself prior to such as are dissimilar. 

PROPOSITION XXIX. 

Every progression is effected through a similitude of secondary to first 
natures. 

For if that which produces, gives subsistence to similars prior to 
dissimilars, the similitude derived from the producing causes will give 
subsistence to the things produced. For similars are rendered similar 
through similitude, and not through dissimilitude. If, therefore, progres¬ 
sion in its diminution preserves a [certain] sameness of that which is 
generated with that which generates, and exhibits that which is posterior 
to the generator such in a secondary degree, as the generator is prima¬ 
rily, it will have its subsistence through similitude. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



324 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XXX. XXXL. 


PROPOSITION XXX, 

Every thing which is produced from a certain thing without a medium,, 
abides in its producing cause, and proceeds from it. 

For if every progression is effected, while primary natures remain 
permanent, and is accomplished through similitude, similars being 
constituted prior to dissimilars,—if this be the case, that which' is 
produced will in a certain respect abide in its producing cause. For 
that which entirely proceeds, will have nothing which is the same with 
the abiding cause, but will be perfectly separated from it, and will not 
have any thing common with and united to it. Hence it will abide in 
its cause, in the same manner as that also abides in itself. If, however, 
it abides, but does not proceed, it will in no respect differ from its cause, 
nor will it, while that abides, be generated something different from it 
For if it is something different it is separated and apart from its cause* 
If, however, it is apart, but the cause abides, it will proceed from the 
eause, in order that while it abides, it may be separated from it. So far 
therefore, as that which is produced has something which is the same 
with the producing 1 cause, it abides in it; but so far as it is different, it 
proceeds from it. Being, however, similar, it is in a certain respect at 
once both the same and different. Hence, it abides, and at the same 
time proceeds, and it is neither of these without the other. 

PROPOSITION XXXI. 

Every thing which proceeds from a certain thing essentially, is 
converted to that from which it proceeds. 

For if it should proceed indeed, but should not return to the cause of 
this progression, it would not aspire after its cause. For every thing: 
which desires is converted to the object of its desire. Moreover, every. 

* For K»g ov here, it is necessary to read ox.. 



Digitized by 


Google 




PROP. XXXII. XXXIII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


325 


thing aspires after good, and to each thing the attainment of it is through 
the proximate cause. Every thing, therefore, aspires after its cause. 
For well-being is derived to every thing from that through which its 
existence is derived. But appetite is first directed to that through 
which well-being is derived. And conversion is to that to which 
appetite is first directed. 

PROPOSITION XXXII. 

All conversion is effected through the similitude of the things converted 
to that to which they are converted. 

For every thing which is converted, hastens to be conjoined with its 
cause, 1 and aspires after communion and colligation with it. But simili¬ 
tude binds all things together, just as dissimilitude separates and disjoins 
all things. If, therefore, conversion is a certain communion and contact, 
but all communion and all contact are through similitude,—if this be the 
case, all conversion will be effected through similitude. 

PROPOSITION XXXIII. 

Every thing which proceeds from a certain thing and is converted to 
it, has a circular energy. ' 

For if it reverts to that from which it proceeds, it conjoins the end to 
the beginning, and the motion is one and continued one motion being 
from that which abides, but the other being directed to the abiding 
cause. Hence all things proceed in a circle from causes to causes; 
greater and less circles being continually formed of conversions, some of 
which are to the natures [immediately} placed above the things that are 
converted, but others are to still higher natures, and so on as far as to- 
the principle of all things. For all things proceed from this principle, 
and are converted to it. 


* Instead of xpos -too here, it is necessary to read xpos etmov- 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



32 6 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XXXIV. XXXV. 


PROPOSITION XXXIV. 

Every tiling which is converted according to nature, makes its conver¬ 
sion to that, from which also it had the progression of its proper 
hypostasis. 

For if it is converted according to nature, it will have an essential 
desire of that to which it is converted. But if this be the case, the* 
whole being of it is suspended from that to which it makes an essential 
conversion, and it is essentially similar to it. Hence also it lias a natural 
sympathy with, as being allied to the essence of it. If this, however, be 
the case, either the being ol both is the same, or the one is derived from 
the other, or both arc allotted similitude from a certain other one. But if 
the being of both is the same, how is the one naturally converted to the 
other? And if both are from a certain one, it will be according to nature 
for both to be converted to that one. It remains, therefore, that the 
one must derive its being from the other. But if this be the case, the 
progression will be from that to which the conversion is according to 
nature. 


COROLI.ABT. 

From these things, therefore, it is evident that intellect is the object of 
desire to all things, that all things proceed from intellect, and that the 
whole world though it is perpetual possesses its essence from intellect. 
For it is not prevented from proceeding from intellect because it is 
perpetual. For neither because it is always arranged is it not converted 
to intellect, but it always proceeds, is essentially perpetual, and is always 
converted, and indissoluble according to order. 

PROPOSITION XXXV. 

Every thing caused, abides in, proceeds from, and returns, or is 
converted to, its cause. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. XXXVI. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


327 


For if it alone abided* it would in no respect differ from its cause, being 
without separation and distinction from it. For progression is accompa* 
nied with separation. But if it alone proceeded, it would be unconjoined 
and deprived of sympathy with its cause, having no communication with 
it whatever. And if it were alone converted, how can that which Has not 
its essence from the cause, be essentially converted to that which is 
foreign to its nature ? But if it should abide and proceed, but should not 
be converted, how will there be a natural desire to every thing of well¬ 
being, and of good, and an excitation to its generating cause? And if it 
should proceed and be converted, but should not abide, how being 
separated from its cause will it hasten to be conjoined with it ? For it was 
unconjoined prior to its departure; since if it had been conjoined, it 
would entirely have abided in it. But if it should abide and be converted, 
but should hot proceed, how can that which is not' separated be able to 
revert to its cause ? For every thing which is converted resembles that 
which is resolved into the nature from which it is essentially divided. It 
is necessary however, either that it should abide alone, or be converted 
alone, or alone proceed, or that the extremes should be bound-to each 
other, or that the medium should be conjoined with each of the extremes, 
or that all should be conjoined. Hence it remains that every thing must 
abide in its cause, proceed from, and be converted to it. 

PROPOSITION XXXVI. 

Of all things which are multiplied according to progression, the first 
are more perfect than the second, the second than those posterior to 
them, and after the same manner successively. 

For if progressions separate productions from their causes, and there 
are diminutions of things secondary with respect to such as are first,' it 
follows that 6rst natures in proceeding, are more conjoined with their 
causes, being [as it were,] germinations from them. But second natures 

1 Instead .of *»$ to Stoxgifa, it is necessary to read to; to m haxgitt*. 


Digitized by boogie 



328 


ELEMENTS 


PIJOP. XXXVII. XXXVIII. 

are more remote from their causes, and in a similar manner such as are 
successive. Things however, which are nearer and more allied to their 
causes, are more perfect. For causes are more perfect than things 
caused. But things which are more remote art more imperfect, being 
dissimilar to their causes. 

PROPOSITION XXXVII. 

Of all things which subsist according to conversion, the first are more 
imperfect than the second, and the second than those that follow; but 
the last are the most perfect. 9 _ 

For if conversions are effected in a circle, and conversion is directed to 
that from which progression is derived, but progression is from that which 
is most perfect, hence conversion is directed to the most perfect. And if 
^ conversion first begins from that in which progression terminates, but 
progression terminates in that which is most imperfect, conversion will 
begin from the most imperfect. Hence in things which subsist according 
to conversion, such as are most imperfect are the first, but such as are 
most perfect, the last. 

PROPOSITION XXXVIII. 

Every thing which proceeds from certain numerous causes, is converted 
through as many causes as those are through which it proceeds, and all 
conversion is through the same things as those through which progression 
is effected. 

For since each of these takes place through similitude, that indeed 
which has a transition immediately from a certain thing, is also immedi¬ 
ately converted to it. For the similitude here is without a medium. 
But that which requires a medium in proceeding, requires also a medium 
according to conversion. For it is necessary that each should be effected 
with reference to the same thing. Hence the conversion will be first to 
the medium, and afterwards to that which is better than the medium. 


Digitized by 


Google 


PROP. XXXIX. XL. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


329 

Through such things therefore as being is derived to each thing, through 
so many well-being also is derived, and vice versa. 

PROPOSITION XXXIX. 

Every being is either alone essentially converted, or vitally, or also 
gnostically. 

For either it alone possesses being from its cause, or life together with 
being, or it likewise receives from thence a gnostic power. So far there¬ 
fore as it alone is, it makes an essential conversion, but so far as it lives, 
a vital, and so far as it likewise knows, a gnostic conversion. For in 
such a way as it proceeded from its cause, such also is the mode of its 
conversion to it, and the measures of its conversion are defined by the 
measures according to progression. Desire therefore is to some things 
according to being alone, this desire being an aptitude to the participation 
of causes; but to others it is according to life, being a motion to more 
excellent natures; and to others, it is according to knowledge, being a 
co-sensation of the goodness of causes. 

PROPOSITION XL. 

Of all things which proceed from another cause, those which exist 
from themselves, and which are allotted a self-subsistent essence,are the 
leaders. 

« 

For if every thing which is sufficient to itself, either according to 
essence, or according to energy, is more excellent than that which is 
suspended from another cause ; but that which produces itself, since it 
produces the being of itself, is sufficient to itself with respect to essence ; 
but that which is alohe produced by another is not sufficient to itself; 
and the self-sufficient is more allied to the good; but things more allied 
* and similar to their causes, subsist from cause prior to such as are 
dissimilar;—this being the case, things which are produced by themselves, 
and are self-subsisteut, are more ancient than those which proceed into 
Proc. Vol. II. 2 T 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



990 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XLI. 


existence from another cause alone. For either there will be nothing 
self-subsistent, or the good is a thing of this kind, or the first things that 
subsist from the good. But if there is nothing self-subsistent, there will 
not in reality be in any thing self-sufficiency. Nor will it be in the good, 
since that being the one is better than self-sufficiency. It is also the good 
itself, and not that which possesses the good. But if the good was self- 
subsistent, in consequence of itself producing itself, it will not be the one. 
For that which proceeds from the one is not the one. And it would 
proceed from itself, if it was self-subsistent; so that the one, would at the 
same time be one and not one. Hence, it is necessary that the self- 
subsistent should be posterior to the first. And it is evident that it will 
be prior to things which alone proceed from another cause. For it has a 
more principal subsistence than these, and is more allied to the good , as 
has been demonstrated. 


PROPOSITION XLI. 

Every thing which is in another is alone produced by another; but 
every thing which is in itself is self-subsistent. 

For that which is in another thing and is indigent of a subject* can 
never be generative of itself. For that which is naturally adapted to* 
generate itself, doe3 not require another seat, because it is contained by 
itself, and is preserved in itself apart from a subject. But that which 
abides, and; is able to be established in itself, is productive of itself, itself 
proceeding into itself, and being connective of itself. And thus it is in 
itself, as the thing caused in its cause. For it is not in itself, as in place* 
or as in a subject. For place is different from that which is in place, and 
that which is in a subject is different from the subject. But this which 
is in itself is the same with that in which it is inherent; for it is self-sub¬ 
sistent. And it is in such a manner in itself, as that which is from a 
cause is in the cause. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. XLII. XLIII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


331 


PROPOSITION XLII. 

Every thing self-subsistent is convertive to itself. 

For if it proceeds from itself, it will also make a conversion to itself. 
For to that from which progression is derived, to that a conversion 
co-ordinate to the progression is directed. For if it alone proceeded from 
itself, but having proceeded was not converted to itself, it would never 
aspire after its proper good, and that which it is able to impart to itself. 
Every cause however is able to impart to that which proceeds from it, 1 
together with the essence which it gives, well-being conjoined with this 
essence. Hence that which is self-subsistent will impart this to itself. 
This therefore is the proper good to that which is self-subsistent. And 
hence this will not be the object of desire to that which is not* converted 
to itself. But not desiring this, it will not obtain it, and not obtaining it, 
it will be imperfect, and not sufficient to itself. If, however, self-sufficiency 
and perfection pertain to any thing, they must pertain to that which is 
self-subsistent. Hence it will obtain its proper good, and will, be 
converted to itself. 


PROPOSITION XLIII. 

Every thing which is convertive to itself is self-subsistent. 

For if it is converted to itself according to nature, it is perfect in the 
conversion to itself, and will possess essence from itself. For to every 
thing, essential progression is from that to which conversion according 
to nature is directed. If therefore, it imparts well-being to itself, it will 
likewise undoubtedly impart being to itself, and will be the lord of its 
own hypostasis. Hence, that which is able to revert to itself is self- 
subsistent. 


1 For to ouk ctvTov here, it U necessary to read rep at' dvr ov. 
* For to moT-gf^ov, it is requisite to read to fwj triorff^ov. 


Digitized by 


Google 



533 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XUV. XLV. 


PROPOSITION XLIV. 

Every thing which is convertive to itself according to energy, is also 
converted to itself essentially. > 

For if it is capable of being converted to itself in energy, but is without 
conversion in its essence, it will be more excellent according to energy 
than according to esseuce, the former being convertive, but the latter 
without conversion. For that which depends on itself, is better than 
that which alone depends on another. And that which has a power of 
preserving itself, is more perfect than that which is alone preserved by 
another. If therefore, it is convertive to itself according to the energy 
proceeding from essence,' it will also be allotted a convertive essence, so 
that it will not alone energize towards itself, but will .depend on itself, 
and will be contained, connected, and perfected by itself. 

PROPOSITION XLV. 

Every thing self-subsistent is unbegotten. 

For if it is generated, because generated indeed, it will be imperfect of 
Itself, and will be indigent of perfection from another. Because, however, 
it produces itself, it is perfect and sufficient to itself. For every thing 
generated is perfected by another which imparts generation to it not yet* 
existing. For generation is a path from the imperfect to its contrary 
the perfect. But if any thing produces itself, it is always perfect, being 
always present with the essence of itself, or rather being inherent in that 
which is perfective of essence. 


1 There is a defect here in the original, which may be supplied, if instead of *m njv axe njf tw- 
iriuf xgef taw to msTgrrrixov we read ti tot tori xara njv axo n)( oottxf tytgytta* xgef taun txt- 
rrgfirrixov. 

* ouxw is omitted in the original. 




t 


Digitized by 


PROP. XLVI. XLVI1. XLVIII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


333 


PROPOSmON XLVI. 

Every thing self-subsistent is incorruptible. 

For if it should be corrupted, it would desert itself, and would be 
without itself. This however is impossible. • For being one thing, it is at 
the same time cause and the thing caused. But every thing which is 
corrupted, departing from the cause of itself is corrupted. For so far as 
it adheres to that which contains, connects and preserves it, it is connected 
and preserved. But that which is self-subsistent never leaves its cause, 
because it does not desert itself; for it is the cause of itself. Every thing 
therefore self-subsistent is incorruptible. 

PROPOSITION XLVII. 

# , 

Every thing self-subsistent, is impartible and simple. 

For if it is partible, being self-subsistent, it will constitute itself 
partible, 1 and the whole will be converted to itself, and all will be in all 
itself. This however is impossible. Hence that which is self-subsistent 
is impartible. But it is also simple. For if a composite, one thing in it 
will be less, but another more excellent, and the more will be derived 
from the less excellent, and the less from the more excellent, if the whole 
proceeds from itself. Farther still, it would not be sufficient to itself, 
being indigent of the elements of itself of which it consists. Every thing 
therefore, which is self-subsistent, is simple. 

PROPOSITION XLVIII. 

Concerning the perpetual , in order to demonstrate that the world is 

perpetual. 

Every thing which is not perpetual, is either a composite, or subsists in 
another. 

* For /ujtaniv tetvrou, it it requisite to read fttgimy mwiw. 


« 


Digitized by 


Google 



884 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XLIX. L. 


For either it is dissoluble into those things of which it consists, and is 
entirely composed from the things into which it is dissolved, or it is 
indigent of a subject, and leaving the subject it departs into non-entity. 
But if it is simple in itself, it will be indissoluble, and incapable of being 
dissipated. 

PROPOSITION XLIX. 

Every thing self-subsistent is perpetual. 

For there are two modes according to which it is necessary a thing 
should not be perpetual; the one arising from composition, and the other 
from a subsistence in something else fas in a subject]. That which is 
self-subsistent however, is neither a composite, but simple, nor in another, 
but in itself. Hence it is perpetual. 

PROPOSITION L. 

Every thing which is measured by time, either according to essence, or 
according to energy, is generation, so far as it is measured by time. 

For if it is measured by time, it will be adapted to it to be, or to 
energize in time; and the was and the will be , which differ from each 
other, pertain to it. For if the was and the will be were the same 
according to number, it would suffer nothing by time proceeding, and 
always having one part prior, and another posterior. If therefore the 
was and the will be are different, that which is measured by time is 
becoming to be Cor rising into existence], and never is, 1 but proceeds 


■ The truth of this reasoning may be evinced by the following considerations. Every thing 
which is measured by time, and such is every corporeal nature, depends on time for the perfection 
of its being But time is composed of the past, present and future. And if we conceive that any 
one oi these parts is taken away from the nature with which it is connected, that nature must 
immediately perish. Time therefore is so essentially and intimately united with the natures 
which it measures, that their being such as it is f depends on the existence of time. But time, as 


» 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. L. OF THEOLOGY. 535 

together with time, by which it is measured, existing in a tendency to 
being. 

It likewise does not stop m the same state of being, but is always 
receiving another and another to be , just as the now in time is always 

is evident, is perpetually flowing, and this in the most rapid manner imagination can conceive. It is 
evident therefore, that the natures to which it is so essential, must subsist in a manner equally 
transitory and flowing; since, unless they flowed in conjunction with time, they would be 
separated from it, and would consequently perish. Hence, as we cannot affirm with propriety of 
any part of time, that it is; since even before we can form the assertion, the present time is no 
more; so with respect to all corporeal natures, from their subsistence in time, before we can say 
they exist, they lose all identity of being. 

Such then is the unreal condition of every thing existing in time, or of every thing corporeal, 
and entangled with matter. But this shadowy essence of body is finely unfolded by Plotinus, in 
the 6th book of his 3rd Ennead, as follows: “ Being (says he) properly so called is neither body, 
nor is subject to corporeal affections; but body and its properties belong to the region of non¬ 
entity. But you will ask, how is it possible, that visible matter should possess no real being; that 
matter in which stones and mountains reside, the solid earth, and bodies which mutually resist; 
since bodies which impel each other, confess by their collision, the reality of their existence ? You 
will likewise ask after what manner things which neither strike against, nor resist each other, 
which neither externally act, nor internally suffer, nor are in any respect the objects of sight, viz. 
soul and intellect, are to be reckoned true and real beings. We reply, that on the contrary, things 
more corpulent are more sluggish and inert, as is evident in bulky masses of earth. But whatever 
is less ponderous is more moveable, and the more elevated the more moveable. Hence fire, the 
most moveable of all the elements, flies as it were from a corporeal nature. Besides, as it appears 
to me, whatever is more sufficient to itself, disturbs others less and brings less inconvenience; but 
such things as are more ponderous and terrene, unable from their defect of being to raise 
themselves on high and becoming debile and languid, strike and oppress surrounding bodies, by 
their falling ruin and sluggish weight. Since it is evident that bodies destitute of life, fall with 
molestation on any proximate substance, and more vehemently impel and pain whatever is endued 
with sense. On the contrary, animated beings, as participating more of entity, by how much the 
more of being they possess, by so much the more harmless they impinge their neighbouring bodies- 
Hence motion, which is a kind of life, or soul, or an imitation of life in bodies, is more present 
with whatever is less corpulent; as if more of body was necessarily produced where a defect of 
being happens in a greater degree. 

Again, it will more manifestly appear from passivity, that whatever is more corpulent is more 
passive ; earth in a greater degree than the other elements; and the rest in a similar proportion. 
For some things when divided, suddenly return to their former union, when no obstacle prevents 
their conjunction. But from the section of a terrene body, the divided portions always remain 
separate, as if destitute of natural vigour, and without any inherent desire of union and consent. 


4 


Digitized by boogie 



336 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. LI. 


another and another, through the progression of time. Hence it is not a 
simultaneous whole; for it subsists in a dispersion of temporal extension, 
and is co-extended with time. This however is to possess being in non- 
being. For that which is becoming to be is not that which is become. 
Such a kind of being therefore as this is generation. * 

PROPOSITION LI. 

Every thing self-subsisteut, is essentially exempt from the natures 
which are measured by time. 

For if that which is self-subsistent is unbegotten, it will not according 
to existence be measured by time. For generation is conversant with the 
nature which is measured by time. Hence nothing self-subsistent has its 
being in time. 

Hence) they are ready by every trifling impulse) to remain as they are impelled; to rush from the 
embraces of bound) and hasten into multitude and non-entity. So that whatever becomes corpo¬ 
real in an eminent degree) as falling, fast into non-entity, has but little power of recalling itself into 
one. And on this account ponderous and vehement concussions are attended with ruin, when 
by mutual rushing one thing impels another. But when debility runs against debility, the one is 
valid against the other, in the same manner as non-entity rushing on non-entity. And this we 
think a sufficient confutation of their opinion, who only place being in the genus of body, 
persuaded by the testimony of impulses and concussions, and the phantasms perceived through 
the senses, which testify that sense is the only standard of truth. Such as these are affected in a 
manner similar to those in a dream, who imagine that the perceptions of sleep are true. For 
sense is alone the employment of the dormant soul; since as much of the soul as is merged in body, 
so much of it sleeps. But a true elevation, and true vigilance are a resurrection from, and not 
with the dull mass of body. For indeed, a resurrection with body, is only a transmigration from 
sieep to sleep, and from dream to dream, like a man passing in the dark from bed to bed. But 
that elevation is perfectly true, which entirely rises from the dead weight of bodies. For these 
possessing a nature repugnant to soul, possess something opposite to essence. And this is 
farther evident, from their generation, and their continual flowing and decay, which are properties 
entirely foreign from the nature of being substantial and real.” 


Digitized by boogie 



PROP. LII. LHIk 


OF THEOLOGY. 


$37 


PROPOSITION LII. 

Every thing eternal is a whole which subsists at once. And whether 
it has its essence alone eternal, it will possess the whole at once present, 
nor will it have this thing pertaining to itself now subsisting, but that 
afterwards which as yet is not; but as much as is possible it now possesses 
the whole without diminution, and without extension. Or whether it has 
its energy as well as its essence at once present, it possesses this also 
collectively, abiding in the same measure of perfection, and as it were, 
fixed immoveably and without transition according to one and the same 
boundary. 

For if the eternal, as the name denotes, is perpetual being, but to be 
sometimes, 1 and to subsist in becoming to be, are different from perpetual 
being, it is not proper that it should have one thing prior and another 
posterior. For if it had, it would be generation, and not being. But 
where there is neither prior nor posterior, nor was and will be, but alone 
fo be, and this a whole, there every thing subsists at once that which it is. 
The same thing also takes place with respect to the energy of that which 
Is eternal. 

COROLLA ET. 

From this it is evident that eternity is the cause to wholes of their 
existence as wholes, since every thing which is eternal either according 
to essence, or according to energy, has the whole of its essence or energy 
present with itself. 

PROPOSITION LIII. 

Concerning Eternity and Eternal Natures. 

Eternity subsists prior to all eternal natures, and time exists prior to 
every thing which subsists according to time. 

1 wot* is omitted in the original* 

Prop. Vol. II. 2 U 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



338 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. L1V. LV. 


For if every where the natures which are participated are prior to their par¬ 
ticipants, and imparticipables are prior to participated natures, it is evident 
that the eternal is one thing, the eternity which is in the eternal, another, 
and eternity itself, another. And the first of these indeed subsists as a 
participant, the second as a thing participated, and the third as an imparti¬ 
cipate. That also which is in time is one thing; for it is a participant. 
The time which is in this is another thing; for it is participated. And the 
time prior to this is another thing; for it is imparticipable. Every where 
also, that which is imparticipable is in all things the same. But that 
which is participated is in those things only by which it is participated. 
For there are many eternal, and many temporal natures in all of which 
eternity subsists according to participation. The time also which is in 
temporal natures subsists in a distributed manner; but the time which 
they participate is indivisible. And there is one time prior to both these. 
Eternity itself likewise is an eternity of eternities, and time itself is a time 
of times; and they give subsistence, the one to participated eternity, but 
the other to participated time. 

PROPOSITION LIV. 

Every eternity is the measure of eternal natures, and every time is the 
measure of things in time; and these are the only two measures of life 
and motion in beings. 

. For every thing which measures, either measures according to a part, 
or it measures the whole at once when it is adapted to that which is 
measured. That which measures, therefore, according to the whole is 
eternity; but that which measures according to parts is time. Hence, 
♦ there are only two measures, the one of things eternal, but the other of 
things in time. 


PROPOSITION LV. 

t 

Every thing which subsists according to time, either subsists through 
the whole of time, or has its hypostasis once in a part of time. 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. LVI. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


339 


For if all progressions are through similitude, and things more similar 
to first natures subsist in union with them prior to such as are dissimilar, 
but it is impossible for things which are generated in a part of time to be 
conjoined with eternal natures, (for as being generated they differ from 
first natures which are self-subsistent,' and as existing once, they are 
separated from things which always exist, but the media between these, 
are such things as are partly similar and partly dissimilar to them)— 
this being the case, the medium between things which are once generated, 
and those that exist always, is either that which is always becoming to 
be, or that which is once, or that which is not truly being. It is however 
impossible it should be that which once only truly is. And that which is 
once not truly being is the same with that which is becoming to be. 
Hence the medium is not that which is once only. It remains, therefore, 
that the medium between both is that which is always becoming to be, 
being conjoined indeed with the worse of the two through becoming to 
be, but through subsisting always, imitating an eternal nature, 

COROLLARY, 

From these things it is evident that perpetuity is twofold, the one 
indeed being eternal, but the other subsisting according to time. The 
one also being a stable, but the other a flowing perpetuity. And the one 
indeed having its being collected, and the whole subsisting at once, but 
the other diffused, and expanded according to temporal extension. And 
the one being a whole of itself, but the other consisting of parts, each of 
which is separate, according to prior and posterior, 

PROPOSITION LVI. 

Every thing which is produced by secondary natures, is produced in 
a greater degree by prior and more causal natures, by whom such as are 
secondary were also produced. 

For if that which is secondary has the whole of its essence from that 

' It is necessary here to supply the word cwtvirorruTuv. • 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



340 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. LV1I. 


which is prior to it, its power of producing is also derived from thence ; 
for powers in producing causes are essentially productive, and give 
completion to the essence of them. But if it is allotted the power of 
producing from a superior cause, it will possess from that its existence as 
the cause of things of which it is the cause, and its power of giving 
subsistence to other things will be measured from thence. If, however, 
this be the case, the things proceeding from it are effects through that 
which is prior to it. For the one perfects a cause, and the other the thing 
caused. But if this be the case, the thing caused is from thence rendered 
such as it is. 

Moreover, that it is also in a greater degree perfected from thence is 
evident. For if that which is first gives to that which is second the 
cause of producing, it will primarily possess this cause; and on this 
account that which is secondary generates, receiving from thence a 
secondary generative power. If, however, the one becomes productive 
through participation, but the other in a way superior to participation 
and primarily, that will be in a greater degree a cause, which imparts 
generative power to another thing proximate to its own nature. 

PROPOSITION LVII. 

Every cause both energizes prion to the thing caused, and gives 
subsistence to a greater number of effects posterior to it. 

For so far as it is cause, it is more perfect and more powerful than that 
which is posterior to it, and in consequence of this is the cause of a 
greater number of effects. For it is the province of a greater power to 
produce more, of an equal power to produce equal, and of a less power 
to produce a less number of effects. And the power which is able to 
effect greater things among similars, is also capable of effecting such as 
are less. But that which is able to effect such as are less, is not neces¬ 
sarily capable of producing such as are greater. If, therefore, the cause 
is more powerful, it is productive of more numerous effects. 

Moreover, such effects as the thing caused is uble to produce, the 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. LV1U. 


OF THEOLOGY* 


341 


cause is in a greater degree able to produce. For every thing which is 
produced by secondary natures, is in a greater degree produced by such 
as are prior and more causal. The cause, therefore, gives subsistence 
together with the thing caused to such effects as the thing caused is 
naturally adapted to produce. But if likewise it produces prior to it, it 
is indeed evident that it energises prior to the thing caused, according to 
the energy which is productive of it. Every cause, 'therefore, energizes 
prior to the thing caused, and together with it, and posterior to it, gives 
subsistence to other things. 

COROLLARY. 

Hence, it is evident, that of such things as soul is the cause, intellect 
also is the cause; but that soul is not also the cause of such things as 
intellect is the cause. But intellect energizes prior to soul. And such 
things as soul imparts to secondary natures, intellect also imparts in a 
greater degree. Likewise, when soul no longer energizes, intellect 
imparts by illumination the gifts of itself to those things to which soul 
does not impart herself. For that which is inanimate, so far as it parti¬ 
cipates of form, participates of intellect, and the production of intellect. 
Moreover, of such things as intellect is the cause, the good also is the 
cause; but not vice versa. For the privations of forms subsist from 
the good ; since all things are from thence. But intellect being form, 
does not give subsistence to privation. 

PROPOSITION LVIII. 

Every thing which is produced by many, is more compounded than 
that which is produced by fewer causes. 

For if every cause imparts something to that which proceeds from it, 
more numerous causes -will impart a greater number of gifts, but less 
numerous causes a less number. Hence, of participants some will 
consist of a greater number of things, but others, of a less number, of 
which each participates, some indeed through a progression from a 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



342 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. LIX. LX. 


greater number of causes, but others from a less. Those, however, which 
proceed from a greater number of causes are more compounded, but those 
from a less number of the same causes, are more simple. Every thing, 
therefore, which is produced by a greater number of causes, is more 
compounded, but that which is produced by a less number is more simple. 
For the more compounded participates of those things of which the more 
simple participates, but the contrary to this is not true. 

PROPOSITION LIX. 

Every thing which is essentially simple, is either better or worse 
than composite natures. 

For if such beings as are the extremes of things are produced by 
fewer and more simple causes, but such as are in the middle, from a 
greater number of causes, the latter indeed will be composites, but of the 
former, some are more simple according to that which is better, but other? 
according to that which is worse. That the extremes, however, are 
produced by fewer causes is evident, because such natures as are 
higher begin to produce prior to such as are subordinate, and extend 
beyond them, to things to which subordinate natures do not proceed 
through a diminution of power. For on this account also, the last of 
things, Q. e. matter] is most simple, as well as the first of things, because 
it proceeds from the first alone. With respect to simplicity, however, 
one kind subsists according to that which is better than all composition, 
but another according to that which is worse. And there is the same 
reasoning in all things, 


^PROPOSITION LX, 

Every thing which is the cause of a greater number of effects, is 
better than that which is allotted a power of producing a less number, 
and which produces the parts of those things to the wholes of which the 
other gives subsistence. 


Digitized by boogie 



PROP. LXI. LXil. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


343 


For if the one is the cause of a less, hut the other of a greater number 
of effects, but the former are parts of the latter, that which gives 
subsistence to a greater number of effects, will produce all that the other 
produces; but not vice versa. Hence the former of these two is more 
powerful and more comprehensive. For as that which proceeds is to 
that which proceeds, so is one productive power to another, when 
assumed with reference to each other. For that which is able to effect a 
greater number of things, possesses a greater and more total power. But 
this is nearer to the cause of all things. That however, which is nearer 
to this cause, is in a greater degree good, just as the cause of all is the 
good itself. Hence, that which is the cause-of a greater number of effects, 
is essentially more excellent than that which produces a less number. 


PROPOSITION LXI. 

Every power which is impartible is greater, but when divided is less. 

For if it is divided it proceeds into multitude. And if this be the case, 
it becomes more remote firom the one. But in consequence of this it is 
able to effect a less number of things, through departing from the one , 
and the unity which contains it, and will be imperfect, since the good of 
every thing consists in union. 


PROPOSITION LXII. 


Every multitude which is nearer to the one t is less in quantity than 
things more remote firom it, but is greater in power. 

For that which is nearer to is more similar to the one. But the one 
gives subsistence to all things, without having any multitude in itself. 
Hence that which is more similar to it, bang the cause of a greater 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



344 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. LXlIf. 


number of effects, since the one is the cause of all things, has more the 
form of unity, and is more impartible, because that is one . As therefore, 
that which is less multiplied, is more allied to the one y so likewise as 
being allied to the cause of all things, it is productive of a greater number 
of effects. Hence it is more powerful. 

COROLLARY. 

From these things it is evident, that there are more corporeal natures 
than souls ; more souls than intellectual natures ; and more intellects 
than divine unities. And there is the same reasoning in all things. 

i 

PROPOSITION LXIII. 

Every thing which is imparticipable gives subsistence to two-fold 
orders of participated natures, one indeed in things which sometimes 
participate, but the other in things which always and connascently par¬ 
ticipate. 

For that which is always participated, is more similar to the imparti¬ 
cipable than that which is sometimes participated. Hence, before the 
imparticipable establishes that which is sometimes, it will establish that 
which is always participable; and which by being participated differs 
from that which is posterior to it, but by the always is more allied and 
more similar to the imparticipable. Nor are there alone things which 
are sometimes participated; for prior to these are the natures which are 
always participated, through which these also are bound to imparticipa- 
bles according to a certain well ordered progression. Nor are there 
alone things which are sometimes participated. For these possessing 
an inextinguishable power, since they are always, are prolific of other 
things which are sometimes participated, and as faf as to these the dim}* 
nution proceeds. 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. ixiv. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


S45 


COROLLARY. 

From hence it is evident that of the unions proceeding from the one , and 
which illuminate beings, some are always, but others sometimes partici¬ 
pated. Intellectual participations, likewise, are in a Similar manner 
two-fold, as also are the animations of souls, and the participations of 
other forms. For beauty, similitude, permanency, and sameness, being 
imparticipable, are participated by natures which always participate, and 
secondarily by those that sometimes participate according to the same 
order. 

PROPOSITION LXIV. 

Every monad which ranks as a principle, gives subsistence to a two¬ 
fold number; one indeed of self-perfect hypostases, but the other of 
illuminations which possess their hypostasis in other things. 

For if progression is according to diminution, through things appro¬ 
priate to producing causes, perfect natures will proceed from the all¬ 
perfect, and through these as media, imperfect natures will proceed in a 
well-ordered progression, so that some indeed will be self-perfect hypo¬ 
stases, but others will be imperfect. And these latter will become the 
forms of participants. For being imperfect, they will be indigent of 
subjects in their very nature. But the self-perfect hypostases will pro¬ 
duce things which participate of themselves. For being perfect, they 
will indeed fill these from themselves, and establish them in themselves. 
But they will require nothing of inferior natures to their own subsistence. 
Self-perfect hypostases, therefore, through their separation into multitude, 
are indeed diminished with respect to their principal monad ; but through 
* their self-perfect hyparxis, they are in a certain respect assimilated to 
it. But imperfect hypostases, in consequence of subsisting in other 
things, are remote from that which subsists from itself, and through their 
imperfection are separated from that which perfects all things. Progres- 
Proc. Vol. II. 2 X 


Digitized by ^OOQi 



346 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. LXV. 


sions, however, are through similars, as far as to natures which are 
entirely dissimilar. Every monad, therefore, which ranks as a principle, 
gives subsistence to a two-fold number. 

COROLLARY. 

From these things it is evident, that of the unities, some are self-perfect 
proceeding from the one , but others are illuminations of unions. And 
with respect to intellects, that some of them are self-perfect essences, but 
others belong to animated natures, being only the images of souls. And 
thus, neither is every union a God, but this is true of a self-perfect unity 
alone, nor is every intellectual peculiarity an intellect, but an essential 
peculiarity alone [is entitled to this appellation], nor is every illumination 
of soul a soul, but there are also images of souls. 

PROPOSITION LXV. 

Every thing which has any subsistence whatever, either subsists ac¬ 
cording to cause, so as to have the form of a principle, or according to 
hyparxis, or according to participation, after the manner of an image. 

For either that which is produced is seen in that which produces, as pre¬ 
existing in cause, because every cause antecedently comprehends in itself 
the thing caused, being that primarily which the thing caused is second¬ 
arily. Or that which produces is seen in that which is produced. For 
the latter participating of the former, exhibits in itself secondarily that 
which the producing cause is primarily. Or each thing is beheld in its 
own order, and is neither seen in the cause nor in the effect. For the 
cause subsists more excellently than that which exists [out of the cause]. 
But that which is in the effect is less excellent than that which exists out 
of the cause Cbut is not in any thing else]. It is, however, necessary there 
should be that which after this manner is. But every thing subsists 
according to hyparxis in its own order. - 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



I’KOP. LXVi. LXVlIi 


OF THEOLOGY. 


347 


PROPOSITION LXVI. 

All beings with reference to each-other, are either wholes, or parts, or 
the same, or different. 

For either some of them comprehend, but the rest are comprehended, 
or they neither comprehend, nor are comprehended. And they either 
suffer something which is the same, as participating of one thing, or they 
are separated from each other. But if they comprehend, they will be 
wholes, and if they are comprehended, parts. If also many things parti* 
cipate of one thing, they are the same according to this one. But if they 
are alone many things, so far as they are many they will be different from 
each other. 


PROPOSITION LXVII. 

Every wholeness (oxonjs) is either prior to parts, or consists of parts, or 
is in a part. 

For the form of each thing is either surveyed in its cause, and we call 
that which subsists in its cause a whole prior to parts. Or it is seen in 
the parts which participate of it; and this in a two-fold respect. For it 
is either seen in all the parts together, and this is a whole consisting of 
parts, any part of which being absent diminishes the whole. Or it is 
seen in each of the parts, so that the part also becomes according to 
participation a whole; which makes the part to be a whole partially. 
The whole, therefore, which is according to hyparxis consists of parts. 
But the whole which is prior to parts is according to cause. And the whole 
which is in a part is according to participation. For this also according 
to an ultimate diminution is a whole, so far as it imitates the whole which 
consists of parts, when it is not any casual part, but is capable of being 
assimilated to the whole, of which the parts also are wholes. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



346 


ELEMENTS 


PROP, LXVIII. LXIX. 


PROPOSITION LXVIII. 

Every whole which is in a part, is a part of that whole which consists 
of parts. 

For if it is a part, it is a part of a certain whole. And it is either a part 
of the whole which it contains, according to which it is said to be a whole 
in a part. But thus it will be a part of itself, the part will be equal to 
the whole, and each will be the same. Or it is a part of a certain other 
whole. And if of some other, it is either the only part of that, and thus 
again, it will in no respect differ from the whole, being one part of one 
thing. Or it is a part in conjunction with another part. - For of every 
whole the parts are more than one, and that will be a whole from many 
parts, of which it consists. And thus the whole which is in a part, is a 
part of the whole which consists of parts. 


PROPOSITION LXIX. 

Every whole which consists of parts, participates of the wholeness 
which is prior to parts. 

For if it consists of parts, the whole is passive [i. e. the whole partici¬ 
pates of another whole]. For the parts becoming one, are passive to a 
whole on account of their union, and the whole subsists in parts which are 
not wholes. But the imparticipable subsists prior to every tiling which 
is .participated. The imparticipable wholeness, therefore, subsists prior 
to that which is participated. Hence, there is a certain form of whole¬ 
ness, prior to the whole which consists of parts, which is not passive to a 
whole, but is wholeness itself, and from which the wholeness consisting of 
parts is derived. For the whole indeed, which consists of parts, subsists 
in many places, and in many things, in various ways. It is, however, 
necessary that there should be a monad essentially of all totalities. For 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



< 


PROP. LXX. OF THEOLOGY. 349 

neither is each of these wholes genuine, since it is indigent of parts that 
are not wholes, of which it consists. Nor is the whole which is in a 
certain thing capable of being the cause of wholeness to all other things. 
Hence, that which is the cause to all wholes of their being wholes, is prior 
to parts. For if this also consisted of parts, it would be a certain whole, 
and not simply whole. And again, this would be from another whole, 
and so on, to infinity; or it will subsist on account of that which is prima* 
rily a whole, and which is not a whole from parts, but is a wholeness. 


PROPOSITION LXX. 

Every thing which is more total among principal causes, illuminates 
participants, prior to partial natures, and when these fail, still continues to 
impart its illuminations. 

For it begins its energy upon secondary natures prior to that which is 
posterior to it, and is present in conjunction with the presence of it. When 
likewise that which is posterior to it no longer energizes, it is still present, 
and that which is more causal continues to energize. And this not only 
in different subjects, but likewise in each of the natures that sometimes 
participate. Thus it is necessary, for instance, that being should be first 
generated, afterwards animal, and afterwards man. And man, indeed, is 
not, if the rational power is absent, but there is still animal, breathing 
and sentient. And again, life failing, being remains. For though a 
thing does not live, yet it has existence. And there is a similar reasoning 
in all things. 

The cause, however, of this is, that the more causal nature being more 
efficacious, energizes on the thing caused * prior [to that which is less 
causal]. For the thing caused participates first of that which is more 
powerful. And that which is secondary again energizing, that which is 
more powerful energizes with it. Because every thing which the second¬ 
ary nature produces, that which is more causal produces likewise in 

1 For iif ro MTutrtpov, it ir necessary to read *»$ro amarev. 



Digitized by boogie 



350 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. LXX1. LXXII. 


conjunction with it. When the former also fails, the latter is still present. 
For the communication of the more powerful cause, operating in a greater 
degree, leaves that which participates it, posterior to the energy of the 
less powerful cause. For through the communication of the secondary 
nature, it corroborates its own illumination. 

PROPOSITION LXXI. 

All things which among principal causes possess a more total and 
higher order in their effects, according to the illuminations proceeding 
from them, become in a certain respect subjects to the communications 
of more partial causes. And the illuminations indeed, from higher causes, 
receive the progressions from secondary causes; but the latter are esta¬ 
blished in the former. And thus some participations precede others, and 
some representations extend after others, beginning from on high, to the 
same subject, more total causes having a prior energy, but such as are 
more partial, supplying their participants with their communications, 
posterior to the energies of more total causes. 

For if more causal natures energize prior to such as are secondary on 
account of exuberance of power, and are present with those that have a 
more imperfect aptitude, and illuminate them also; but things more 
subordinate, and which are second in order, are supplied from such as 
are more causal,—it is evident that the illuminations of superior natures 
antecedently comprehend that which participates of both these, and give 
stability to the communications of things subordinate. But these illumi¬ 
nations of superior causes, employ the resemblances of subordinate 
natures as foundations, and operate on that which'participates of them, 
the superior causes themselves having a prior energy. 


PROPOSITION LXXII. 

All things which in their participants have the relation of a subject, 
proceed from more perfect and total causes. 



Digitized by 


Google 


PROP. LXXIII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


351 


For the causes of a greater number of effects, are more powerful and 
total, and are nearer to the one than the causes of fewer effects. But the 
natures which give subsistence to such things as are antecedently the 
subjects of others, are among causes the sources of a greater number of 
effects. 

COROLLARY. 

From hence it is evident why matter which derives its subsistence from 
the one , is of itself destitute of form. And why body, though it partici¬ 
pates of being, is of itself without the participation of soul. For matter 
being the subject of all things proceeds from the cause of all. But body 
being the subject of animation, derives its subsistence from that which is 
more total than soul, and participates after a certain manner of being. 


PROPOSITION LXXIII. 

Every whole is at the same time a certain being, and participates of 
being, but not every being is a whole.' 

For either being and whole are the same, or the one is prior, but the 
other posterior. If, however, a part, so far as it is a part, is being (for a 
whole is from parts which have a being), yet it is not of itself also a whole. 
Being, therefore, and whole are not the same. For if this were the case, 
a part would be a non-entity. But if a part was a non-entity, the whole 
would have no existence. For every whole is a whole of parts, either as 
existing prior to them [and therefore causally containing them in itself], 
or as subsisting in them. But the part not existing, neither is it possible 
for the whole to exist. If, however, whole is prior to being, every being 
will immediately be a whole. Again, therefore, there will not be a part. 
This, however, is impossible. For if the whole is a whole, being the whole 
of a part, the part also being a part, will be the part of the whole. 
It remains, therefore, that every whole indeed is being, but that not every 
being is a whole. 

* «Aoy is omitted is original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



352 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. LXXIV. 


COROLLARY. 

From these things, it is evident that being which has a primary sub¬ 
sistence is beyond wholeness. For the one indeed, viz. being, is present 
with a greater number of things ; since to be is present with parts, so tar 
as they are parts. But the other, viz. wholeness, is present with a less 
number of things. For that which is the cause of a greater number of 
effects is more excellent; but the cause of a leSs number is of a subordi¬ 
nate nature, as has been demonstrated. 

, t 


PROPOSITION LXXIV. 

livery form is a certain whole; for it consists of many things, each of 
which gives completion to the form. But not every whole is a form. 

For a particular' thing is a whole and also an individual, so far it is 
an individual, but neither of them is a form. For every whole consists 
of parts ; but form is that which may be divided into individual forms. 
Whole, therefore, is one thing, and form another. And the one is present 
with many things, but the other with a few. Hence, whole is above the 
forms of beings. 

COROLLARY. 

From these things it is evident that whole has a middle order between 
being and forms. And hence it follows that being subsists prior to forms, 
and that forms are beings, but that not every being is form. Whence 
also, in effects, privations are in a certain respect beings, but are no 
longer forms, and in consequence of the unical power of being, they also 
receive a certain, obscure representation of being.* 


1 L e. Any thing which is not universal (ro t»)• 

* too ovtoj seems to be wanting here in the original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. LXXV. LXXVI. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


358 


PROPOSITION LXXV. 

Every cause which is properly so called, is exempt from its effect. 

For if it is in the effect, it either gives completion to it, or is in a certain 
respect indigent of it in order to its existence, and thus it will be more 
imperfect than the thing caused. For being in the effect, it is rather a 
concause than a cause, and is either a part of that which is generated, or 
an instrument of the maker. For that which is a part in the thing gene¬ 
rated, is more imperfect than the whole. The cause also which is in 
the effect, is an instrument of generation to the maker, being unable to 
define of itself the measures of production. Every cause, therefore, 
which is properly so denominated, if it is more perfect than that which 
proceeds from it, imparts to its effect the measure of generation, and is 
exempt from instruments and elements, and in short, from every thing 
which is called a concause. 

PROPOSITION LXXVI. 

Every thing which is generated from an immoveable cause, has aa 
immutable hyparxis. But every thing which is generated from a move- 
able cause, has a mutable hyparxis. 

For if that which makes is entirely immoveable, it does not produce 
from itself that which is secondary through motion, but by its very being. 
If, however, this be the case, it has that which proceeds from it concurrent 
with its own essence. And 'if this also be the case, it will produce as 
long as it exists. But it exists always, and therefore it always gives 
subsistence to that which is posterior to itself. Hence, this is always 
generated from thence, and always is, conjoining with the ever according 
to energy of the cause, its own ever according to progression. If, how¬ 
ever, the cause is moved, that also which is generated from it will be 
essentially mutable. For that which has its being through motion, 
Proc. Vol. II. 2 Y 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



S64 


ELEMENTS 


PflOP. LXXVIL. 


changes its being when its moveable cause 1 is changed. For if, though 
produced from motion, it should itself remain immutable, it would be 
better than its producing cause. This, however, is impossible. It will 
not, therefore, be immutable. Hence, it will be mutable, and will be 
essentially moved, imitating the motion of that which gave it subsistence. 


PROPOSITION LXXVII. 

Every thing which is in capacity proceeds from that which is it): 
energy. And that which is in capacity, proceeds into energy. That 
also which is in a certain respect in capacity, so far as it is in capacity, is 
the offspring of that which is in a certain respect in energy. But that 
which is all things in capacity, proceeds from that which is all things in 
energy. 

For that which is in capacity is not naturally adapted to produce itself 
into energy, because it is imperfect. For if being imperfect it should 
become the cause to itself of perfection, and this in energy, the cause 
will be more imperfect than that which is produced by it. Hence, that 
which is in capacity, so far as it is in capacity, will not be the cause to 
itself of a subsistence in energy. For on this hypothesis, so far as it is 
imperfect, it would be the cause of perfection; since every thing which is 
in capacity, so far as it is in capacity, is imperfect, but that which is in 
energy is perfect. Hence, if that which Mas in capacity becomes in. 
energy, it will have its perfection from something else. And this will 
either be in capacity; but thus again the imperfect will be generative of 
the perfect; or it will be in energy, and either something else, or this 
which was in capacity will be that which becomes in energy. But if 
something else which is in energy produces,'operating according to its- 
own peculiarity, it will not by being in capacity make that which is im 
another to be in energy; nor will this which is now made be in energy,, 

* eurm is oaaitted in the original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. LXXVm. LXXIX. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


3SS 


unless it becomes this so far as it was in capacity. It remains, therefore, 
that from that which is in energy, that which is in capacity must be 
changed into energy. 


PROPOSITION LX XVIII. 

Every power is either perfect or imperfect. 

For the power which is prolific of energy is perfect. For it makes 
other things to be perfect through its own energies. That, however, which 
is perfective of other things is in a greater degree perfect, as being more 
self-perfect. But the power which is indigent of another that pre-exists 
in energy, according to which indigence it is something in capacity, is 
imperfect. For it is indigent of the perfection which is in another, in 
order that by participating of it, it may become perfect. Hence, such a 
power as this is of itself imperfect. So that the power of that which is 
in energy is perfect, being prolific of energy. But the power of that 
which is in capacity is imperfect, and obtains perfection from the power 
which is in energy. 


PROPOSITION LXXIX. 

Every thing which is generated, is generated from a two-fold power. * 

For it is requisite that the thing generated should possess aptitude and 
an imperfect power. And that which makes being in energy 1 that which 
the thing generated is in capacity, antecedently comprehends a perfect 
power. For all energy proceeds from inherent power. For if that which 
makes did not possess power, how could it energize, and produce some- 

* i. e. As the Greek Scholiast bbserves in the margin of this Proposition, from the efficacious 
cause of that which acts, and the aptitude of that which suffers* 

a The words to toiovy tvtpyuet ov o *vto are wanting in the original* 


Digitized by boogie 



356 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. LXXX. LXXXt 


thing else? And if that which is generated did not possess power 
according to aptitude, how could it be generated? For that which makes 
or acts, makes or acts in that which is able to suffer, but not in any casual 
thing, and which is not naturally adapted to suffer from the agent. 


PROPOSITION LXXX. 

Every body is naturally adapted of itself to suffer; but every thing 
incorporeal to act. And the former indeed is essentially inefficacious* 
but the latter is impassive. That which is incorporeal, however, suffers 
through its communion with body; just as- hodies are able to act through 
the participation of incorporeals. 

For body, so far as body, is,alone divisible, and through this becomes 
passive, being entirely partible, and this to infinity. But that which is 
incorporeal, being simple, is impassive. For neither is that which is 
impartible, capable of being divided, nor can that be changed in quality 
which is not compounded. Either, therefore, nothing will be effective, 
or this must be affirmed of an incorporeal nature, since body, so far as. 
body, does not act, because it is alone liable to be divided, and to suffer. 
For every thing which acts has an effective power; so that body, so far 
as it is body, will not act, but so far as it contains in itself a power 
of acting. Hence, when it acts, it acts through the participation of 
power. Moreover, incorporeal natures when they are inherent in bodies*, 
participate of passions, being divided together with bodies, and enjoying 
their partible nature, though according to their own essence they are 
impartible. 


PROPOSITION LXXXI. 

Every thing which is participated in a separable manner, is present 
with its participant by a certain inseparable power which it inserts in it. 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. LXXXII. LXXXHL 


OF THEOLOGY. 


35? 

For if it is itself present with the participant in a separate manner, and 
is not in it, as if it possessed its subsistence in it, a certain medium 
between the two is necessary* connecting the one with the other, an4 
which is more similar to that which is participated, and subsists in the 
participant. For if this medium is separable, how can it be participated 
by the participant, since the participant neither contains the medium, 
nor any thing proceeding from it? A power, therefore, and illumination 
proceeding from that which is separable into the participant conjoins both. 
Hence, one of these will be that through which the participation is 
effected, another will be that which is participated, and another that 
which participates. 


PROPOSITION LXXXII. 

Every thing incorporeal', which is converted to itself, when it is parti¬ 
cipated by other things, is participated in a separable manner. 

For if in an inseparable manner, the energy of it would not be separate 
from its participant, as neither would its essence. If, however, this were 
the case, it would not be converted to itself. For being converted, it will 
be separate from its participant, each being different from the other. 
If, therefore, it is able to be converted to itself, it will be participated in a: 
separable manner, when it is participated by other things. 


PROPOSITION LXXXIII. 

Every thing which has a knowledge of itself, is entirely converted to 
itself. 

For knowing itself, it is evident that it is converted to itself in energy. 
For that which knows and that which is known are one. And the 
knowledge of itself is directed to itself as to that which is known. This 
knowledge also as pertaining to that which knows is a certain energy; but 


Digitized by {jOoq le 



858 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. LXXXIV. LXXXV. 


it is the knowledge of itself directed to itself, because it is gnostic of 
itself. Moreover, that it is converted to itself essentially, if it is so in 
energy, has been demonstrated. For every thing which by energizing is 
converted to itself, has also an essence verging to, and subsisting in itself. 


PROPOSITION LXXXIV. 

Every thing which always is, possesses an infinite power. 

For if its hypostasis is never-failing, the power also according to which 
it is that which it is, and is able to exist, is infinite. For the power of 
existing being finite, it will some time or other fail. But this failing, the 
existence also of that which possesses it will fail, and it will no longer be 
that which always is. It is necessary, therefore, that the power of that 
which always is, and which connects and contains it essentially, should 
be infinite. 


PROPOSITION LXXXV. 

Every thing which is always becoming to be, or rising into existence, 
{aei yivopevov) possesses an infinite power of becoming to be. 

For if it is always rising into existence, the power of generation in it is 
never-failing. For if this power was finite, it would cease in an infinite 
time. But the power of becoming to be ceasing, that which is rising into 
being according to this power would cease, and thus it would no longer be 
always becoming to be. 1 It is, however, supposed to be always becoming 
to be. Hence, it possesses an infinite power of rising into existence. 


* The Proposition ends here in the Greek, though very erroneously; -and its conclusion forms 
the beginning of the next Proposition, which should begin at the words e*v to oj/toi; *v. But 
instead of eav, we must read *a.v. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. LXXXVT. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


359 


PROPOSITION LXXXVI. 

Every thing which is truly being (om»s ov) is infinite, neither according 
to multitude, nor according to magnitude, but according to power alone. 

For every infinite, is either in discrete, or in continued quantity, or in 
power. But that which always is, is infinite, as having an inextinguish- 
able life, a never-failing hyparxis, and an undiminished energy. That 
which is eternally being, however, is neither infinite on account of rnagni- 
tude; for that which is truly being is without magnitude, being self- 
subsistent; since every thing self-subsistent is impartible and simple. 
Nor is it infinite on account of multitude; for it has in the most eminent 
degree the form of the one , as being arranged most near, and being most 
allied to it. But it is infinite according to power. Hence, it is also im¬ 
partible and infinite. And by how much the more it is one and impart¬ 
ible, by so much the more is it infinite. For the power which is 
divided, becomes irabecil and finite, and powers which are entirely- 
divided, are in every respect finite. For ultimate powers, and which are 
most remote from the one , are in a certain respect finite, on account of 
their distribution into parts. But first powers, on account of their im- 
partibility, are infinite. For a separation into parts divulses and 
dissolves the power of every thing. But impartiality compressing and 
contracting that which it contains, renders it never-failing, and undimi¬ 
nished in itself. 

Moreover, infinity, according to magnitude, and also according to 
multitude, is entirely a privation and falling off from impartibility. For 
that which is finite is most near to the impartible, hut the infinite is most 
remote from it, entirely departing from the one. Hence, that which is 
infinite according to power, is not infinite either according to multitude 
or magnitude, since infinite power subsists in conjunction with imparti¬ 
bility. But the infinite either in multitude or magnitude, is most 
remote from the impartible. If„ therefore, that which is truly being was. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



360 


ELEMENTS PROP. LXXXVI1. LXXXVIII. 


infinite either in magnitude or multitude, it would not possess infinite 
power. It does, however, possess infinite power; and therefore is not infi¬ 
nite either according to multitude, or according to magnitude. 


PROPOSITION LXXXVII. 

t 

Every thing eternal indeed is being, but not every being is eternal. 

For the participation of being is present in a certain respect with gene¬ 
rated natures, 1 so far as each of these is not that which in no respect is. 
But if that which is generated is not entirely deprived of being, it is in a 
certain respect being. The eternal, however, is in no respect whatever 
present with generated natures, and especially not with such of these as 
do not even participate of the perpetuity which subsists according to the 
whole of time. Moreover, every thing eternal always is. For it participates 
of eternity, which imparts to the natures by which it is participated to be 
always that which they are. Being, therefore, is participated by a 
greater number of things than eternity. And hence being is beyond 
eternity. For by those natures by whom eternity is participated, being 
is also participated. But not every thing which participates of being, 
participates also of eternity. 


PROPOSITION LXXXVIII. 

Every thing* which is truly being, is either prior to eternity, or in 
eternity, or participates of eternity. 

For that there is true being prior to eternity has been demonstrated. 
But true being is also in eternity. For eternity possesses the always in 

■ i. e. With natures rising into existence, or becoming to be, as opposed to the things which 
are, or to beings truly so called {rot oyrccg ovra). 

a Instead of layrws to ovrwg ov, it is doubtless necessary to read to ovrvg oy. 


Digitized by boogie 



PROP. LXXXJX. XC, XCL OE THEOLOGY. 


961 


conjunction with being. And that which participates of eternity, has 
both the alwqys and being , according to participation. Eternity, however, 
possesses the always primarily, but being according to participation. But 
being itself is primarily being. 

PROPOSITION LXXXIX. 

Every thing which is primarily being consists of bound and infinity. 

For if it possesses infinite power, it is evident that it is infinite, and on 
this account consists from the infinite. If also it is impartible, and has. 
the form of the one , through this, it participates of bound. For that 
which participates of unity is bounded. Moreover, it i? impartible, and 
therefore possesses infinite power. Hence every thing which is truly £or 
primarily] being consists of bound and infinity. 

PROPOSITION XC. 

The first bound, and the first infinity subsist by themselves prior to 
every thing which consists of bound and the infinite. 

For if beiugs which subsist by themselves, are prior to those which are 
certain beings, as being common to all essences, and principal causes, and 
not the causes of certain, but in short of all beings, it is necessary that 
the first bound, and the first infinity should be prior to that* which 
consists of both these. For the bound in that which is mixed [or the 
first being,] participates of infinity, and the infinite participates of bound. 
But of every thing, that which is the first, is nothing else than that which 
it is. It is not therefore proper that the first infinite should have the 
form of bound, or that the first bound should have the form of infinity. 
These therefore subsist primarily prior to that which is mixed. 

PROPOSITION XCI. 

Every power is either finite or infinite. But every finite power indeed 
derives its subsistence from infinite power. And infinite power subsists 
from the first infinity. 

1 Instead of fci wgarrov c£ tivcu, it is necessary to read In wge rev «£ etpfow nv*i. 

Proc. Vol. II. 2 Z 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



*62 


ELEMENTS 


prop. xcii. xcm. 


For the powers which have an existence at a certain time, are finite, 
falling from the infinity of existing always. But the powers of eternal 
beings are infinite, never deserting their own hyparxis. 


PROPOSITION XCII. 

Every multitude of infinite powers, is suspended from one first infinity, 
winch does not subsist as a participated power, nor in things which are 
endued with power, but subsists by itself, not being the power of a certain 
participant, but the cause of all beings. 

For though the first being possesses power, yet it is not power itself. 
For it has also bound. But the first power is infinity. For infinite 
powers are infinite, through the participation of infinity. Infinity itself 
therefore, will be prior to all powers, through which being also possesses 
infinite power, and all things participate of infinity. For infinity is not 
the first of things [or the ineffable principle of all] since that is the 
measure of all things, being the good and the one. Nor is infinity beings 
For this is infinite, but not infinity. Hence infinity subsists between that 
which is first and being, and is the cause of all infinite powers, and of all 
die infinity that is in beings. 

PROPOSITION XCIII. 

Every infinite which is in [true] beings, is neither infinite to the 
natures that are above beings, nor is it infinite to itself. 

For that by which each thing is infinite, by this also it exists uncircum¬ 
scribed. But every thing which is in [true] beings, is bounded by itself, 
and by all the things prior to it. It remains therefore, that the infinite 
which is in [true] beings, is infinite to subordinate natures alone, above 
which it is so expanded in power, as to be incomprehensible by all of 
them. For in whatever manner they may extend themselves towards 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. XCIV. XCV. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


363 


this infinite, yet it has something' entirely exempt from them. And 
though all things enter into it, yet it has something occult, and incompre¬ 
hensible by secondary natures. Though likewise it evolves the power# 
which it contains, yet it possesses something on account of its union 
insurmountable, contracted, and surpassing the evolution of beings. 
Since however, it contains and bounds itself, it will not be infinite to itself 
nor much less to the natures situated above it, since it has a portion of 
the infinity which is in them. For the powers of more total natures are 
more infinite, in consequence of being more total, and having an arrange¬ 
ment nearer to the first infinity. 

PROPOSITION XCIV. 

Every perpetuity is indeed a certain infinity, but not every infinity is 
perpetuity. 

For there are many infinites which have the infinite not on account of 
the always , such for instance, as the infinity according to magnitude, the 
infinity according to multitude, and the infinity of matter. And what¬ 
ever else there may be of the like kind, which is infinite, either because it 
cannot be passed over, or through the indefiniteness of its essence. That 
perpetuity however is a certain infinity 1 is evident. For that which 
never fails is infinite. But this is that which always has its hypostasis in¬ 
exhaustible. Infinity therefore, is prior to perpetuity. For that which 
gives subsistence to a greater number of effects, and is more total, is more 
causal. Hence, the first infinity is beyond eternity, and infinity itself is 
prior to eternity. 

PROPOSITION XCV. 

Every power which is more single, is more infinite than that which is 
multiplied. 

* t» is omitted in the original. 

* After on, there is a chasm in the original, and the wolds that are wanting appear to. be it 

mSuttk arttgitt rif «rw. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



I 


$64 ELEMENTS PROP. XCVI. XCVIU 

For if of powers the first infinity is nearest to the one , that power 
which is more allied to the one , is in a greater degree infinite than that 
which recedes from it. For being multiplied it loses the form of the one y 
ia which while it remained, it possessed a transcendency with respect to 
other powers, being connected and contained through its impartiality. 
For in partible natures themselves, the powers when congregated, are 
united,* but when divided, they are increased in number, and become 
obscured. 

PROPOSITION XCVI. 

The power which is infinite of every finite body, is incorporeal. 

For if it were corporeal, if this body indeed is finite,* the infinite will be 
contained in the finite. But if the body is infinite, it will not be power 
so far as it is body. For if so far as it is body it is finite, but power is 
infinite, it will not be power so far as it is body. Hence, the power 
which is infinite in a finite body is incorporeal. 


PROPOSITION XCVII. 

In each series of things, every cause which has the relation of a leader, 
imparts to the whole series the peculiarity of itself; and that which the 
cause is primarily, tire series is according to diminution. 

For if it is the leader of the whole series, and all co-ordinate natures 
are co-arranged with reference to it, it is evident that it imparts to all 
that the series contains the one idea according to which they are arranged 

1 There is evidently a very gross error here in the original which is as follows r xm yog tv toi$ 
pig tarots at Bova/xti; truvayofj&vat ptv, xiWavXao'tatyrrat, pigiCopcyai Be, aputyouvrat, For powers 
when congregated are not multiplied, but united. Hence it is necessary to read xat yag iv t ot§ 
(tegtarotf at Buvafut; truvetyofitvat pev, ivi^ovrat, pegt&pevat Be, woXXawXatrtafyvrat, xat apvlgovvrat, 

* By a strange mistake the original has awn go* here, instead of wtxtgarium, and in the next line 
vtirtgoo’pn’oy instead of atitgoy. 


Digitized by boogie 



PROP. XCVUI. 


OF THEOLOGY* 


365 


in that series. For either all things partake of similitude to this cause 
without a cause, or that which is the same in all is derived from it. Bui 
the former of these is impossible. For that which is without a cause is 
also fortuitous. But the fortuitous can never take place in things in which 
there is order, connection, and an invariable sameness of subsistence. 
From the cause therefore, which ranks as a leader, every series receives 
the peculiarity of the hypostasis of that cause. But if from it, it is 
evident that this is accompanied with a diminution and decrement 
adapted to secondary natures. For either the peculiarity exists similarly 
in the leader, and the natures that are secondary, and how in this 
case can the former be the leader, but the latter be allotted an 
hypostasis after the leader ? Or it exists dissimilarly. And if this be the 
case, it is evident that sameness is derived to the multitude from one thing, 
but not vice versa. And the illustrious peculiarity of the series which is 
primarily in one thing [or the leader,] is secondarily in the multitude 
([suspended from the leading cause]. 

PROPOSITION XCVIII. 

Every separate cause is at one and the same time every where and no 
where. 

For by the communication of its own power it is every where. For 
this is a cause which replenishes the natures that are naturally adapted 
to participate of it, rules over all secondary beings, and is present 
to all things by the . prolific progressions of its illuminations. But by an 
essence unmingled with things in place, and by its exempt purity, it is no 
where. For if it is separate, it is established above all things. In a 
similar manner also, it is in no one of the natures inferior to itself. For 
if it was alone every where, it would not indeed be prevented from being 
a cause, and from subsisting in all its participants. But it would not be 
prior to all of them in a separate manner. If also it was no where 
\vithout being every where, it would not indeed be prevented from being 
prior to all things, and from being nothing pertaining to subordinate 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



366 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. XCIX. 


natures. But it woulA not be in all things, as causes are naturally 
adapted to be in their effects,' by the abundant and unen vying communi¬ 
cations of themselves. In order therefore, that existing as a cause, it 
maybe in all things that are able to partake of it, and that being separate 
in itself, it may be prior to all the natures that are filled by it, it is every 
where, and at the same time no where. 

And it is not indeed partly every where and partly no where. For thus 
it would be divulsed and separate from itself, if one part of it was every 
where in all things, but another was no where, and prior to all things. 
But the whole of it is every where, and in a similar manner no where. 
For the things which are able to participate of it, meet with the whole of 
it, and find the whole present with themselves, that at the same time 
being wholly exempt from them. For the participant does not place 
this separate cause in itself, but participates of it as much as it is capable 
of receiving. Nor in the communication of itself does it become 
contracted by the multitude of the participations of it; for it is separate. 
Nor do its participants participate of it defectively; for that which 
imparts is every where. 


PROPOSITION XCIX. 

Every imparticipable, so far as it is imparticipable, does not derive its 
subsistence from another cause. But it is itself the principle and cause 
of all its participants. And thus every principle in each series is 
un begotten. 

For if it is imparticipable in its own proper series, it is allotted the 
principality, and does not proceed from other things. For it would no 
longer be the first, if it received this peculiarity, according to which it is 
imparticipable, from something else.* But if it is inferior to other things, 

* For amoi; here it is necessary to read airnroi;. 

* Hence, as all things proceed from the ineffable, that which is imparticipable proceeds also 
from it, yet not as from a cause, but as from that which is better than cause. The procession, 
therefore, of the imparticipable from the ineffable is ugpfns »*p«w» s, an inffpxble evolution into 
light. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



OF THEOLOGY. 


367 


PROP. C. Cl. 

\ 

and proceeds from them, it does not proceed from them so far as it is 
imparticipable, but so far as it participates. For of the things from which 
it originates, it doubtless participates, and it is not primarily the things 
of which it participates. Hence, it is not from a cause so far as it is 
imparticipable. For so far as it is from a cause it participates, and is 
not imparticipable. But so far as it is imparticipable, it is the cause of 
things that are participated, and is not itself a participant of other things. 

PROPOSITION C. 

Every series of wholes is extended to an imparticipable cause and 
principle. But all imparticipables are suspended from the one principle 
of all things. 

For if each series suffers something which is the same [[or a certain 
sameness,] there is something in each which is the leader, and the cause 
of this sameness. For as all beings are from unity, so every series is from 
unity. But again, all imparticipable monads are referred to the one; 
because all of them are analogous to the one. So far therefore, as they 
also suffer something which is the same through an analogy to the one , so 
far a reduction of them to the one is effected. And so far indeed, as all 
of them are from the one , no one of these is a principle. But so far as 
each is imparticipable, so far each , is a principle. Hence, being the 
principles of certain things, they are suspended from the principle of all 
things. For that is the principle of all things of which all things partici¬ 
pate. All things however alone entirely participate of the first; but of 
other things not all, but certain things participate. Hence also that [i. e. 
the ineffable] is simply the first, but other things are firsts with reference 
to a certain thing, but simply are not firsts. 

PROPOSITION Cl. 

Imparticipable intellect is the leader of all things that participate of 
intellect, imparticipable life of all things that participate of life, and 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



3g 8 ELEMENTS PROP. C1I. 

imparticipable being of all things that participate of being. But of these, 
being is prior to life, but life is prior to intellect. 

For because in each series of beings, imparticipables are prior to things' 
which are participated, it is necessary that intellect should be prior to 
intellectuals, that life should be prior to vital natures, and that being 
itself should be prior to beings. Because however, that which is the 
cause of a greater number of effects, precedes that which is the cause of 
a less number, hence, among these, being will be the first; for it is 
present with all things to which life and intellect are present. For every 
thing that lives and participates of intelligence necessarily is; but not 
vice versa. For many beings neither live, nor energize intellectually.* 
But life is the second. For all things that participate of intellect, partici¬ 
pate also of life, but not vice versa. For many things live indeed, but 
are left destitute of knowledge. And intellect is the third. For every 
thing which is in any manner whatever gnostic, also lives and is. If 
therefore being is the cause of a greater number of effects, but life of a 
less number, and intellect of still fewer effects, being is the first, life the 
second, and intellect the third. 


PROPOSITION CII. 

All beings which exist in any manner whatever, consist of bound and 
the infinite through that which is primarily being. But all living beings 
are motive of themselves through the first life. And all gnostic beings 
participate of knowledge, through the first intellect. 

For if that which is imparticipable in each series imparts its own 
peculiarity to all the natures under the same series, it is evident that the 
first being also imparts to all things bound, and at the same time infinity, 
since it is itself primarily mixed from these. Life also imparts to all things 


* of y*g w**, fc “ necessary to read toAXm yag ona fttv oufo 

mSt von. 


Digitized by boogie 



PROP. CIII. CIV. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


369 


the motion which it possesses in itself. For life is the first progression 
and motion from the stable hypostasis of being. And intellect imparts 
knowledge to all things. For the summit of all knowledge is in intellect. 
And intellect is the first gnostic nature. 


PROPOSITION CIII. 

All things are in all, but appropriately in each. 

For in being there is life and intellect; and in life, being and intellection; 
and in intellect being and life. But in intellect indeed, all things subsist 
intellectually, in life vitally, and in being, all things are truly beings. 
For since every thing subsists either according to cause, or according to 
hyparxis, or according to participation; and in the first, the rest are 
according to cause; in the second, the first is according to participation, 
but the third, according to cause; and in the third, the natures prior to 
it are according to participation;—this being the case, life and intellect 
have a prior or causal subsistence in being. Since however, each thing 
is characterized according to hyparxis, and neither according to cause 
(for cause pertains to other things, i. e. to effects) nor according to 
participation (for a thing derives that elsewhere of which it participates,) 
—hence in being there is truly life and intellection, essential life, and 
essential intellect. And in life, there is being indeed according to 
participation, but intellection according to cause. Each of these however, 
subsist there vitally. For the hyparxis is according to life. And in 
intellect, life and essence subsist according to participation, and each of 
these subsists there intellectually. For knowledge is the essence and the 
life of intellect. 


PROPOSITION CIV. 

» 

Every thing which is primarily eternal, has both its essence and its 
energy eternal. 

Proc. Vol. II. 3 A 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



370 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CV. 


For if it primarily participates of the perpetuity of eternity, it does not 
partially participate of it, but entirely. For either it participates of it in 
energy, but not in essence. This however is impossible; since in this 
case, energy would be more excellent than essence. Or it participates 
of it according to essence, but does not participate of it according to 
energy. In this case however, that which is primarily eternal, and that 
which primarily participates of time will be the same. And time indeed, 
will primarily measure the essence of certain things, but eternity which is 
more excellent than all time, will not measure the essence of any thing, if 
that which is primarily eternal, is not essentially contained by eternity. 
Hence every thing which is primarily eternal, has both an eternal essence 
and energy. 


PROPOSITION CV. 

Every thing immortal is perpetual; but not every thing perpetual is 
immortal. 

For if the immortal is that which always participates of life, but that 
which always participates of life, participates also of being, and that 
which always lives, always is,—hence, every thing immortal is perpetual. 
But the immortal is that which is unreceptive of death, and always lives. 
And the perpetual is that which is unreceptive of non-being, and always 
is. If however, there are many beings more and less excellent than life, 
which are unreceptive of death, but exist always;—if this be the case, 
not every thing which is perpetual is immortal. That however, there are 
many beings not immortal, that exist always, is evident. For there are 
certain beings indeed, which are destitute of life, but which exist always, 
and are indestructible. For as being is to life, so is the perpetual to the 
immortal. For the life which cannot be taken away is immortal, and the 
being which cannot be taken away is perpetual. But being is more 
comprehensive than life, and therefore the perpetual is more comprehen¬ 
sive than the immortal.' 

1 For tou tavarov here, it is necessary to read rov atavarov, 

¥ 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CVI. CVII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


371 


PROPOSITION CVI. 

The medium of every thing which is entirely eternal both in essence 
and energy, and of every thing which has its essence in time, is that 
which is partly indeed eternal, and partly is measured by time. 

For that which has its essence comprehended by time, is entirely 
temporal. For by a much greater priority, this will be allotted a 
temporal energy. But that which is entirely temporal, is in every respect 
dissimilar to that which is entirely eternal. But all progressions are 
through similars. Hence there is something between these. The medium 
therefore, is either that which is eternal in essence, but temporal in energy, 
or vice versa. This latter however, is impossible. For energy would be 
more excellent than essence. It remains therefore, that the medium is 
the former of these. 


PROPOSITION CVII. 

Every thing which is partly eternal, and partly temporal, is at one and 
the same time being and generation. 

For every thing eternal is being, and that which is measured by time 
is generation. So that if the same thing participates of time and eternity, 
yet not according to the same, it will be both being and generation. 

COROIXARV. 

From these things it is evident, that generation indeed, having a 
temporal essence, is suspended from that which partly partakes of being, 
and partly of generation, participating at once of eternity and time. 
But this is suspended from that which is in every respect eternal. And 
that which is in every respect eternal, is suspended from being which is 
prior to the eternal. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



372 


ELEMENTS 


prop. cvm. CIX. 


PROPOSITION CVIII. 

Every thing which is partial in each order, is able to participate in a 
twofold respect of the monad which is in the proximately superior order, 
viz. either through its own wholeness or through that which is partial in 
the superior order, and co-ordinate with the thing according to an 
analogy to the whole series. 

For if conversion is to all things through similitude, that which is partial 
in an inferior order, is dissimilar to that which is monadic and a whole 
in a superior order. And in short, is as that which is partial, to a whole, 
and as one order to another. But a partial nature is similar to a whole 
of the same series, through a communion of peculiarity, and to the 
proximately superior co-ordinate peculiarity through an analogous 
subsistence. It is evident, therefore, that through these media a conver¬ 
sion from one to the other is effected, as through similars to that which is 
similar.' For the one is similar as the partial to that which is partial, 
but the other as that which is the appropriate of the same series. But 
the whole of the superior series is dissimilar in both these respects. 


PROPOSITION CIX. 

Every * partial intellect participates of the unity which is above 
intellect and the first, both through the intellect which ranks as a. whole, 
and through the partial unity which is co-ordinate with this partial 
intellect. Every partial soul, likewise, participates of the intellect which 
is a whole, through the soul which ranks as a whole, and through a partial 
intellect. And every partial nature of body participates of the soul 
which is a whole through the wholeness of nature, and a partial soul. 

* Instead of it opoiov avo/swiov, it is necessary to read u>s it op«i«v «<; o/toiov. 

* Instead of here it is necessary to read *•«*, and consequently the proposition is not 
interrogatory as in the original. 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CX. CXI. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


373 


For every thing partial participates of the monad which is in a supe¬ 
rior order, either through its proper wholeness, or through that which is 
partial in that order, and which is co-ordinate to the thing. 

PROPOSITION CX. 

, • 

Of all the things that are arranged in each series, such as are first, and 

are conjoined with their monad, are able to participate of the natures 
which are proximately established in the superior series, through analogy. 
But such as are more imperfect and remote from their proper principle, 
are not naturally adapted to enjoy these natures. 

For because such things as are first, are allied to those in a superior 
series, being allotted a better and more divine nature in the order to 
which they belong, but such things as are more imperfect proceed further 
from their principle, and are allotted a secondary and ministrant, but not 
a primary and leading progression in the whole series;—this being the 
case, the former are necessarily connascently conjoined to the things in a 
superior order; but the latter are unadapted to be conjoined with them* 
For all things are not of an equal dignity, though they may belong to the 
same order. For there is not one and the same ratio in all. But all 
things proceed from their proper monad, as from one, and with reference 
to one thing. Hence, they are not allotted the same power. But some 
things are able to receive proximately the participations * of superior 
natures ; while others being dissimilar to them by proceeding to a greater 
distance from their principles, are deprived of a power of this kind. 


PROPOSITION CXI. 

Of every intellectual series, some things are divine intellects, receiving 
the participations of the Gods; but others are intellects alone. And of 

' It is necessary here to supply the word 




Digitized by t^OOQLe 



/ 

374 ELEMENTS PROP. CX1I. 

every psychical series, some things are intellectual souls, suspended from 
their proper intellects; but others are souls alone. Of all corporeal 
natures, likewise, some have souls supernally presiding over them, but 
others are natures alone, destitute of the presence of souls. 

For of each series, not the whole genus is adapted to be suspended 
from that which is prior to itself, but that which is more perfect in it, 
and sufficient to be connascent with superior natures. Neither, therefore, 
is every intellect suspended from deity, but those intellects only which 
are supreme and most single. For these are allied to the divine unities. 
Nor do all souls participate of participate intellect, * but such only as 
are most intellectual. Nor do all corporeal natures enjoy the presence 
of soul, and of the soul which is participated, but those only that are 
more perfect, and possess in a greater degree the form of reason. And 
this is the mode of demonstration in all things. 


PROPOSITION CXII. 

Of every order those things that are first, have the form of the natures 
prior to them. 

For the highest genera in each order, are conjoined through similitude 
to the natures placed above them , 1 and through the connexion and 
coherence of the progression of wholes. Hence, such as the superior 
natures are primarily, such also is the form which these highest genera 
are allotted, and which is allied to the nature of those in the superior 
order. They are also such according to the peculiarity of subsistence as 
are the natures prior to them. 

' It is here requisite to supply vou. 

* For v*t*niunt{, it is necessary to read wifm/wotf. 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CX1II. CXIV. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


375 


PROPOSITION CXIII. 

Every divine number is unical. 

For if a divine number has a precedaneous cause, viz. the one , just as 
an intellectual number has intellect, and a psychical number soul, and if 
multitude is every where analogous to its cause, it is evident that a divine 
number is unical, since the one is God. But this follows, since the one 
and the good are the same. For the good and God are the same. For 
that beyond which there is nothing, and after which all things aspire, is 
God. And also that from which all things proceed, and to which all 
things tend. But this is good. If therefore, there is a multitude of Gods, 
the multitude is unical. But that there is, is evident. For every princi¬ 
pal cause is the leader of an appropriate multitude which is similar and 
allied to the cause. 


PROPOSITION CXI\ r . 

Every God is a self-perfect unity, and every self-perfect unity is a God. 

For if the number of unities is twofold, as has been before demonstrated, 
and some are self-perfect, but others are illuminations from the self-perfect 
unities, and if a divine number is allied to and connatural with the one and 
the good , the Gods are self-perfect unities. And vice versa, if there is a 
self-perfect unity it is a God. For as unity is in the most eminent degree 
allied to the one , and the self-perfect to the good , so likewise according to 
both these the self-perfect participates of the divine peculiarity and is a 
God. But if a God was a unity, yet not a self-perfect unity, or a self¬ 
perfect hypostasis, yet not a unity, he would be arranged in another order, 
on account of the mutation of the peculiarity . 1 

' There are two chasms in this sentence in the original, which I have endeavoured to supply in 
the translation. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



376 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXV. 


PROPOSITION CXV. 

Every God is superessential, supervital, and superintellectual. 

For if each is a self-perfect unity, but neither being, life, or Intellect is 
a unity, but that which is united, it is evident that every God is beyond 
each of these. For if these differ from each other, but all are in all, each 
of these being all will not be one only. Farther still, if the first God is 
superessential, but every God is of the series of the first, so far as a God, 
each will be superessential. But that the first God is superessential,* is 
evident. For essence is not the same with unity, nor is to exist the 
same thing as to be united. If, however, these are not the same, either 
the first God is both these, and in this case he will not be one only, but 
something else besides the one , and will participate of unity, but will not 

i That the principle of all things is something beyond intellect and being itself, was asserted 
by the most ancient Pythagoreans, as well as by Plato and his best disciples, as the following 
citations will abundantly evince. 

And in the first place, this is evident from a fragment of Archytas, a most ancient Pythagorean, 
On the Principles of Things, preserved by Stobxus, Eclog. Phys. p. 82. and in which the follow¬ 
ing extraordinary passage occurs : «$* otmyxot rpti$ ttfitv raj apx a $> r av ts t<rrcv tom trgayfMtToov, xou 
ray xou to •£ ovtou xivarixov xai otopar oy 8 vvapar to 8e toiovtov ov ov fiovov 1 eifin 8ei, aKXa xou 

yo w t< x£f<r<rov voco 8c xgteeov to ti, oweg ovo/xottypev iiov pavcgov.— i. e. “ So that it is necessary to 
assert that there are three principles; that which is [ the subject ] of things (or matter)^ Jorm y and 
that which is of itself motive , and invisible in power. With respect to the last of which, it is not 
only necessary that it should have a subsistence, but that it should be something better than inteU 
led. But that which is better than intellect is evidently the same with that which we denominate 
god.” It must here however be observed, that by the word god we are not only to understand the 
first cause, but every god: for, according to the Pythagoric theology, every deity, considered 
according to the characteristic of his nature, is superior to intellectual essence. Agreeably to the 
above passage is that also of Brotinus, as cited by Syrianus in Arist. Meta. p. 102, b. who 
expressly asserts that the first cause vow ravros xou ou<ri«$ 8uv«|xci xou •wqtvfiua uwepe^ei — (€ surpasses 
every intellect and essence both in power and dignity.” Again, according to the same Syrianus, 
p. 103, b. we are informed “ that the Pythagoreans called god the one, as the cause of union to 

[*] Instead of ov ov ftovov, which is evidently the true reading, ovo^oy /xovov is erroneously printed 
in Sttobxus. 


Digitized by 


Google 



OF THEOLOGY. 


377 


PROP. CXV. 

be the one itself; or he is one of these. But if indeed he is essence, he 
will be indigent of the one. It is, however, impossible that the good , and 


the universe, and on account of his superiority to every being, to all life, and to all-perfect intel¬ 
lect. But they denominated him the measure of all things, on account of his conferring on all 
things through illumination, essence and bound \ and containing and bounding all things by the 
ineffable supereminence of his nature, which is extended beyond every bound." Toov Bum avtipaov 
ev [MV X eyovrcuv rov Beov a>$ eveoseoog to 0 X 01 $ amov, xcu tolvto$ too ovto$, xcu *a<n}$ %coijr f xcu you too 
TotvTeXo v; txtxuvct. i tierpov Be tcov txvtcov a>$ iratn ryv otxnav, xou to reXo; exihafiirovra, xcu a* %avra 
•Keqir/ovroLj xcu ogi£ovra rou$ afyaoroig aoroo, xcu tsolv to; vxeprpt\ciofjL§vai$ icepotrog wtgo^ai*. And 
again, this is confirmed by Clinius the Pythagorean, as cited by Syrianus, p. 104, in which place 
pr&clari is erroneously substituted for Clinii. “ That which is the one , and the measure qf all 
things (says he), is not only entirely exempt from bodies, and mundane concerns, but likewise 
from intelligibles themselves: since he is the venerable principle 'of beings, the measure of intelli¬ 
gible!, ingenerable, eternal, and alone (/xovov), possessing absolute dominion (xupitotie$), and himself 
manifesting himself (avro to terno SijXowv).” This fine passage I have translated agreeably to the 
manuscript corrections of the learned Gale, the original of which he has not inserted. To this 
we may likewise add the testimony of Philolaus; who, as Syrianus informs us, p. 102, knew 
that cause which is superior to the two first elements of things, bound and infinite. For (says he) 
“ Philolaus asserts that the deity established bound and infinite : by bound indeed exhibiting every 
co-ordination, which is more allied to the onet but by infinity a nature subjected to bound. And 
prior to these two principles he places one, and a singular cause, separated from the universality of 
things, which Archainetus (Agx^ve ro$) denominates a cause prior to cause ; but which, according 
to Philolaus, is the principle of all things." To all these respectable authorities for the super¬ 
essential nature of the first cause, we may add the testimony of Sextus Empiricus himself. For in 
his books against the Mathematicians (p. 425) he informs us " that the Pythagoreans placed the 
one as transcending the genus of things which are essentially understood." xcu tit) raov [isv xati 9 
otura voovfxevuiv yevo$ V7cc<rTr)<rctvT0 IhiBayopiXoi nccutie^, eo$ etrava/3e/3i)xo$ to ev. In which passage, by 
things which are essentially understood, nothing more is meant than intelligible essences, as is 
obvious to every tyro in the Platonic and Pythagoric philosophy. 

But in consequence of this doctrine of the ancients concerning the one , or the first principle of 
things, we may discover the meaning and propriety of those appellations given by the Pythago¬ 
reans to unity, according to Photius and others : such as aXa/xiria, <rxo rcvBiot, apu^la, ftdquBpov uro- 
ybovw, AttoMoov, &c. viz. obscurity, or without illumination, darkness, without mixture , a subterra¬ 
nean profundity, Apollo , &c. For, considered as ineffable, incomprehensible, and superessential, 
he may be very properly called obscurity, darkness, and a subterranean profundity ; but considered 
as perfectly simple and one, he may with no less propriety be denominated without mixture , and 
Apollo i since Apollo signifies a privation of multitude. “ For (says Plotinus) the Pythagoreans 
denominated the first God Apollo, according to a more secret signification, implying a negation of 
many." Ennead. 5, lib. 5. To which we may add, that the epithets darkness and obgptrity 

Proc. Vol. II. 3 B 


Digitized by boogie 



378 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXV. 


the first should be indigent. Hence, he is one alone; and therefore super¬ 
essential. But if each thing imparts the peculiarity of that which it is 

wonderfully agree with the appellation of a thrice unknown darkness , employed by the Egyptians, 
according to Damascius, * in their most mystical invocations of the first God; and at the same 
time afford a sufficient reason for the remarkable silence of the most ancient philosophers and poets 
concerning this highest and ineffable cause. 

This silence is indeed remarkably obvious in Hesiod, when in his Theogony he says: 

yjTOt fxev ngoortoToi Xao$ yevtr, -- 

That is, “ Chaos was the Jirst thing which was generate#' —and consequently there must be 
some cause prior to Chaos, through which it was produced; for there can be no effect without a 
cause. Such, however, is the ignorance of the moderns, that in all the editions of Hesiod, yevero is 
translated Juit f as if the poet had said that Chaos was the Jirst of all things ; and he is even accused 
by Cudworth on this account, as leaning to the atheistical system. But the following testimonies 
clearly prove, that in the opinion of all antiquity, yev fro was considered as meaning was generated) 
and not was simply. And in the first place, this is clearly asserted by Aristotle in lib. S, de Ccelo. 
“ There are certain persons (says he) who assert that there is nothing unbegotten, but that all 
things are generated . —And this is especially the case with the followers of Hesiod. ,, — euri yap 

rtn$ oi fcuriv ov$tv ayewfjTOV eivai, aWa •Karra ytyveeiai. - fuaXtera fxev 01 ire pi tov Hmolov. And 

again, by Sextus Empiricus in his treatise Adversus Mathemat. p. 383, edit. Steph. who relates, 
that this very passage was the occasion of Epicurus applying himself to philosophy. “ For (says 
he) when Epicurus was as yet but a young man, he asked a grammarian, who was reading to him 
this line of Hesiod, 

Chaos of all things was the first produc’d, 

from what Chaos was generated , if it was the first thing generated. And upon the grammarian 
replying that it was not his business to teach things of this kind, but was the province of those 
who are called philosophers.—To those then, says Epicurus, must I betake myself, since they know 
the truth of things.” xo/uw&ij yap fitipuxKrxof «v, jjpero tov eiravayivaxrxorra aurep rpafjLfLaTKrrtjv (ij toi 
fiev TgaoTirra Xao$ yever) ex two$ to yas$ ey$vero } turep itqqgtov eyevero, toutov St eixovror jxi) avrov 
epyov ewai ra toixvra fotiao-xen, aXXa rwv xaXoufisvcov QtXotroQw to iwv tfijcrev o Enxovpo$ f «r’ extmvf 
ft oi padurreov e<rnv, eiireg avrot tijv tcov ovtcov aX rfietav ttraatv. 

Simplicius too, in commenting on the passage above cited from Aristotle, beautifully observes 
as follows: “Aristotle (says he) ranks Hesiod among the first physiologists, because he sings Chaos 
was first generated . He says, therefore, that Hesiod in a particular manner makes all things to 
be generated, because that which is first is by him said to be generated. But it is probable that 
Aristotle calls Orpheus and Musxus the first physiologists, who assert that all things are gene - 

* * mqi ctpxoov. 


Digitized by boogie 



prop. cxvr. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


379 


primarily to the whole series £of which it is the leader], hence, every 
divine number is superessential; since every principal cause produces 
similars prior to dissimilars. If, therefore, the first God is superessential, 
all the Gods will be syperessential. For they will be entirely similar [to 
the first]. Since, however, they are also essences, they will be produced 
from the first essence, as the monads of essences. 


PROPOSITION CXVI. 

Every deity except the one is participable. 

For that the one is imparticipable is evident, since if it were partici¬ 
pated, and on this account pertained to something else, it would no 
longer be similarly the cause of all things; both of such as are prior to 
beings, and of beings themselves. But that the other unities are partici¬ 
pated, we shall thus demonstrate. For if there is another imparticipable 
unity after the first, in what does it differ from the one ? For either it 
subsists after the same manner as that; and how in this case is the one 
the second, but the other first? Or it does not subsist after the same 
manner. And thus one of these will be the one itself, but the other one 
and not one. This non-one also, if it is no hypostasis whatever, will be 
one alone. But if it is a certain other hypostasis besides the one , in this 
case the one will be participated by the non-one. And that will be a self¬ 
perfect one, which conjoins the non-one with the one. So that again God 
will be this [viz. the one] so far as he is God. But that which is non-one 
will subsist in the participation of the one. Every unity, therefore, which 
subsists after the one is participable, and every God is participable. 

rated, except the first. It is, however, evident that those theologists, singing in fabulous strains, 
meant nothing more by generation than the procession of things from their causes; on which 
account all of them consider the first cause as unbegotten. For Hesiod also, when he says that 
Chaos was first generated, insinuates that there was something prior to Chaos, from which Chaos 
was produced. For it is always necessary that every thing which is generated should be gene* N 
rated from something. But this likewise is insinuated by Hesiod, that the first cause is above all 
knowledge *nd every appellation.” (De Coclo, p. 147.) 


Digitized by boogie 



380 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXVI1. CXVIIf. 


PROPOSITION CXYII. 

Every God is the measure of beings. 

For if every God is unical, he defines and measures all the multitude 
of beings. For all multitudes being in their own nature indefinite, are 
bounded through the one. But that which is one being for being cha¬ 
racterized by the one] measuring and terminating the natures with which 
it is present, leads into bound that which according to its own power is 
not bounded. For the one being has the form of the one by participation. 

But that which is uniform, or has the form of the one, recedes from 
indefiniteness and infinity. And by how much the more uniform it is, by 
so much the less 1 is it indefinite, and without measure. Every multitude 
of beings, therefore, is measured by the divine unities. 

PROPOSITION CXVIII. 

Every thing which is in the Gods pre-exists in them according to their 
peculiarities. And the peculiarity of the Gods is unical and superessen¬ 
tial. Hence, all things are contained in them unically and superessen- 
tially. 

For if every thing subsists in a three-fold manner, viz. either according 
to cause, or according to hyparxis, or according to participation, but the 
first number of all things is the divine number, nothing will be in the 
Gods according to participation, but all things will subsist in them either 
according to hyparxis, or according to cause. Such things, however, as 
they antecedently comprehend, as being the causes of all things, they 
antecedently comprehend in a manner appropriate to their own uuion. 
For every thing which is the leader of secondary natures causally, contains 
the cause of things subordinate, in a way naturally adapted to itself. All 
things, therefore, are in the Gods‘unically and superessentially. 

1 Instead of pxAAov here, it is necessary to read ijttov. 




Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CXIX. CXX. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


381 


PROPOSITION CXIX. 

Every God subsists according to superessential goodness, and is good 
neither according to participation, nor according to essence, but superes- 
sentially; since habits and essences are allotted a secondary and manifold 
order from the Gods. 

For if the first God is the one and the good, and so far as he is the one , 
he is also the good , and so far as the good , the one , if this be the case, 
<9very series of the Gods has the form of the one , and the form of the good , 
according to one peculiarity, and each of the Gods is not a unity and 
goodness according to any thing else. But each so far as he is a unity, so 
far he is a goodness, and so far as he is a goodness, so far he is a unity. 
So far also as the Gods posterior to the first God proceed from the first, 
they have the form of the good , and the form of the one , since the first is 
the one and the good. But so far as all of them are Gods, they are unities 
and goodnesses. As, therefore, the one of the Gods is superessential, so 
likewise is their goodness, since it is nothing else than the one. For 
each of them is not any thing else than the good, but is good alone; as 
neither is each any thing else than the one , but is one alone. 

PROPOSITION CXX. 

Every God possesses in his own hyparxis a providential inspection of 
the whole of things. And a providential energy is primarily in the Gods. 

For all other things which are posterior to the Gods, energize provi¬ 
dentially through the participation of them. But providence is connas- 
cent with the Gods. For if to impart good to the subjects of providential 
energy, is the prerogative of the providential peculiarity, but all the Gods 
are goodnesses, either they do not impart themselves to anything, and thus 
nothing will be good in secondary natures. And whengfe will that be 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



382 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXX1. 


derived which subsists according to participation, except from those 
natures that primarily possess peculiarities? Or if they do impart them¬ 
selves, they impart good, and in consequence of this providentially 
attend to all things. Providence, therefore, subsists primarily in the 
Gods. For where is the energy which is prior to intellect, except in 
superessential natures ? But providence (rpowm), as the name signifies, 
is an energy prior to intellect (tvtpyua *<m irp* voo). The Gods, therefore, 
from being Gods, and from being goodnesses, provide for all things, and 
fill all things with the goodness which is prior to intellect. 

PROPOSITION CXXI. 

Every divine nature has indeed for its hyparxis goodness, but possesses 
a power which is unsubdued and at once incomprehensible by all second¬ 
ary natures. 

For if it providentially attends to the whole of things, there is in it a 
power which has dominion over the subjects of its providential energy; 
through which being unsubdued and uncircumscribed by all things, 
divine natures fill all things with, and subject all things to themselves. 
For every thing of a ruling nature, which is the cause of other things, and 
has dominion over them, rules through abundance of power, and predo¬ 
minates according to nature. 

The first power, therefore, is in the Gods, not indeed having 
dominion over some things, but not over others, but equally compre¬ 
hending in itself according to cause the powers of all beings, this 
power neither being essential, nor much less unessential; but being 
connascent with the hyparxis of the Gods, and superessential. 
Moreover, the boundaries of all knowledge, presubsist uniformly in the 
Gods. For through divine knowledge, which is exempt from the whole 
of things, all other knowledge has a subsistence; this knowledge neither 
being intellectual, nor much less, being a certain knowledge posterior to 
intellect, but being established according to the divine peculiarity above 
intellect. Whether, therefore, there is a divine knowledge, this knowledge 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CXX11. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


383 


is occult and uniform [or has the form of the one]. Or whether there is a 
power uncircumscribed by all things, this power is in a similar manner 
comprehensive of all things. Or whether there is a divine goodness, 
this goodness defines the hyparxis of th§ Gods. For if all things are in 
the Gods, knowledge, power, and goodness are also in them. But their 
hyparxis is characterized by that which is most excellent, and their 
hypostasis also is according to that which is best. But this is goodness. 


PROPOSITION CXXII. 

Every thing divine provides for secondary natures, and is exempt from 
the subjects of its providential care, providence neither relaxing the 
unmingled and unical transcendency of that which is divine, nor a sepa¬ 
rate union abolishing providence. 

For divine beings abiding in their unical nature, and in their own 
hyparxis, fill all things with the power of themselves. And every thing 
which is able to participate of them, enjoys the good which it is capable 
of receiving, according to the measures of its proper hypostasis; divine 
natures, in the mean time, illuminating beings with good, by their very 
essence, or rather prior to essence. For that which is divine being nothing 
else than goodness, it supplies all things with an unenvying abundance of 
good, by its very being, not making a distribution according to a reasoning 
process; but other things receiving indeed according to their desert, and 
divine natures according to their hyparxis. Neither, therefore, in pro¬ 
viding for other things, do they receive a habitude, or alliance with the 
subjects of their providential care. For they benefit all things by being 
that which they are. But every thing which makes by its very essence, 
makes without habitude, and with an unrestrained energy. For habitude 
is an addition to essence. Hence also it is preternatural. Nor being 
separate, do they withdraw their providential care. For thus they would 
subvert, which it is not lawful to say, their own hyparxis, the peculiarity 
of which is goodness. For it is the province of goodness to extend itself 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



384 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXXIII. 


to every thing which is able to participate of it. And the greatest of all 
things is not that which is boniform, but that which is beneficent. Either, 
therefore, no being will possess this beneficent nature, or the Gods will 
possess it prior to beings. For it is not possible that a greater good 
should be present with the natures that are good by participation, but a 
less good with those that are primarily good. 


PROPOSITION CXXIII. 

Every thing divine is itself indeed, on account of its superessential 
union, ineffable and unknown to all secondary natures; but it is com¬ 
prehended and known by its participants. Hence, that which is Jirst, is 
alone perfectly unknown, as being imparticipable. 

For all knowledge which subsists through reasoning and language, per¬ 
tains to beings, and in beings possesses the apprehension of truth. For 
it comes into contact with conceptions, and subsists in intellections. But 
the Gods are beyond all beings. Neither, therefore, is that which is 
divine doxastic, or the object of opinion, nor is it dianoetic, nor intelli¬ 
gible. For every being is either sensible, and on this account doxastic, 
or truly existing being, and on this account intelligible, or it is between 
these, subsisting as being and at the same time generation , and on this 
account is dianoetic. If, therefore, the Gods are superessential, and 
subsist prior to beings, there is neither any opinion of them, nor science 
and dianoia, nor intellection. But the nature of their peculiarities is 
known by the beings that are suspended from them. And this by a 
necessary consequence. For the differences of participants are co-divided 
conformably to the peculiarities of the participated natures. And neither 
does every thing participate of every thing; for there is no co-ordination 
of things perfectly dissimilar. Nor does any casual thing participate of 
that which is casual. But that which is kindred is conjoined to that 
which is kindred, and proceeds from that to which it is allied. 


Digitized by 


Gc>9gle 



PROP. CXX1V. CXXV. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


385 


PROPOSITION CXXIV. 

Every God knows partible natures irapartibly, temporal natures, 
without time, things which are‘not necessary, necessarily, mutable 
natures, immutably; and in short, all things in a manner more excellent 
than the order of the things known. 

For if every thing which is with the Gods, is with them according to 
their peculiarity, it is evident that the knowledge in the Gods of things 
inferior, will not subsist according to the nature of the inferior things, 
but according to the exempt transcendency of the Gods. Hence, their 
knowledge of multiplied and passive natures, will be uniform and impas¬ 
sive. If, therefore, the object of knowledge is partible, divine knowledge 
will be impartible. If the objects that are known are mutable, the 
knowledge of the Gods will be immutable; if they are contingent, they 
will be known by the Gods necessarily; and if they are indefinite, defi¬ 
nitely. For that which is divine, does not receive knowledge from 
subordinate beings, in order that thus the knowledge may be such as is 
the nature of the thing known. But subordinate beings become indefi¬ 
nite about the definite nature of the Gods, are changed about their 
immutability, receive passively that which is impassive in them, and 
temporally that which in them is without time. For it is possible for 
subordinate to be surpassed by more excellent natures; but it is not 
lawful for the Gods to receive any thing from beings inferior to themselves. 


PROPOSITION CXXV. 

Every God, from that order from which he began to unfold himself 
into light, proceeds through all secondary natures, always indeed multi¬ 
plying and dividing ihe communications of himself, but preserving the 
peculiarity of his own hypostasis. 

Proc. Vol. II. SC 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



elements 


PROP. CXXVl. 


386 


For progressions being effected through diminution, first natures are 
every where after a manner multiplied into the decrements of 
secondary natures. But these proceeding according to a similitude 
to their producing causes receive their orderly distribution, so that 
the whole of that which proceeds is after a manner the same with, 
and different from, that which abides; through its diminution indeed, 
appearing to be different, but through continuity with its cause, not 
departing from sameness with it. But such as that which abides is 
among first, such is that which proceeds, among secondary natures; and 
thus an indissoluble communion of the series is preserved. Each of the 
Gods, therefore, is unfolded into light appropriately, in the orders in 
which he makes his evolution. But he proceeds from thence, as far as 
to the last of things, through the generative power of first natures. He is 
always, however, multiplied according to a progression from unity into 
multitude. But he preserves sameness in the progression, through the 
similitude of the things that proceed to the leader and primary cause of 
each series. 


PROPOSITION CXXVl. 

9 

Every God who is nearer to the one is more total, but the God who is 
more remote from it is more partial. 

For the God, who is the cause of a greater number of effects, is nearer 
to that which produces all things; but he who is the cause of a less 
number is more remote from it. And he indeed, who is the cause o a 
greater number of effects, is more total; but he who is the cause of a less 
number, is more partial. And each indeed, is a unity, but the one is 
greater, and the other less in power. The more partial Gods also are 
generated from the more total; the latter not being divided, for they are 
unities; nor changed in quality, for they are immoveable; nor multiplied 
by habitude, for they are unmingled. But they generate secondary pro¬ 
gressions from themselves, which are the decrements of the natures prior 
to them, through abundance of power. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CXXVII. cxxvui. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


387 ; 


PROPOSITION CXXVII. 

, Every thing divine, is especially primarily simple, and on this account 
most sufficient to itself. 

For that it is indeed simple, is evident from its union; since every 
thing divine is most unical. But a thing of this kind is transcendently 
simple. That it is also most sufficient to itself, may be learnt by consi¬ 
dering that a composite nature is indigent, if not of other things to which 
it is external, yet of those things of which it is composed. But that which 
is most simple and unical, and which establishes itself in the good , is 
most sufficient to itself. Such, however, is every thing divine. Neither, 
therefore, is it indigent of other things, existing as goodness itself, nor of 
things requisite to composition, because it is unical. 


PROPOSITION CXXVUI. 

Every God, when participated by natures nearer to himself, is partici¬ 
pated without a medium; but when participated by natures more remote 
from himself, the participation is through a less or greater * number of 
media. 

For the former through their alliance being uniform, are immediately 
able to participate of the divine unities; but the latter through their di¬ 
minution, and extension into multitude, require other things which are 
more united, in order that they may participate of the unities themselves, 
and not of things united. For united multitude subsists between unity 
itself and divided multitude; being indeed able * to coalesce with unity, 
but allied in a certain respect to divided multitude, through the repre¬ 
sentation of multitude. 

' % *A»ov<ov is omitted in the original. 

* IvYUfum is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXXIX. 


388 


PROPOSITION CXXIX. 

Every divine body is divine through a deified soul. But every soul is 
divine through a divine intellect. And every intellect is divine through 
the participation of a divine unity. And unity indeed is of itself a God; 
intellect is most divine; soul is divine; but body is deiform. For if 
every number of the Gods is above intellect, but participations are 
effected through kindred and similar natures, the impartible essence will 
primarily participate of the supercssential unities. But the nature which 
comes into contact with generation will participate of them secondarily. 
And generation in the third place. Each of these likewise participates of 
them through the proximately superior natures. And the peculiarity of 
the Gods indeed proceeds, as far as to the last of things, in its partici¬ 
pants ; but through media allied to itself. For unity indeed imparts the 
transcendent power of itself to the first intellect, among divine natures, and 
causes this intellect to be like itself according to unical multitude. But 
through intellect it is also present with soul, conjoining soul with intellect 
and co-inflaming it £with divine fire], when this intellect is participable. 
And through the echo ' of soul, imparting also to body its own peculia¬ 
rity, if it is a body which participates something of soul. And thus body 
becomes not only animated and intellectual, but also divine. For it 
receives life indeed and motion from soul; but indissoluble permanency 
from intellect; and divine union from participated unity. 1 For each of 
these imparts its own hyparxis to the subsequent natures. 

* By the echo of soul, Proclus means that vital quality by which the soul is united to the body 5 
and which is nothing more than the last image and shadow of the soul. The necessity of such a 
connecting quality will easily appear, from considering that a truly incorporeal nature, like that 
of soul, cannot be connected with body, without a vital medium. In consequence of this we may 
consider with Plotinus (Ennead. 4. lib. 4.) the animated body as resembling illuminated and heated 
air. And the pains and pleasures of the body will be conversant with this shadow of the soul. 

* The original here is defective: for it is syoxriy 8* &tiav, m ro tjjj * * * * tairrov 

jxrr«8iWi To** tfefa. From the version of Patricius, however, the defect may be supplied as fol¬ 
lows : evaxnv 8s itiav, cckq nj$ /xeTe^oftrvitf cy*8o£. fKaa Toy y up tqvt'jov tavrov x. r. A. This emenda¬ 
tion is adopted in the above translation. 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CXXX. CXXXI. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


389 


PROPOSITION CXXX. 

In every divine order, such things as are first, are in a greater degree 
exempt from the natures proximately arranged under them, than these 
latter are from things subsequent. And secondary natures in a greater 
degree adhere to their proximate superiors, than following natures to 
these. 

For by how much more unical and total any thing is, by so much the 
more is it allotted a greater transcendency with respect to subsequent 
natures. And by how much the more diminished it is according to 
power, by so much the more is it connascent with the natures posterior to 
itself. And more elevated natures indeed are more united with their more 
principal causes; but inferior natures are less united with them. For it 
is the province of a greater power to be more exempt from subordinate, 
and to be more united to better natures. As on the contrary, it is the 
province of a diminution of power, to recede in a greater degree from 
more excellent, and to be co-passive with subordinate natures. And this 
happens to secondary, but not to first natures, in every order of things. 


PROPOSITION CXXXI. 

Every God begins his own energy from himself. 

For he first exhibits the peculiarity of his presence with secondary 
natures, in himself; because he imparts himself to other things also 
according to his own exuberant plenitude. For neither is deficiency 
adapted to the Gods, nor fulness alone. For every thing deficient is 
imperfect, and not being itself perfect, it is impossible it should make 
another thing to be perfect. But that which is full is alone sufficient to 
itself, and is hot yet prepared to communicate. It is necessary, there¬ 
fore, that the nature which fills other things, and which extends to other 
things the communications of itself should be super-plenary or exuber- 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



390 


ELEMENTS 


prop, cxxxii. cxxxm. 


antly full. Hence, if a divine nature fills all things from itself with the 
good which it contains in itself, it is exuberantly full. And if this be the 
case, establishing first in itself the peculiarity which it imparts to others, 
it will extend to them the communications of super-plenary goodness. 


PROPOSITION CXXXII. 

All the orders of the Gods are bound in union by a medium. 

For all the progressions of beings are effected through similars; and 
much more will the orders of the Gods possess an indissoluble continuity, 
as subsisting uniformly, and being defined according to the one , which is 
the principal cause of their existence. The decrements, therefore, are 
produced unitedly, and alone according to ' the similitude in beings of 
secondary to first natures. And this, because the hyparxis of the Gods 
much more consists in union than the subsistence of beings. All the 
divine genera, therefore, are bound together by appropriate media; and 
first natures do not proceed into progressions perfectly different without a 
medium, but through the genera common to each, from which they pro¬ 
ceed, and of which they are immediately the causes. For these congre¬ 
gate the extremes into one union, being spread under some things 
connascently, but proximately exempt from others. And they preserve 
the well-ordered generation of divine natures. 


PROPOSITION CXXXIII. 

Every God is a beneficent unity or an unific («vojroiof) goodness; and 
each, so far as a God, possesses this hyparxis. The first God, however, 
is simply good, and simply one. But each posterior to the first, is a certain 
goodness, and a certain unity. 

For the divine peculiarity distinguishes the unities and goodnesses of 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CXXX1V. cxxxv. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


391 : 

the Gods, so that each according to a certain peculiarity of goodness, such 
as that of perfecting, or connectedly-containing, or defending, benefits all 
things. For each of these is a certain good, but not every good. But 
the first God pre-establishes a unical cause. Hence, that is the good , as 
giving subsistence to all goodness. For all the hyparxes of the Gods, 
are not together equal to the one ; so great a transcendency is the first 
God allotted with respect to the multitude of the Gods. 

PROPOSITION CXXXIV. 

Every divine intellect, intellectually perceives indeed, as intellect, but 
energizes providentially as a God. 

For it is the illustrious prerogative of intellect to know beings, and to 
have its perfection in intellections. But it is the province of a God to 
energize providentially, and to fill all things with good. This communi¬ 
cation, however, and replenishing with good, is accomplished through the 
union of the replenishing natures with the causes prior to themselves ; 
which intellect, also imitating, passes into sameness with intelligibles. A 
divine intellect, therefore, -so far as it energizes providentially, is a God i 
providence being established in an energy prior to intellect. Hence, as 
a God it imparts itself to all things; but as intellect it is not present with 
all things. For a divine nature extends to things into which the intellec¬ 
tual peculiarity does not proceed. For beings which are without intellect 
desire to energize providentially, and to participate of a certain good. 
But this is because all things indeed do not aspire after intellect, not 
even all such as are able to participate of it. All things, however, aspire 
after good, and hasten to obtain it. 

PROPOSITION CXXXV. 

Every divine unity is participated by some being immediately, or 
without a medium; and every deified nature is extended to one divine 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



30S 


ELEMENTS 


PROP, cxxxri. 


unity. As many also as are the participated unities, so many are the 
participating genera of beings. 

For neither two or more unities are participated by one being. For 
since the peculiarities in the unities are different, must not that which is 
connascent with each be different also, since contact is effected through 
similitude? Nor is one unity participated in a divided manner by many 
beings. For many beings are unadapted to be conjoined with unity, and 
as beings they are unconjoined with the unity which is prior to beings, 
and as many , they are separated from unity. It is necessary, however, 
that the thing which participates should be partly similar to that which 
is participated, and partly different and dissimilar. Since, therefore, that 
which participates is something belonging to beings, but unity is super¬ 
essential, and according to this they are dissimilar; it is necessary that 
the participant should be one, in order that according to this, it may be 
similar to the one which is participated, though of these, the latter is one 
in such a manner as to be unity, but the former, so as to be passive to the 
one, and to be united through the participation of unity. 


PROPOSITION CXXXVI. 

Every God who is more total, and arranged nearer to the first, is 
participated by a more total genus of beings. But the God who is more 
partial, and more remote from the first, is participated by a more 
partial genus of beings. And as being is to being, so is one divine unity 
to another. 

For if unities are as many in number as beings, and vice versa, and 
one,unity is participated by one being, it is evident that the order of 
beings proceeds according to the order of the unities, being assimilated 
to the order prior to beings. And more total beings indeed are connas¬ 
cent with more total unities; but more partial beings with more partial 
unities. For if this were not the case, again similars would be conjoined 
with dissimilars, and there would not be a distribution according to 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CXXXVII. CXXXV1II. OF THEOLOGY. 


393 


desert. These things, however, are impossible. Since from thence the 
one, and an appropriate measure are luminously imparted to all things, 
and from these proceed. Much more, therefore, will there be an order of 
participation in these, similars being suspended as much as possible from 
similars. 


PROPOSITION CXXXVII. 

Every unity in conjunction with the one gives subsistence to the being 
which participates of it. 

For the one, as it gives subsistence to all things, so likewise it is the 
cause of the participated unities, and of beings suspended from these 
unities. But (he unity belonging to every being produces the peculiarity 
which shines forth in that particular being. And the one indeed is the 
cause of existence simply ; but unity is the cause of alliance, because it is 
connascent with the one. Hence, unity is that which of itself defines 
the being which participates of it, and essentially exhibits in itself a super- 
essential peculiarity. For every where, from that which is primary that 
which is secondary is that which it is. If, therefore, there is a certain 
superessential peculiarity of deity, this also belongs to the being which 
participates of it superessentially. 


PROPOSITION CXXXVIII. 

Of all the deified natures which participate of the divine peculiarity, 
the first and highest is being itself. 

For if being is beyond intellect and life, as has been demonstrated, 
and if it is also after the one the cause of the greatest number of effects, 
being will be the highest deified nature. For it is more single than life 
and intellect, and is on this account entirely more venerable. But 
there is not any thing else-prior to it except the one. For prior to unical 
Proc. Vo l. II. 3 D 


Digitized by boogie 



394 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXXXIX. CXL, 


multitude what else can there be except the one ¥ But being is unical 
multitude as consisting of bound and infinity. And in short, the super- 
essential one * is prior to essence. Since also in the illuminations which 
are imparted to secondary natures, the one alone extends beyond being. 
But being is immediately posterior to the one. For that which is being 
in capacity, but is not yet being, is nevertheless according to its own 
nature one. And that which follows the being that is in capacity is now 
being in energy. ITence, in the principles of things, non-being is imme¬ 
diately beyond being, as something more excellent, and no other than 
the one itself. 

PROPOSITION CXXXIX. 

All things which participate of the divine unities, originate indeed 
from being, but end in a corporeal nature. 

For being is the first of participants, but body the last,* for we say 
that there are divine bodies. For the highest of all the genera of bodies, 
souls and intellects, are attributed to the Gods, that in every order, 
things analogous to the Gods may connect and preserve secondary 
natures, and that each number may be a whole, containing all things in 
itself, according to the whole which is in a part, and possessing prior to 
other things the divine peculiarity. The divine genus, therefore, subsists 
corporeally, psychically, and intellectually. And it is evident that all 
these are divine according to participation. For that which is primarily 
divine subsists in the unities. Hence, the participants of the divine unities 
originate indeed from being, but end in a corporeal nature. 

PROPOSITION CXL. 

/ 

% 

All the powers of divine natures, having a supernal origin, and pro¬ 
ceeding through appropriate media, extend as far as to the last of things, 
and to places about the earth; 

* For ro vrtpoviriov ov, it is necessary to read to vxtpouo-iov tv. 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CXL. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


395 


For neither does any thing intercept these powers, and exclude them 
irom being present with all things. For they are not in want of places 
and intervals, on account of their unrestrained transcendency with respect 
to all things, and a presence every where unmingled. Nor is that which 
is adapted to participate of them, prohibited from participation. But as 
soon as any thing is prepared for participation, they also are present, 
neither then approaching, nor . prior to this being absent, but always 
possessing an invariable sameness of subsistence. If, therefore, any 
terrene nature is adapted to the participation of these divine powers, they 
are present with it, and fill all things with themselves. And indeed they 
are in a greater degree present with superior natures. But they are 
present with those of a middle nature, according to the order which they 
possess. And with such natures as are last, they are present in an ulti¬ 
mate degree. From on high, therefore, they extend themselves as far as 
to the last of things. Hence also, in last natures there are representations 
of such as are first, and all things sympathize uith all; * secondary 

* Thus too Hippocrates, a fua, avpirvotot (mix, vavret o-uj tijrallea, i. e. t( there is one conflux 9 \ 

one conspiration , and all things sympathize with all” He who understands this will see that 
the magic cultivated by the ancient philosophers, is founded in a theory no less sublime than 
regional and true. Such a one will survey the universe as one great animal, all whose parts are 
in union and consent with each otherj so that nothing is foreign and detached; nothing, strictly 
6peaking, void of sympathy and life. For though various parts of the world, when considered 
as separated from the whole, are destitute of peadiar life j yet they possess some degree of anima¬ 
tion, however inconsiderable, when viewed with relation to the universe. Life indeed may be 
compared to a perpetual and universal sound$ and the soul of the world resembles a lyre, or some 
other musical instrument, from which we may suppose this sound to be emitted. But from the 
unbounded diffusion as it were of the mundane soul, every thing participates of this harmonical 
sound, in greater or less perfection, according to the dignity of its nature. So that while life 
every where resounds, the most abject of beings may be said to retain a faint echo of the melody 
produced by the mundane lyre. It was doubtless from profoundly considering this sympathy 
between the mundane soul, and the parts of the world, that the ancient philosophers were enabled 
to procure the presence of divinity, and perform effects beyond the comprehension of the vulgar. 

And that this was the opinion of Plotinus, the following passage evinces: " It appears to me that 
the ancient wise men, who wished to procure the presence of the Gods, by fabricating statues and 
performing sacred rites, directed their intellectual eye to the nature of the universe, and perceived 
that the nature of soul was every where easy to be attracted, when a proper subject was at hand, 
easily passive to its influence. But every thing adapted to imitation, is readily passive, and is like 
a mirror able to seize a certain form, and reflect it to the vieV.” Eimead 4. lib. 3. 


Digitized by boogie 



396 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXU. CXLII. 


indeed, preexisting in first natures, but first natures presenting themselves 
to the view in such as are second. For every thing subsists in a threefold 
manner, either according to cause, or according to hvparxis, or according 
to participation. 


PROPOSITION CXLI. 

Every providence of the Gods is twofold, one indeed being exempt 
from the natures for which it provides, but the other being co-arranged 
with them. 

For some divine essences indeed, according to hyparxis, and the 
peculiarity of their order, are entirely expanded above the illuminated 
natures. But others being of the same order, provide for things subordi¬ 
nate that are of the same co-ordination; these also imitating the 
providential energy of the exempt Gods, and desiring to fill secondary 
natures with the good which they are able to impart. 

PROPOSITION CXLII. 

The Gods are present with all things after the same manner, but all 
things are not after the same manner present with the Gods. But every 
thing participates of their presence according to its own order and power. 
And this is accomplished by some things uniformly, but by others mani¬ 
foldly ; by some things eternally, but by others according to time; and 
by some things incorporeally, but by others corporeally. 

For it is necessary that the different participation of the same things, 
should become different, either from the participant, or from that which 
is participated. But every thing divine always possesses the same order, 
and is without habitude to, and unmingled with all things. It remains 
therefore, that the mutation must subsist from the participants, and that 
in these that which is not invariably the same must be found, and that at 
different times they are differently present with the Gods. Hence, the 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CXLI1I. CXI4V. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


397 


Gods being present with all things with invariable sameness, all things are 
not after the same manner present with them. But other things are 
present with them as far as they are able, and according to the manner 
in which they are present they enjoy their illuminations. For the parti¬ 
cipation is according to the measure of the presence of the divinities. 


PROPOSITION CXLIII. 

All inferior natures fail before the presence of the Gods, though that 
which participates of them may be adapted to participation. Every 
thing foreign indeed from divine light becomes far removed from it. 
But all things are illuminated at once by the Gods. 

For divine natures are always more comprehensive and more powerful 
than the things which proceed from them. But the inaptitude of the 
participants, becomes the cause of the privation ' of divine illumination. 
For this inaptitude obscures it by its own imbecility. And this being 
obscured, something else appears to receive dominion, not according to 
its own power, but according to the imbecility of the participant, which 
seems to rise against the divine form of the illumination. 

PROPOSITION CXLIV. 

AH beings, and all the distributions of beings, extend as far in their 
progressions, as the orders of the Gods. 

For the Gods produce beings in conjunction with themselves, nor is 
any thing able to subsist, and to receive measure and order external to the 
Gods, [or beyond their influence.] For all things are perfected through, 
their power, and are arranged and measured by the Gods. Prior there¬ 
fore to the last genera in beings, the Gods preexist, who also adorn these 

* The word mpinttf is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by boogie 



398 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXLY. 


genera, and impart to them life, formation and perfection, and convert 
them to the good. In a similar manner also, the Gods are prior to the 
middle and first genera of beings. And all things are bound and rooted 
in the Gods, and through this cause are preserved. But when any thing 
apostatizes from, and becomes destitute of the Gods, it entirety departs 
into nonrentity and vanishes, in consequence of being perfectly deprived 
of those natures by which it was contained. 

PROPOSITION CXLV. 

The peculiarity of every divine order pervades through all secondary 
natures, and imparts itself to all the subordinate genera of beings. 

For if beings proceed as far as the orders of the Gods extend, in every 
genus of beings, there is a supernally-illuminated peculiarity of the divine 
powers. For every thing receives from its proximate appropriate cause, 
the peculiarity according to -which that cause is allotted its subsistence. 
I say for instance, if there is a certain cathartic or purifying deity, there 
is also a purification in souls, in animals, in plants, and in stones. And 
in a similar manner, if there is a guardian, k convertive, a perfective, and 
a vivific power. And a stone indeed participates of the divine cathartic 
power in a corporeal manner only. ' But a plant participates it still more 
clearly according to life. An animal possesses this form according to 
impulse; the rational soul rationally; intellect, intellectually; and the 
Gods superessentially and unically. The whole series also has the same 
power from one divine cause. And there is the same mode of reasoning 
with respect to the peculiarities of the other divine powers. For all things 
are suspended from the Gods. And different natures are illuminated by 
different Gods; every divine series extending as far as to the last of 
things. And some things indeed are suspended from the Gods immedi¬ 
ately, but others through a greater or less number of media. But all 
things are full 1 of Gods. And whatever any thing naturally possesses, it 
derives from the Gods. 

4 For jtMra 8* wana 9i»v, it is necessary to read /iWT« It wane t decoy. 


Digitized by s^OOQle 



/ 


PROP. CXLVI. CXLVII. CXLV1II. OF THEOLOGY. 399 


PROPOSITION CXLVI. 

The ends of all the divine progressions are assimilated to their principles, 
preserving* a circle without a beginning and without an end, through 
conversion to their principles. 

For if every thing that has proceeded, is converted to the proper 
principle from which it proceeded, much more will total orders having 
proceeded from their summit be again converted to it. But the conversion 
of the end to the beginning, renders the whole order one, definite, and 
converging to itself, and exhibiting through the convergency, that which 
has the form of the one in the multitude. 


PROPOSITION CXLVII. 

The summits of all the divine orders are assimilated to the ends of the 
natures [proximately] situated above them. 

For if it is necessary that there should be an uninterrupted connection 
of the divine progression, and that each order should be bound together 
by appropriate media, it is necessary that the summits of secondary 
should be conjoined with the terminations of first orders. But this 
contact is through similitude. Hence there will be a similitude of the 
principles of an inferior, to the ends of a [proximately] superior order. 

PROPOSITION CXLVIII. 

Every divine order is united to itself in a threefold manner, from the 

summit which is in it, from its middle, and from its end. 

/ 

For the summit possessing a power which is most single, transmits 
union to all the series, and unites the whole of it supernally abiding in 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



400 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXLIX 


itself. But the middle extending to both the extremes, binds together 
the whole order about itself; transmitting indeed, the gifts of primary 
divine natures, but extending the powers of such as are last, and inserting 
communion in all of them, and a conjunction with each other. For thus 
the whole order becomes one, from natures that replenish and those that 
are filled, converging to the middle as to a certain centre. And the end 
again returning to the beginning, and recalling the proceeding powers, 
imparts similitude and convergency to the whole order. And thus the 
whole order is one through the unific power of primary natures, through 
the connexion existing in the middle, and through the conversion of the 
end to the principle of the progressions. 


PROPOSITION CXLIX. 

Every multitude of the divine unities is bounded according to number. 

For if this multitude is most near to the one it will not be infinite. 
For the infinite is not connascent with, but foreign from the one. Indeed, 
if multitude is of itself, or in its own nature, separated from the one t it is 
evident that infinite multitude is perfectly destitute of it. Hence it is 
powerless, and inefficacious. The multitude of the Gods therefore, is not 
infinite. Hence it has the form of the one and is finite, and is more finite 
than every other multitude. For it is nearer to the one than all other 
multitude. If therefore the principle of things was multitude, it would 
be necessary that what is nearer to the principle should be a greater 
multitude than what is more remote from it. For that which is nearer to 
any thing is more similar to it. Since however, that which is first is the 
one , the multitude which is conjoined with it, is a less multitude than that 
which is more remote from it. But the infinite is not a Jess, but is the 
greatest possible multitude. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CL. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


401 


PROPOSITION CL. 

Every thing which proceeds in the divine orders, is not naturally 
adapted to receive all the powers of its producing cause. Nor in short, 
are secondary natures able to receive all the powers of the natures prior 
to themselves, but the latter have certain powers exempt from things in 
an inferior order, and incomprehensible by the beings posterior to 
themselves. 

For if the peculiarities of the Gods differ from each other, those of the 
subordinate preexist in the superior divinities ; but those of the superior 
being more total, are not in the subordinate. But more excellent natures 
impart indeed some things to their progeny, but antecedently assume 
others in themselves, in an exempt manner. For it has been demonstrated 
that those Gods who are nearer to the one are more total; and those 
more remote from it more partial. But if the more total have powers 
comprehensive of the more partial, those that have a secondary and more 
partial order, will not comprehend the power of the more total Gods. 
In the superior therefore, there is something incomprehensible and 
uncircurnscribed by the inferior orders. For each of the divine orders is 
truly infinite.* Nor is that which is infinite, as has been demonstrated, 1 
infinite to itself, nor much less to things above itself, but to all the natures 
posterior to itself. But infinite in these last is in capacity. The infinite 
however, is incomprehensible by those natures to which it is infinite. 
Subordinate natures therefore, do not participate of all the powers which 
more excellent natures antecedently comprehend in themselves. For 
the latter are incomprehensible by the former. Hence things of a 
secondary nature, from theii* more partial subsistence, will neither possess 
all the powers of more excellent beings, nor will they possess the powers 

* There is a chasm here in the original. And it appears fronrthe version of Patricius, that the 
words xai yetg axtigos tnn orr a>( ixgwto ;, are wanting. 

* In Prop. 93. 

Proc. Vol. II. 3 E 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



402 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLI. CLII. 


which they do contain after the same manner as superior natures, on 
account of that infinity through which the latter transcend the former. 


PROPOSITION CLI. 

Every thing paternal in the Gods is of a primary nature, and is 
pre-established in the rank of the good, according to all the divine orders. 

For it produces the hyparxes of secondary natures, and total powers 
and essences, according to one ineffable transcendency. Hence also it is 
denominated paternal, in consequence of exhibiting the united and 
boniform power of the one, and the cause which gives subsistence to 
secondary natures. And according to each order of the Gods, the 
paternal genus ranks as the leader, producing all things from itself, and 
adorning them, as being arranged analogous to the good. And of divine 
lathers, some are more total, but others are more partial, just as the orders 
themselves of the Gods, differ by the more total, and the more partial, 
according to the reason of cause. As many therefore, as are the progres¬ 
sions of the Gods, so many also are the differences of fathers. For if 
there is that which is analogous to the good in every order, it is necessary 
that there should be the paternal in all the orders, and that each order 
should proceed from the paternal union. 

PROPOSITION CLII. 

Every thing which is generative in the Gods, proceeds according to 
the infinity of divine power, multiplying itself, proceeding through all 
things, and transcendently exhibiting the never-failing in the progressions 
of secondary natures. 

For to multiply things which proceed, and to produce things into 
progeny, from the occult comprehension in causes, of what else is it the 
prerogative, than of the infinite power of the Gods, through which all 
divine natures are filled with prolific good ? For every thing which is full 


Digitized by 


Google. _ 



PROP. CLIII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


403 


produces other things from itself according to a super-plenary power. 
The domination of power therefore is the peculiarity of generative deity, 
which multiplies the powers of the things generated, and renders them 
prolific, and excites them to generate and give subsistence to other things. 
For if every thing imparts the appropriate peculiarity which it possesses 
primarily to other things, every thing which is prolific will impart 
progression, and will adumbrate the infinity which is the primary leader 
of wholes, from which every generative power proceeds, and which in an 
exempt manner pours forth the ever-flowing progressions of divine 
natures. 


PROPOSITION CLIII. 

[Every thing which is perfect in the Gods,’] is the cause of divine 
perfection. 

For as the hypostases of beings are of one kind, but those of super¬ 
essential natures of another, so likewise with respect to perfections, those 
of the Gods themselves according to hyparxis, are different from those of 
beings, which are secondary and posterior to them. And the former 
indeed, are self-perfect and primary, because the good subsists primarily 
in them; but the latter possess perfection according to participation. 
Hence the perfection of the Gods is one thing, and that of deified natures 
is another. The perfection however, which is primarily in the Gods, is 
not only the cause of perfection to deified natures, but also to the Gods 
themselves. For if every thing so far as it is perfect, is converted to its 
proper principle, that which is the cause of all divine conversion, is the 
perfective genus of the Gods. 

1 The words within the bracket* are wanting in the original, which I have supplied from the 
version of Patricias, lit the Greek therefore it is necessary to supply the words too to rt\tiov n ms 
itots. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



404 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CUV. CLV. 


PROPOSITION CLIV. , 

Every thing which is of a guardian nature in the Gods, preserves every 
thing in its proper order, and is uniformly exempt’ from secondary, and 
established 1 in primary natures. 

For if a guard immutably preserves the measure of the order of every 
thing, and connectedly contains all the natures that are guarded in their 
appropriate perfection, it will impart to all things a transcendency exempt 
from subordinate beings, and will firmly establish each thing unmingled, 
in itself, existing as the cause of undefiled purity to the natures that are 
guarded, and fixing them in superior beings. For every thing is perfect 
which adheres to primary natures, but is in itself alone, and is expanded 

above things subordinate. 

/ 

PROPOSITION CLV. 

! 

Every thing vivific in the Gods is [a generative cause, but every 
generative cause is not vivific.’} 

For a generative is more total than a vivific cause, and is nearer to the 
principle of all things. For generation manifests a cause which produces 
beings into multitude. But vivification represents to us the deity who is 
the supplier of all life. If therefore the former multiplies the hypostases 
of beings, but the latter gives subsistence to the progressions of life,—if 
this be the case, as being is to life, so is the generative order to the vivific 
series. The former therefore, will be more total, and the cause of a 
greater number of effects, and will on this account be nearer to the 
principle of all things. 

' For tfygtifUMv it is necessary to read i^giifitvov. 

1 Here also we must read for miigu/xtvwy. 

1 The words ainx ytwi itixij, aXka xot<ra curt * ym ijtixi) oux eon ^cooyowxt), are wanting in the 
original. 


Digitized by boogie 



PROP. CLVI. CLV1I. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


405 


PROPOSITION CLVI. 

Every cause of purity is comprehended in the guardian order. But on 
the contrary, not every thing of a guardian order is the same with the 
purifying genus. 

For purity imparts to all the Gods the unmingled with things inferior, 
and the undefiled in the providence of secondary natures. But a 
guardian power also effects this, and contains all things in itself, and 
firmly inserts them in superior natures. The guardian therefore is more 
total than the purifying genus. For in short, the peculiarity of the 
guardian power, is to preserve the order of every thing the same with 
reference to itself, and to the natures prior and posterior to itself. But 
the peculiarity of purity is to keep more excellent natures exempt from 
such as are subordinate. These powers however primarily subsist in the 
Gods. For it is necessary that there should be one cause preceding that 
which is in all things, and in short, it is requisite that there should be 
uniform measures of all good, and that these should be comprehended by 
the Gods according to cause. For there is no good in secondary natures 
which does not pre-exist in the Gods. [Hence in the divinities purity is 
likewise a primary good, guardianship, and every thing of this kind.'] 

PROPOSITION CLVII. 

Every paternal cause is the supplier of being to all things, and gives 
subsistence to the hyparxes of beings. But every thing which is fabricative 
of the production of form, exists prior to composite natures, and precedes 
their order, and division according to number, and is also of the same 
co-ordination with the paternal cause, in the more partial genera of 
things. 

1 The words within the brackets are wanting in the original, which I have supplied from the 
version of Patricius. Hence, in the printed Greek text it is necessary to supply the words, ev 
Qeotf apa , ij fxtv Katctgory\$ ten xai wgcorws ayctiov, xcti ij fgovgct, xat ttccv toiqutov. 


\ 


Digitized by boogie 



406 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLVIII. 


For each of these belongs to the order of bound; since hyparxis also, 
number and form, have all of them the nature of bound. Hence, in this 
respect they are co-ordinate with each other. But the demiurgic or 
fabricative cause indeed, produces fabrication into multitude. And the 
uniform, or that which has the form of the one supplies the progressions 
of beings. And the former indeed, is the artificer of form, but the latter 
produces essence. So far therefore, as these differ from each other, viz. 
form and being, so far also does the paternal differ from the demiurgic 
cause. But form is a certain being.* Hence the paternal cause is more 
total and causal, and is beyond the demiurgic genus, in the same manner 
as being is beyond form. 

PROPOSITION CLVIII. 

Every elevating cause in the Gods, differs both from a purifying cause, 
and from the convertive genera. 

For it is evident that this cause also has necessarily a primary subsist¬ 
ence in the Gods; since all the causes of total good preexist in the 
divinities. But it subsists prior to the purifying cause. For the one 
liberates from things of a subordinate nature, but the other conjoins with 
more excellent natures. The elevating however, has a more partial order 
than the convertive cause. For every thing which converts, [is converted 
either to itself, or to that which is more excellent than itself. 1 ] But the 
energy of the elevating cause is characterized by a conversion to that 
which is more excellent, as leading that which is converted to a superior 
and more divine cause. 

* For ti «v, it appears requisite to read ti ov. 

* From the version of Patricius, it is necessary to supply the words wgts mw, s wgos n 
KgMTTov nri0Tgi$rr«« which are wanting in the original. 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CLIX. CLX. CLXI. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


407 


PROPOSITION CLIX. 

Every order of the Gods consists of the first principles, bound and 
infinity. But one order is in a greater degree derived from bound, and 
another from infinity. 

For every order proceeds from both these, because the communications 
of first causes pervade through all secondary natures. But in some things 
bound predominates in the mixture [of bound and infinity,] and in others 
infinity. And thus the genus which has the form of bound has its 
completion, in which the prerogatives of bound have dominion. This too 
is the case with the genus which has the form of the infinite, and in which 
the properties of infinity predominate. 

PROPOSITION CLX. 

Concerning Intellect . 

Every divine intellect is uniform, or has the form of the one, and is 
perfect. And the first intellect subsists from itself, and produces other 
intellects. 

For if it is a God it is filled with divine unities, and is uniform. But 
if this be the case, it is also perfect, being full of divine goodness. And 
if this be admitted, it is likewise primarily intellect, as being united to the 
Gods. But being primarily intellect, it also gives an hypostasis to other 
intellects. For all secondary natures obtain their hyparxis from such as 
have a primary subsistence. 

PROPOSITION CLXI. 

Every thing which is truly being, and is suspended from the Gods, 
is divine and imparticipable. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



408 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLX1I. 


For since that which is truly being, is the first of the natures that 
participate of the divine union, it likewise fills intellect from itself. For 
intellect is being, as replete with being, and is therefore a divine intelli¬ 
gible. And so far indeed as it is deified it is divine, but as filling 
intellect, and being participated by it, it is intelligible. Intellect also is 
being, on account of that which is primarily being. But that which is 
primarily being itself is separate from intellect; because intellect is 
posterior to being. But imparticipables subsist prior to things which 
are participated. Hence being which subsists by itself and is impartici- 
pable, is prior to the being which is conjoined with intellect. For it is 
intelligible, not as co-arranged with intellect, but as perfecting intellect 
in an exempt manner, because it imparts being to it, and fills it with 
truly existing essence. 

PROPOSITION CLXII. 

* 

Every multitude of unities which illuminates truly existing being, is 
occult and intelligible; occult indeed, as being conjoined with unity; 
but intelligible,' as participated by being. 

For all the Gods are denominated from the things which are suspended 
from them; because from these it is possible to know their different 
hypostases, which are [of themselves] unknown. For every thing divine 
is of itself ineffable and unknown, as being connascent with the ineffable 
one. From the difference, however, of the participants it happens that 
the peculiarities of divine natures become known. The unities, therefore, 
which illuminate truly existing being are intelligible; because being, truly 
so called, is a divine intelligible, and imparticipable, subsisting prior to 
intellect. For this would not be suspended from the first Gods, unless 
they also possessed a primary hypostasis, and a power perfective of other* 
Gods; since, as participants are to each other, so likewise are the 
hyparxes of the things that are participated. 


1 For veo here it is necessary to read voigm. 


Digitized by 



PROP. CLXIII. CLXIV. CLXV. OF THEOLOGY. 


409 


PROPOSITION CLXIII. 

Every multitude of unities which is participated by imparticipable’ 
intellect, is intellectual. 

For as intellect is to truly existing being, so are these unities to the 
intelligible unities. Since, therefore, the latter which illuminate being, 1 
are intelligible, hence, the former which illuminate a divine and impar¬ 
ticipable intellect, are intellectual. Yet they are not intellectual in such 
a way, as if they subsisted in intellect, but as causally existing prior to 
intellect, and generating intellect. 

PROPOSITION CLXIV. 

Every multitude of unities which is participated by every impartici¬ 
pable soul, is supermundane. 

For because imparticipable soul is primarily above the world, the 
Gods also which are participated by it are supermundane, having the 
same analogy to the intellectual and intelligible Gods, which soul has to 
intellect, and intellect to truly existing being. As, therefore, every soul 
is suspended from intellect, and intellect is converted to the intelligible, 
thus also the supermundane are suspended from the intellectual, in the 
same manner as the intellectual from the intelligible Gods. 

PROPOSITION CLXV. 

Every multitude of unities which is participated by a certain [sensible 
body is mundane.] 

For it illuminates the parts of the world, through intellect and soul as 


Proc. 


• For jttrfucrov here, it is necessary to read afutn tr#«. 


* For Tor nw, it is necessary to read to or. 


VOL. II. 


3 F 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



410 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLXVI. 


media. 1 For intellect is not present with any mundane body without 
soul, nor are deity and soul conjoined without a medium; since partici¬ 
pations are through similars. Intellect itself also according to its 
intelligible summit, participates of unity. These unities, therefore, are 
mundane, as giving completion to the whole world, and as deifying 
visible bodies. For each of these is divine, not on account of soul; for 
soul is not primarily a God. Nor on account of intellect; for intellect 
is not the same with the one. But each of• these visible bodies, is 
animated indeed on account of soul, and moved of itself. But it possesses 
a perpetual sameness of subsistence, and is moved in the most excellent 
order, on account of intellect. It is| however, divine on account of 
union. »And if it possesses a providential power, it possesses it through 
this cause. 

PROPOSITION CLXVI. 

Every intellect is either imparticipable or participable. And if parti- 
cipable, it is either participated by supermundane, or by mundane souls. 

For imparticipable intellect having the first order, is the leader of every 
multitude of intellects. But of participable intellects, some illuminate super¬ 
mundane and imparticipable soul, but others the mundane soul. For the 
mundane multitude is not immediately derived from the imparticipable; 
since progressions are through similars. But that which is separate from 
the world, is more similar to the imparticipable, than that which is 
divided about it. Nor has a supermundane multitude alone a subsist¬ 
ence, but there are also mundane intellects; since there is likewise a 
mundane multitude of Gods, and the world itself is animated, and at 
the same time intellectual. The participation also of the supermundane 
Gods by mundane souls, is through mundane intellects as the media. 

* The original in the beginning of this proposition is both defective and erroneous. For it is as 
follows : xav to reov evatoov rwv /urf^oftcvcov uxo tivo$ ***** yag WTi reov T ou xoTftou /xegcov, 

xat ha fj*<rov, xai ttj$ From the version of Patricius, however, the defect and error may 

be removed by reading vav to xXtjJoj rant svahov reov /tm^o/tcvcov otto rmg aurhjTov <rc» paros 07x007x10* 
tori. oxiXa/xxoi yag too* tou xovjxou jxogoov, xea ha fMcov you, xai njj 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CLXVII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


411 


PROPOSITION CLXVII. 

Every intellect intellectually perceives itself. But the first intellect 
indeed, perceives itself alone; and in this, intellect and the intelligible 
are one in number. But each of the subsequent intellects, perceives 
itself, and the natures prior to itself. And the intelligible to each of 
these,' is partly that which it is, and partly that from which it is derived. 

For every intellect, either * intellectually perceives itself, or that which 
is above, or that which is posterior to itself. But if indeed it perceives 
that which is posterior to itself, it will through intellect be converted to 
that which is less excellent than itself; and thus will not know that to 
which it is converted, as not being in itself, but external to itself. But it 
will only know the image of this thing, as being generated in itself from 
it. For it knows that which it possesses, and the manner in which it is 
affected, but not that which it does not possess, and by which it is not 
affected. 

But if it perceives that which is above itself, if indeed, this is accom¬ 
plished through the knowledge of itself, it will at one and the same time 
both know itself and that superior nature. But if it knows that alone, 
it will be ignorant of itself, though it is intellect. In short, by knowing 
that which is prior to itself, it will know that it is a cause, and will also 
know the things of which it is the cause. For if it is ignorant of these, 
it will likewise be ignorant of that which is the cause of them; not 
knowing that which produces what it produces, by its very being, and 
what the things are which it does produce. Hence, by knowing the 
things of which it is the cause, it will also know itself, as deriving its 
subsistence from thence. By knowing, therefore, that which is prior to 
itself, it will likewise entirely know itself. Hence, if there is a certain 
intelligible intellect, this by knowing itself, will also know the intelligible, 


1 Instead of vorjjov t<rn. tovto here, it is necessary to read »o>jrov to ti rovrcf. 
f for ti yetg iav tov von, **{ vovf, it is requisite to read yag tfcurov you wets ms • 




Digitized by t^OOQLe 



ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLXVIlf. CLXIX. 


419 

being itself intelligible. But each of the intellects posterior to this, will 
intellectually perceive the intelligible which is in itself, and at the same 
time that which is prior to itself. Hence, in intellect there is the intel¬ 
ligible, and in the intelligible intellect. But one intellect is the same 
with the intelligible; and another is the same with the intelligible which 
is in itself, but is not the same with the intelligible prior to itself. For 
that which is simply intelligible is one thing, and the intelligible in that 
which intellectually perceives is another. 


PROPOSITION CLXVIII. 

Every intellect knows in energy that which it intellectually perceives, 
and it is not the peculiarity of one part of it to perceive, and of another 
to perceive that it perceives. 

For if it is intellect in energy, and perceives itself as not any thing 
different from the object of intellectual perception, it will know itself, 
and see itself. But seeing that which perceives intellectually, and 
knowing that which sees, it will know that it is intellect in energy. But 
knowing this, it will know that it perceives intellectually, and will not 
alone know the objects of its intellection. Hence, it will at once both 
know the intelligible, and that it intellectually perceives it, and by. intel¬ 
lection it will be intellectually perceived by itself. 


PROPOSITION CLXIX. 

Every intellect has its essence, power and energy in eternity. 

For if it intellectually perceives itself, and intellect is the same with 
the intelligible, intelligence also is the same with intellect and the intel¬ 
ligible. For being the medium between that which intellectually perceives, 
and the object of intellectual perception, and these being the same, 
intelligence also will be the same with both. Moreover, that the essence 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CLXX. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


413 


of intellect is eternal, is evident. 1 For the whole of it subsists at once. 
And this being the case, intelligence also will be eternal, since it is the 
same with the essence of intellect. But if intellect is eternal,* it will not 
be measured by time, neither according to its being, nor its energy. 
But these subsisting with invariable sameness, the power also of intellect 
will be eternal. 


PROPOSITION CLXX. 

Every intellect at once intellectually perceives all things. But impar- 
ticipable intellect indeed, simply perceives all things. And each of the 
intellects posterior to it perceives all things [according to one. 

For if] 1 every intellect establishes its essence in eternity, and together 
with its essence its energy, it will intellectually perceive all things at 
once. For to every thing which is not established in eternity, the 
successive objects of its perception subsist according to parts. For every 
thing which is successive, is in time; the successive consisting of prior 
and posterior, but the whole of it not existing at once. If therefore all 
intellects similarly perceive all things, 4 they will not differ from each other. 
For if they perceive all things similarly,’ they are similarly all things, 
since they are the very things which they intellectually perceive. But 
being similarly all things, one intellect will not be imparticipable, and 
another not. For their essences are the same things as the objects of 
their intellection ; since the intellection of each is the same with the being 
of each, and each is both intellection and essence. It remains therefore, 
either that each intellect does not similarly perceive all things, but one 
thing, or more than one, but not all things at once; or that it perceives 

1 SijXov is omitted in the original. 

* For axiwjro* here, it is requisite to read juwwo;. 

3 From the Tersion of Patricius, it is here necessary to supply the words x«fa* •< y*g. 

4 The word *avr« is omitted in the original. 

3 Here also it is requisite to supply the words o/xoi»$ warra m jcwi. 


Digitized by boogie 



414 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLXXI. 


all things according to one.* To assert however, that each intellect does 
not perceive all things, is to make intellect to be ignorant of some 
particular being. For if it suffers transition in its energy, and intellectually 
perceives, not at once, but according to prior and posterior, at the same 
time possessing an immoveable nature, it will be inferior to soul, which 
understands all things in being moved, [or in a mutable energy]; because 
intellect on this hypothesis, will only understand one thing by its perma¬ 
nent energy. It will therefore understand all things according to one. 
For it either intellectually perceives all things, or one thing, or all things 
according to the one of intellection. For in all intellects indeed, there is 
always an intellectual perception of all things; yet so as to bound all 
things in one of all. Hence there is something predominant in intellection, 
and the objects of intellection; since all things are at once understood as 
one, through the domination of one, which characterizes all things with 
itself. 


PROPOSITION CLXXI. 

Every intellect is an impartible essence. 

» 

For if it is without magnitude, incorporeal, [and immoveable, it is 
impartible. For every thing] 1 which in any way whatever is partible, 
is either partible on account of magnitude, or multitude, or on account 
of energies which are borne along with the flux of time. But intellect is 
eternal according to all things, and is beyond bodies, and the multitude 
which is in it is united. It is, therefore, impartible. That intellect also 
is incorporeal, is manifest from its conversion to itself. For no body is 
converted to itself. But that it is eternal, the identity of its energy with 
its essence evinces. For this has been before demonstrated. And that 

1 By an intellectual perception of all dungs according to one, Proclus means a perception of all 
things in one. For all intellectual forms are in eachj so that a perception of one, is a perception 
of all forms, and therefore of all things. 

s It is here necessary from the version of Patricius to supply the words x*i axiyijrof, «/ugwro$ 

»<rri. »*» 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CLXXII. CLXXIII. OF THEOLOGY. 


4J5 


the multitude in it is united isevident from the continuity of intellectual 
multitude with the divine unities. For these are the first multitude ; but 
intellects are next to these. Hence, though every intellect is a multitude, 
yet it is an united multitude. For prior to that which is divided, that 
which is collected into profound union, and is nearer to the one , subsists. 

PROPOSITION CLXXII. 

Every intellect is proximately the producing cause of beings perpetual 
and immutable according to essence. 

For every thing which- is produced by an immoveable cause, is 
immutable according to essence. But immoveable intellect being all 
things eternally, and abiding in eternity, produces by its very being that 
which it produces. If however it always is, and is invariably the same, it 
always produces, and after the same manner. Hence, it is not the cause 
of things which sometimes have existence, and at other times not, but it 
is the cause of things which always exist. 

PROPOSITION CLXXIII. 

Every intellect is intellectually both the things which are prior and 
posterior to itself. 

For it is those things which are posterior to itself, according to cause, 
but those things which are prior to itself, according to participation. 
Yet it is still intellect, and is allotted an intellectual essence. [Hence it 
defines] all things [according to its essence];' both such as are according 
to cause, and such as are according to participation. For every thing 
participates of more excellent beings in such a way as it is naturally 
adapted to participate, and not according to their subsistence. For 
otherwise, they would be similarly participated by all things. Participa- 

' From the Tertion of Patririus, it is likewise necessary to supply in this plaee the words 
Kara tijv avrou owna* oyi£«. 


Digitized by boogie 



416 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLXXIV. 


tions therefore, are according to the peculiarity and power of the 
participants. Hence in intellect, the natures prior to it subsist intellectu¬ 
ally. But intellect is likewise intellectually the things posterior to itself. 
For it does not consist of its effects, nor does it contain these, but the 
causes of these in itself. But intellect is by its very being the cause of 
all things. And the very being of it is intellectual. Hence it contains 
intellectually the causes of all things. So that every intellect possesses 
all things intellectually, both such as are prior, and such as are posterior 
to it. As therefore, every intellect contains intelligibles intellectually, so 
likewise it contains sensibles intellectually. 


PROPOSITION CLXXIV. 

Every intellect gives subsistence to things posterior to itself, by 
intellection, and its fabrication consists in intellection, and its intellection 
or intelligence, in fabrication. 

For if intelligible and intellect are the same, the essence also of every 
intellect will be the same with the intellection in itself. But it produces 
that which it produces by essence, and produces according to the very 
being, which it is. By intellection therefore, it will produce the things 
which are produced. For in intellect, being and intellection are both of 
them one. For intellect is the same with every being which it contains. 
If therefore, it makes by its very being, but its very being is intellection, 
it makes by intellection. Intelligence also which is in energy, consists 
in intellection. But this is the same with the essence of intellect. And 
the essence of intellect consists in producing. For that which produces 
immoveably, [always possesses] its very being [in producing. The 
intelligence of intellect therefore consists in fabrication or production.’] 

1 The words within the brackets are omitted in the original, but may be supplied from the 
version of Patricius by reading after to iimci, as follows, oui tv rtf iroittv, ago, ty rtf 

%WV, 


Digitized by boogie 



PROP. CLXXV. CLXXVI. OF THEOLOGY. 


417 


PROPOSITION CLXXV. 

Every intellect is primarily participated by those natures which are 
intellectual, both according to essence, and according to energy. 

For it is necessary that it should either be participated by these, or by 
other natures, which possess indeed an intellectual essence, but do not 
always energize intellectually. It is however impossible that it should be 
participated by the latter of these. For the energy of intellect is 
immoveable. And hence, the natures by which it is participated, always 
participate of intellectual energy, which always causes the participants of 
it to be intellectual. For that which possesses its energy in a certain 
part of time, is unadapted to be conjoined with an eternal energy. But 
that which has perfection according to the whole of time, is the medium 
between every eternal energy, and that which is perfect in a certain time, 
as well in the mutations of energy, as in essences. For progressions 
are never effected without a medium, but through kindred and similar 
natures, both according to hypostases, and the perfections of energies. 
After a similar manner therefore, every intellect is primarily participated 
by those beings that are able to perceive intellectually, according to the 
whole of time, and who always energize intellectually, though their 
intellection is in time, and is not eternally in energy. 

COROLLARY. 

From this therefore, it is evident that it is impossible for the soul which 
sometimes perceives intellectually and sometimes does not, to participate 
proximately of intellect, 

PROPOSITION CLXXVI. 

All intellectual forms are in each other, and each is at the same time 
separate and distinct from the rest. 

For if every intellect is impartible, and the multitude which is in it is 
Proc. Vol, II. 3 G 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



413 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLXXVI. 


united through intellectual impartiality, all things in it will be in one, 
impartibles will be united to each other, and all intellectual forms will 
pervade through all. But if all intellectual forms subsist immaterially 
and incorporeally, they are unconfused with each other and separate, and 
each preserving its own purity, remains that which it is. The peculiar 
participation however of each participating in a separate manner, mani¬ 
fests the unconfused nature of intellectual forms. For unless the forms 
which are participated were distinguished separate from each other, the 
participants of each of them would not participate in a separate manner, 
but in the subordinate natures [i. e. in the participants] there would be, 
in a much greater degree, an indistinct confusion, these being according 
to their order of an inferior condition. For whence would there be a 
separation of these, if the natures which give subsistence to, and perfect 
them, were without distinction, and were confused together ? But again 
the impartible hypostasis, and uniform essence of that which contains 
forms, evinces their united nature. For things which have their hyparxis 
in the impartible and the uniform, are impartibly in the same thing. For 
how can you divide the impartible and the one f Hence, they have a 
simultaneous subsistence, and are in each other, .each wholly pervading 
through the whole of each, in a manner unaccompanied with interval. 
For that which comprehends them is not extended with interval, nor is 
one of them in this thing, but another elsewhere, as in that which has 
interval; but every thing is at once in the impartible and in one. So that 
all intellectual forms are in each other, and are in each other unitedly, 
and at the same time each is distinctly apart from each. 

COROLLARY. 

But if some one, in addition to these demonstrations, should require 
also examples, let him direct his attention to the theorems which exist in 
one soul. For all these are in the same essence, which is truly without 
magnitude,* and are united to each other. For that which is without 
magnitude, does not locally contain the things which are in it, but the 


1 afuydu it omitted in the original. 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CLXXVII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


419 


natures which it contains are united and separated, impartibly and with¬ 
out interval. For the soul genuinely produces all things, and each apart 
from each, attracting nothing from the rest, which, unless they were 
always separated according to habit, would not be separated by the 
energy of the soul. 


PROPOSITION CLXXVII. 

Every intellect being a plenitude of forms, one indeed, is comprehensive 
of more total, but another of more partial forms. And the superior 
intellects contain in a more total manner, such things as those posterior 
to them contain more partially. But the inferior intellects contain more 
partially, such things as those that are prior to them contain more 
totally. 

For the superior intellects employ greater powers, having more the 
form of the one than secondary intellects. But the inferior intellects being 
more multiplied, diminish the powers which they contain. For things 
that are more allied to the one ,, being contracted in quantity, surpass the 
natures that are posterior to them. And on the contrary, things more 
remote from the one, as they are increased in quantity, are inferior to the 
natures that are nearer to the one. Hence the superior intellects, being 
established according to a greater power, but being less in multitude, 
produce a greater number of effects, according to power, through fewer 
things according to the quantity of forms. But the intellects posterior to 
them produce fewer effects through a greater number of things, according 
to a defect of power.* If therefore, the former produce a greater number 
of effects, through fewer things, the forms in them are more total. And 
if the latter produce fewer effects, through a greater number of things, 
the forms in them are more partial. * 


■ Instead of •> 8. ^ 8.« «W<r« x*t« t,v au , ,x«vo., x. x it is 

necessary to read •< 8. ^ ew.vouj, ha rVww eX*<rcr«, x«r« n,y h»a^ mi ,xx«4,v. e< ow e x . A 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



420 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLXXVIII. 


COROLLARY. 

Hence it happens that the natures which are generated from superior 
intellects according to one form, are produced fin a divided manner from 
secondary intellects *3 according to many ideas. And again, those 
natures which are produced by inferior intellects through many and 
distinct forms, are produced by superior intellects through fewer, but 
more total forms. And that indeed which is a whole and common, 
accedes supernally to all its participants. But that which is divided and 
peculiar accedes from secondary intellects. Hence secondary intellects, 
by the more partial separation of peculiarities, accurately and subtly 
distinguish the formations of primary intellects. 

•'} 

PROPOSITION CLXXVIII. 

Every intellectual form gives subsistence to eternal natures. 

For if every intellectual form is eternal and immoveable, it is essentially 
the cause of immutable and eternal hypostases, but not of such as are 
generated and corrupted. So that every thing which subsists according 
to an intellectual form is an eternal intellectual nature. For if all forms 
produce things posterior to themselves by their very being, but their 
essence possesses Rn invariable sameness of subsistence, the things 
produced by them will also be invariably the same, and will be eternal. 
Hence, neither the genera which subsist from a formal cause, according 
to a certain time, nor corruptible natures so far as they are corruptible, 
have a pre-existent intellectual form. For they would be incorruptible 
and unbegotten, if they derived their hypostasis from intellectual forms. 

* It is here requisite to supply from the version of Patricius, the words ex rm Seurigav 



V 


\ 

gitize 


Google 



PROP. CLXXIX. CLXXX. OF THEOLOGY. 


421 


PROPOSITION CLXXIX. 

Every intellectual number is bounded. 

For if there is another multitude posterior to this, essentially inferior to 
it, and thus [more remote from the one , but the intellectual number is 
nearer to the one; *] and if that which is nearer to the one , is less 
according to quantity, but that which is more remote from it, is more 
according to quantity;—if this be the case, the intellectual number also 
will be less than every multitude posterior to it. Hence, it is not infinite. 
The multitude of intellects therefore, is bounded. For that which is less 
than a certain thing is not infinite, because the infinite, so far as infinite, is 
not less than any thing. 

PROPOSITION CLXXX. 

Every intellect is a whole, so far as each consists of parts, and is 
united to other things, and at the same time separated from them. But 
i imparticipable intellect indeed, is simply a whole, as containing all parts 

in itself totally. But each partial intellect possesses the whole as in a 
part; and thus is all things partially. 

For if a partial intellect is all things according to one, but a subsistence 
according to one thing is nothing else than a subsistence partially, the 
whole is in each of these intellects partially, being defined according to a 
certain one particular thing which predominates in all of them. 

' 1 It it necessary here to read and supply from the version of Patricius, mqfartfo* too no;, t it 

otgitfios tyyvrtgw rot; cyof. 


/ 


Digitized by boogie 



422 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLXXXI. 


PROPOSITION CLXXXI. 

Every participated intellect is either divine, as being suspended from 
the Gods, or is intellectual only. 

For if a divine and imparticipable intellect has a primary subsistence, 
the intellect which is allied to this, is not that which differs from it in 
both respects, viz. which is neither divine, nor imparticipable. For 
things which are dissimilar in both these respects, cannot be conjoined 
with each other. It is evident therefore, that the medium between these 
is partly similar to that which is primarily intellect, and partly dissimilar 
to it. Either 1 therefore, it is imparticipable and not divine; or it is 
participated and divine. But every thing imparticipable is divine, as 
being allotted an order in multitude analogous to the one. Hence, there 
will be a certain intellect which is divine and at the same time partici¬ 
pated. It is necessary however that there should be [an intellect which 
does not participate *] of the divine unities, but intellectually perceives 
them only. For in each series, such things as are first, and which are 
conjoined with their monad, are able to participate of things proximately 
situated in a superior order. But such as are far distant fronai the primary 
monad, cannot be suspended from the natures that proximately belong to 
a higher order. There is therefore both [a divine intellect, 1 ] and an 
intellect which is intellectual only ; the latter indeed, being established' 
according to an intellectual peculiarity, which it possesses from its own 
monad, and from imparticipable intellect; but the former subsisting 
according to the union which it receives from the participated monad. 

' For n here it is necessary to read tj. 

* From the version of Patricias, it is here necessary to supply the words Sn to «w pq 

/urt^orra. « 

* The words xcu vous $ut{ are omitted in the original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CLXXXII. CLXXX1II. CLXXXIV. OF THEOLOGY. 


423 


' PROPOSmON CLXXXII. 

Every [divine 1 ] participated intellect, is participated by divine souls. 

For if participation assimilates the participant to that which is partici¬ 
pated, and renders the former connascent with the latter, it is evident 
that the participant of a divine intellect must be a divine soul, as being 
suspended from a divine intellect, and that through intellect as a medium 
it must participate of the deity which it contains. For deity conjoins h 
soul which participates of it with intellect, and binds that which is divine 
to that which is divine. 

PROPOSITION CLXXXIII. 

Every intellect which is participated indeed, but is intellectual alone, 
is participated by souls which are neither divine, nor subsisting in a 
mutation from intellect into a privation of intellect. 

For neither are divine souls of this kind, nor such as participate of 
intellect. For souls participate of the Gods through a divine intellect, 
as was before demonstrated. Nor are souls which admit of mutation, of 
this kind. For every intellect is participated by natures which are always 
intellectual, both according to essence and according to energy. For this 
is evident from what has been before shown. 

PROPOSITION CLXXXIV. 

Concerning Soul . 

Every soul is either divine, or is changed from intellect into a privation 
of intellect; or always remains as a medium between these, but is inferior 
to divine souls. 


* fcio; is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



424 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLXXXV. 


For if a divine intellect indeed, is participated by divine souls, but an 
intellectual intellect by those souls alone which are neither divine, nor 
receive a mutation from intelligence into a privation of intellect (for there 
are souls of this kind, which sometimes perceive intellectually, and some- 
. times do not);—if this be the case, it is evident that there are three 
genera of souls. And the first of these indeed, are divine. But the 
second are not divine, yet always participate of intellect. And the third 
are those, which are sometimes changed into an intellectual condition, 
and sometimes into a privation of intellect. 


PROPOSITION CLXXXV. 

All [divine] * souls, are indeed Gods psychically. But all those that 
participate of an intellectual intellect, are the perpetual attendants of the 
Gods. And all those that are the recipients of mutation, are sometimes 
only the attendants of the Gods. 

For if some souls have divine light supernally shining upon them, but 
others are endued with perpetual intelligence, and others again only 
sometimes participate of this perfection;—if this be the case, the first of 
these will among the multitude of souls be analogous to the Gods. But 
the next to these, will always follow the Gods, in consequence of always 
energizing according to intellect, and will be suspended from divine souls, 
having the same relation to them as that which is intellectual* to that which 
is divine. And the souls which sometimes energize intellectually and 
follow the Gods, neither participate of intellect after a manner always the 
same, nor are always able to be converted [to the intelligible] in conjunc¬ 
tion with divine souls. For that which sometimes only participates of 
intellect, cannot by any contrivance whatever be always conjoined with 
the Gods. 


1 taut is omitted in the original. 

* For T«y mg* it is necessary to read to votgov* 


Digitized by boogie 



PROP. CLXXXV1. CLXXXVII. CLXXXV1II. OF THEOLOGY. 


425- 


PROPOSITION CLXXXVI. 

Every soul is both an incorporeal essence, [and separate from body].* 

For if it knows itself, but every thing which knows itself, is converted 
to itself, and that which is converted to itself, does not pertain to body 
(since every body is without conversion to itself) nor is inseparable from 
body, since that which is inseparable from body is not naturally adapted' 
to revert to itself as it would thus be separated from body;—if this be 
the case, every soul is neither a corporeal essence, nor inseparable from 
body. Moreover, that the soul knows itself is evident. For if it knows 
the natures that are above itself, and is also naturally adapted to know 
itself, it will in a much greater degree know itself from the causes prior 
to itself. 


PROPOSITION CLXXXVII. 

Every soul is indestructible, and incorruptible. 

For every thing which can in any way whatever be dissolved and 
destroyed, is either corporeal and a composite, or is allotted its hypostasis 
in a subject. And that indeed, which is dissolved, is corrupted as 
consisting of many things. But that which is naturally adapted to be in 
another thing, vanishes into non-entity when separated from its subject. 
Moreover, the soul is incorporeal, and external to every subject, subsisting 
in itself, and being converted to itself. Hence, it is indestructible and 
incorruptible. 


PROPOSITION CLXXXVIII. 

Every soul is both life and vital. 

For that to which soul accedes necessarily lives. And that which is 
* From the ration of Patridns,it is here necessary to supply die words iuux"9>rni «v <r»iucns, 

Proc. Vol. II. 3 H 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



426 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CLXXXIX. 


deprived of soul, is immediately left destitute of life. Either therefore it 
lived through soul, or through something else, and not through soul. It 
is however impossible that it should have lived through something else 
alone. For every thing which is participated, either imparts itself, or 
something pertaining to itself to its participant. But if it suffers neither 
of these, it will not be participated. Soul however, is participated by 
that to which it is present. And that which participates of soul is said to 
be animated. If therefore that which is participated introduces life to 
animated natures, it is either life, or vital alone, or both life and vital. 
If however, it is alone vital, but not also life, it will consist of life and 
non-life. It will not therefore know itself, nor be converted to itself. 
For knowledge is life, and the gnostic power so far as it is such is vital. 
If therefore, there is any thing in soul without life, this will not possess 
essentially the power of knowing. But if soul is life alone, it will no 
longer participate of the intellectual life. For the participant of life is 
vital, and is not life alone, i. e. the first and imparticipable life ; but the 
life which is posterior to this, is both vital and life. Soul however, is not 
imparticipable life. And hence it is at the same time both life and vital. 


PROPOSITION CLXXXIX. 

Every soul is self-vital. 

For if it is converted to itself, but every thing which is converted to 
itself is self-subsistent, the soul also is self-subsistent, and produces itself. 
But it is likewise life and vital, and its hyparxis is according to vitality. 
For it imparts life by its very being to the natures to which it is present. 
And if the participant is adapted, it immediately becomes animated and 
vital, [soul in effecting this not reasoning] 1 nor acting from deliberate 
choice, nor vivifying by cogitation and judgment, but by its very essence, 

1 The words 4'^X’lf ou Aoyi&piyiK are wanting in the original} but from the version of 
Patricias ought to be added. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CXC. 


OK THEOLOGY. 


427 


and by that which it is, supplying the participant with life. Hence the 
being of soul is the same as to live. Tf therefore the soul possesses being 
from itself, and this is the same as to live , and it has life essentially;—if 
this be the case, it will impart life to itself, and will possess it from 
itself. And this being admitted, soul will be self-vital. 


PROPOSITION CXC. 

Every soul is a medium between impartible natures, and the natures 
which are divisible about bodies. 

For if soul is self-vital and self-subsistent, and has an hyparxis separate 
from bodies, it is, in consequence of being more excellent than, exempt 
from every thing divisible about body. For the natures which are 
divided about bodies, are entirely inseparable from their subjects, being 
co-distribuled with divisible bulks. They also depart from themselves, 
and their own impartiality, and are co-extended with bodies. And 
though they subsist in lives, yet these are not the lives of themselves, but 
of participants. Though likewise they exist in essence and in forms, yet 
they are not the forms of themselves, but of those things which are 
fashioned by forms. If therefore, soul is not these, it is a self-subsistent 
essence, a self-vital life, and a knowledge gnostic of itself. Hence, it is 
entirely separate from bodies, but is a participant of life. If however, 
this be the case, it also participates of essence. But it likewise partici¬ 
pates of knowledge from other causes. It is evident therefore, that it is 
inferior to impartible natures, because it is filled ([with life externally.] * 
But if with life, it is evident that it is also externally filled with essence. 
For imparticipate life and imparticipable essence are prior to soul. 1 
That soul however is not primarily gnostic is evident.’ For every soul 

1 Here too, the words oti «£»fcv, are wanting in the original. 

a The original here is defective, but may be restored to the true sense by reading aXxeu 
ov<nag, wctg 8»jAoy. rgo yag x. A. instead of otXXa xeu ouo-ictf, five g &»}$• SijAov yog x. A. 

3 Instead of ©n &e xeu to xgwrcos garrixov, ovx em fotvtgov, it is necessary to read oti Se xeu to 
•Kgwrms yvowrixov ovx c<rn, fetvtgov. 


Digitized by boogie 



428 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXCI. 


indeed, so far as soul is life, but not every soul, so far as it is soul possesses 
knowledge. For a certain soul while it remains soul, is ignorant of 
[jreal] beings. Soul therefore, is not primarily gnostic, nor does it 
possess knowledge from its very being. Hence/ it has an essence secon¬ 
dary to those natures that are primarily, and by their very being, gnostic. 
Since however, the essence of soul is divided from its knowledge, soul does 
not belong to patures [entirely] impartible. But it has been demonstrated 
that neither does it rank among the natures that are divisible about 
bodies. Hence, it is a medium between both. 


PROPOSITION CXCI. 

Every participable soul has indeed an eternal essence, but its energy is 
accompanied with time. 

For either it possesses both eternally, or both temporally; or the one 
eternally, but the other temporally. It cannot however, possess both 
eternally: for it would be an impartible essence, and the nature of soul 
would in no respect differ from an. intellectual hypostasis, viz. a self¬ 
motive from an immoveable nature. Nor can it possess both temporally: 
for thus it would be generated alone, and would neither be self-vital, nor 
self-subsistent. For nothing which is essentially measured by time is 
self-subsistent. But soul is self-subsistent. For that which is converted 
to itself, according to energy, is also essentially converted to itself, » 
and proceeds from itself. It remains therefore, that every soul is 
partly eternal, and partly participates of time. Either therefore, it is 
essentially eternal, [but participates of time according to energy,'] or vice 
versa. The latter however, is impossible. Hence, every participable 
soul, is allotted an eternal essence, but a temporal energy. 

* It is here requisite to supply the words xm' tngyiutv Si row ^yovow ptTi%»vc*. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CXCII. CXCIU. CXCIV. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


429 


PROPOSITION CXCII. 

Every participate soul ranks among the number of [truly existing! 
beings, and is the first of generated natures. 

For if it is essentially eternal, it is truly being according to its hyparxis, 
and always is. For that which participates of eternity, participates like¬ 
wise of perpetual existence. But if it is in time according to energy, it 
is generated. For every thing which participates of time, since it is 
always becoming to be, or rising into existence, according to the prior 
and posterior of time, and is not at once that which it is, is wholly 
generated. But if every soul is in a certain, respect generated according 
to energy, it will be the first of generated natures. For that which is in 
every respect generated, is more remote from eternal natures. 


PROPOSITION CXCIII. 

Every soul subsists proximately from intellect. 

For if it has an immutable and eternal essence, it proceeds from an 
immoveable essence. For that which proceeds from a moveable essence, 
is essentially changed in every respect. The cause, therefore, of every 
soul is immoveable. But if it proximately subsists from intellect, it is 
perfected by, and converted to intellect. And if it participates of the 
knowledge which intellect imparts to the natures that are able to partake 
of it; (for all knowledge is derived from intellect, and all things have 
their progression essentially from that to which they are naturally con¬ 
verted)—if this be the case, every soul proceeds from intellect 

PROPOSITION CXCIV. 

Every soul contains all the forms which intellect primarily possesses. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



430 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXCV. 


For if it proceeds from intellect, and intellect gives subsistence to soul; 
and if intellect subsisting immoveably produces all things by its very being, 
it will also impart to soul which it fabricates, the essential reasons [or 
producing principles] of all things which it contains. For every thing 
which produces by its very being, imparts secondarily to the thing gener¬ 
ated by it, that which it is itself primarily. The soul, therefore, contains 
secondarily the representations of intellectual forms. 


PROPOSITION CXCV. 

Every soul is all things, containing indeed sensibles paradigmatically, 
or after the manner of an exemplar; but intelligibles iconically, or after 
the manner of an image. 

For subsisting as a medium between impartible natures, and such as 
are divisible about body, it produces and gives subsistence to the latter 
of these, but pre-establishes in itself the causes from which it proceeds. 
Those things, therefore, of which it is the pre-existent cause, it antece¬ 
dently comprehends paradigmatically. But it possesses according to 
participation, and as the progeny of first natures the causes of its subsist¬ 
ence. Hence it antecedently comprehends according to cause all sensible 
natures, and contains the immaterial productive principles of things 
material, the incorporeal principles of things corporeal, and without inter¬ 
val, the principles of things which possess interval. But it contains 
intelligibles and the forms of them after the manner of an image; so that 
it receives partibly indeed impartibles, with multiplication unical natures, 
and in a self-motive manner, things immoveable. Hence it is all beings, 
containing such as are first, according to participation, but paradigmati¬ 
cally such as are posterior to its own nature. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CXCVI. CXCVII. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


431 


PROPOSITION CXCVI. 

Every participable soul, primarily uses a perpetual body, which 
possesses an unbegotten and incorruptible hypostasis. 

For if every soul is essentially eternal, and by its very being primarily 
animates some particular body, [it will always animate this body. For 
the essence of every soul is immutable]. But if this be the case, that 
which is animated by it is always animated, and always participates of 
life. That, however, which always lives, by a much greater priority 
always exists. But that which always is, is perpetual. Hence, that 
which is primarily suspended from every soul, is perpetual. But indeed 
every participable soul is primarily participated by a certain body, since 
it is participable and not imparticipable, and animates its participant by 
its very being. Every participated soul, therefore, uses a body which is 
primarily perpetual, and essentially unbegotten and incorruptible. 


PROPOSITION CXCVII. 

Every soul is an essence vital and gnostic, and a life essential and 
gnostic, and is knowledge, essence, and life. All things likewise subsist 
in it at once, the essential, the vital, and the gnostic; and all things are 
in aU, and each is separate from the rest. 

For if it is the medium between impartible forms, and those which are 
divided about bodies, it is neither so impartible as all intellectual natures, 
nor so partible as corporeal forms. Sinee, therefore, essences, lives and 
cognitions are divided in corporeal natures, these subsist in souls impar- 
tibly, unitedly, and incorporeally, and all of them exist at once, through 
their immateriality and impartiality. Since, likewise, in intellectual 
natures, all things subsist according to union, they are distinguished and 
divided in souls. All things, therefore, subsist together in these, and at 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



432 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CXCVUI. 


the same time apart. But if ail impartibles subsist together and in one, 
they pervade through each other, and if they are separate, they are again 
divided without confusion; so that each subsists by itself, and all are in 
all. For in the essence of soul there is both life and knowledge;' since 
every soul would not know itself, if the essence of it was of itself deprived 
of life and knowledge. And in the life of the soul there are both essence 
and knowledge. For unessential 1 life, and which is without knowledge, 
pertains to material lives, which are neither able to know themselves, nor 
are genuine essences. . Knowledge, also, which is unessential and without 
life, is without subsistence. For all knowledge belongs to that which is 
vital, and which is of itself allotted an essence. 

PROPOSITION CXCVUI. 

Every thing which participates of time, and is always moved, is 
measured by periods. , 

For since it is measured by time, the motion of it also participates of 
measure and bound, and proceeds according to number. But because it is 
always moved, and this always is not 5 eternal, but temporal, it is necessary 
that it should use periods. For motion indeed is a mutation from some 
things to others. But beings are terminated by multitude and magnitude. 
These, however, being bounded, there can neither be a mutation to infinity 
according to a right line, nor can that which is always moved, make its 
transitions finitely. Hence, that which is always moved, will proceed 
from the same to the same, and thus will proceed periodically. 

1 The words JJcwj xm ywtvn are wanting in the original. And immediately after, for w yw tnrrn, 
it is requisite to read ev yap ynwrrw. 

* For awvs here, it is necessary to read amvttf. 

* mx >• omitted hrthe original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROP. CXC1X. CC. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


433 


PROPOSITION CXCIX. 

Every mundane soul uses periods of its proper life, and restitutions to 
its former state. 

For if it is measured by time, it energizes transitively, and possesses a 
peculiar motion. * But every thing which is moved and participates of 
time, if it is perpetual, uses periods, periodically revolves, and is restored 
from the same things to the same. And every mundane soul possessing 
motion, and energizing according to time, will have periods of motions, 
and restitutions to its pristine state. For every period of perpetual 
natures is apocatastatic, or restorative to a former condition. 

PROPOSITION CC. 

Every period of soul is measured by time. The period of other souls 
indeed is measured by a certain time; but that of the first soul, since it 
is measured by time, is measured by the whole of time. 

For if all motions have prior and posterior, so likewise have periods, 
and on this account they participate of time. That also which measures 
all the periods of souls is time. But if indeed there were the same periods 
of all souls, and they were about the same things, the time of all would 
be the same. If, however, the restitutions of different souls are different, 
the periodic time also and which restores to a pristine state, is different in 
different souls. 

That the soul, therefore, which is primarily measured by time, is 
measured by the whole of time, is evident. For if time is the measure of 
all motion, that which is primarily moved, will entirely participate of time, 
and will be measured by the whole of time. For if the whole of time did 
not measure its first participant, it would not measure any thing else, 
according to the whole of itself. From these things, however, it is evident 

' For i) Stoxivi)<n(, it is necessary to read iSi« xiv>j<n$. 

Proc. Vol. II. 3 I 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



434 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CCI. 


that all souls are measured by certain measures which are more partial 
than the whole of time. For if these souls are more partial than the soul 
which primarily participates of time, neither can they adapt their periods 
to the whole of time. The multitude of their restitutions, however, will 
be parts of the one period, and of the one restitution of things to their 
pristine state, which is effected by the soul that primarily participates of 
time. For a more partial participation pertains to a less power; but a 
more total to a greater power. Other souls, therefore, are not naturally 
adapted to receive the whole temporal measure according to one life, 
because they are allotted an order inferior to that of the soul which is 
first measured by time. 


PROPOSITION CCI. 

All divine souls have triple energies; some indeed as souls; but others 
as receiving a divine intellect; and others as suspended from the Gods. 
And they provide indeed for the whole of things as Gods; but they know 
all things through an intellectual life; and they move bodies through a 
self-moved hyparxis. 

For because they psychically ' participate of the natures situated above 
them, and are not simply souls, but divine souls, and are established 
according to an order, in the psychical extent, analogous to the Gods, 
they energize not only psychically, but also divinely, being allotted a 
deified summit of their essence, and also because they have an intellec¬ 
tual hypostasis, through which they are spread under intellectual essences. 
Hence, they not only energize divinely, but also intellectually; the former 
indeed accoridng to the one which they contain; but the latter through 
an energy established according to intellect. A third energy, likewise, is 
present with them, according to their own hyparxis, which is motive 
indeed of things naturally alter-motive, but is vivific of such as possess an 
adventitious life. For this is the proper employment of every soul; but 


* For here, it is accessary to read 



Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CCII. CC1II. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


435 


such energies as are intellectual and providential, they possess according 
to participation. 


PROPOSITION CCII. 

All souls attending upon, and always following the Gods, are inferior to 
divine, but are expanded above partial souls. 

For divine souls participating of intellect and deity, on which account, 
they are at the same time both intellectual and divine, are the leaders 
of other souls, just as the Gods also are the leaders of all beings. But 
partial souls are deprived of a suspension from intellect, in consequence 
of not being able to participate proximately of an intellectual essence. 
For they would not fall from intellectual energy, if they essentially par¬ 
ticipated of intellect, as has been before demonstrated [in Prop. 184]]. 
Hence, the souls which always follow the Gods are of a middle condition; 
receiving indeed a perfect intellect, and through this surpassing partial 
souls, yet not being suspended from the divine unities. For the intellect 
which they participate is not divine. 

PROPOSITION CCIII. 

Of every psychical multitude, divine souls indeed being greater in power 
than other souls, are contracted according to number. But those that 
always follow divine souls have a middle order among all souls, both in 
power and quantity. And partial souls indeed are inferior in power to 
the others, but proceed into a greater number. 

For divine souls are more allied to the one , on account of their hyparxis 
being divine; but souls of a middle rank, through.the participation of 
intellect; and those of the last order, are essentially dissimilar both to 
those of the middle, and those of the first rank. Among perpetual natures, 
however, those that are nearer to the one , are more single in number, and 
are more contracted in multitude, than such as are more remote from it. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



436 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CCIV. 


But such as are more remote from the one , are more multiplied. The 
powers, therefore, of superior souls are greater, and have the same ratio 
to those of souls in the second rank, which the divine has to the intellec¬ 
tual, and the intellectual to the psychical peculiarity. Inferior souls also 
are more in number. For that which is more remote from the one , is a 
greater, and that which is nearer to it, is a less multitude. 

\ 

PROPOSITION CCIV. 

Every divine soul is the leader of many souls that always follow the 
Gods; and of a still greater number of such as sometimes receive this 
order. 

£For if it is a divine soul] it is necessary that it should be allotted an 
order £ which is the leader or generator *] of all things, and which has a 
primary rank among souls. For in all beings that which is divine, is the 
leader of wholes. It is likewise requisite that every divine soul should 
neither alone preside over such souls as perpetually follow the Gods, nor 
over those alone that are sometimes their attendants. For if any divine 
soul should alone preside over those that sometimes follow the Gods, how 
can there be a contact between these and a divine soul, since they are 
entirely different from it, and neither proximately participate of intellect, 
nor much less of the Gods. But if it only presides over those that always 
follow the Gods, how is it that the series proceeds as far as to these 
falone] P For thus intellectual natures will be the last, and will be 
unprolific, and unadapted to perfect and elevate. It is necessary, there¬ 
fore, that such souls as follow the Gods, and energize according to intellect, 
and which are elevated to intellects more partial than divine intellects, 
should be primarily suspended from a divine soul. But it is necessary 
that partial souls, and which through those that are divine as media, 
participate of intellect and a divine life, should be suspended from a 

* There is a chasm here in the original after the word which may be supplied by 

reading u yap fata, yyffuvixip x. A ; and yrnijTixijv must be substituted for ytvixijv. 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CCY. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


437 


divine soul in the second place. For through those which always parti¬ 
cipate of a more excellent condition, those that sometimes only participate 
of it, are perfected. And again, it is necessary that about every divine 
soul, there should be a greater number of those that only sometimes 
follow, than of those that always attend on the Gods. For the power of 
the monad always proceeds into multitude, according to diminution; 
being deficient indeed in power, but redundant in multitude. Since 
every soul also of those that always follow the Gods, is the leader of a 
greater multitude of partial souls, imitating in this a divine soul; and 
elevates a greater number of souls to the primary monad of the whole 
series. Every divine soul, therefore, is the leader of many souls that 
always follow the Gods, but presides over a still greater number of those 
that sometimes only receive this order. 


PROPOSITION CCV. 

Every partial soul has the same ratio to the soul under which it is 
essentially arranged, as the vehicle of the one to the vehicle of the other. 

For if the distribution of vehicles to souls is according to nature, it is 
necessary that the vehicle of every partial soul should have the same ratio 
to the vehicle of the soul which ranks as a whole, as the essence of the 
one to the essence of the other. The distribution, however, is according 
to nature. For things which primarily participate are spontaneously 
conjoined with the natures which they participate. If, therefore, as a 
divine soul is to a divine body, so is a partial soul to a partial body, each 
soul essentially participating,—if this be the case, that which was at first 
asserted is true, that the vehicles of souls have the same ratio to each 
other, as the souls themselves of which they are the vehicles. 

PROPOSITION CCVI. 

Every partial soul is able to descend infinitely into generation, and to 
ascend from generation to real being. 


Digitized by 


Google 



433 


ELEMENTS 


prop, ccvii. ccvm. 


For if it sometimes follows the Gods, but sometimes falls from an 
extension to a divine nature, and participates of intellect and the priva¬ 
tion of intellect, it is evident that it is alternatively conversant with 
generation and the Gods. For since it is not for an infinite time with 
the Gods, it will not for the whole of the following time be conversant 
with bodies. For that which has not a temporal beginning will never 
have an end; and that which never has an end is necessarily without a 
beginning. It remains, therefore, that every partial soul must make 
periods of ascents from, and of descents into generation, and that this 
must be unceasing through an infinite time. Every partial soul, therefore, 
is able to descend and ascend infinitely. And this never ceases to be the 
case with all of them. 


PROPOSITION CCVII. 

The vehicle of every partial soul, is fabricated by an immoveable cause. 

For if it is perpetually and connascently suspended from the soul that 
uses it,* being immutable according to essence, it is allotted its hypostasis 
from an immoveable cause. For every thing which is generated from 
moveable causes, is essentially changed. Moreover, every soul has a 
perpetual body, which primarily participates of it. Hence, the cause of 
a partial soul, and therefore of its vehicle, * is immoveable, and on this 
account supermundane. 

PROPOSITION ccvm. 

The vehicle of every partial soul is immaterial, essentially indivisible, 
and impassive. 

1 For ifjgiyrai Tot$ xpwfjLtvoif out m it is necessary to read o^gn/frai rqs Xf to f ur K * UT ¥ 

1 Instead of axrre xaj *) fupix y 4 xm ro amov aga to u o%tipctros it appears to me to be 
necessary to read owr# xai to oiriov tyj$ fitptxw xm of a tov o^futros 


Digitized by 


Google 



PBOP. CCIX. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


439 


For if it proceeds from an immoveable fabrication, and is perpetual, 
it will have an immaterial and impassive hypostasis. For such things 
as are adapted to suffer essentially, and to be changed, are all of them 
material, and in consequence of subsisting differently at different times, 
are suspended from moveable causes. Hence, likewise, they receive an 
all-various mutation, being moved in conjunction with their principal 
causes. Moreover, that this vehicle is indivisible, is manifest. For every 
thing which is divided, so far as it is divided, is corrupted, in consequence 
of departing from the whole, and from its continuity. If, therefore, it is 
essentially immutable and impassive, it will-be indivisible. 


PROPOSITION CCIX. 

The vehicle of every partial soul descends indeed with the addition of 
more material vestments, but becomes united to the soul by an ablation 
of every thing material, and a recurrence to its proper form, analogous to 
the soul that uses it. 

For this soul indeed descends irrationally, assuming irrational lives; 
but it ascends laying aside all the generation-producing powers, with 
which it was invested iu its descent, and becoming [pure, returns 
to the pristine condition of its nature. For the vehicle '3 imitates the 
lives of the souls that use it, and they being every where moved, it is 
moved in conjunction with them. By its circulations likewise it repre¬ 
sents the intellections of some souls; but the falling of others through 
their inclination to the realms of generation; and the purifications of 
others, through the circumductions which lead to an immaterial nature. 
For because it is vivified by the very essence of souls, * and is connascent 

’ There is a chasm here in the original, which as it is not supplied in the version of Patricius, 
I have filled up by conjecture. Hence, I have added the words xaimpav, avarpt^tt its rtjy «unj{ 
fvffiv. to yap o%r)fia. 

1 For ms here, it is necessary to read tom fax**- 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



440 


ELEMENTS 


PROP. CCX. CCXI. 


with them, it is all-variously changed in conjunction with their energies; 
follows them every where; becomes co-passive with them; is restored to 
its pristine state together with them when they are purified;' and is 
elevated when they are elevated, and aspires after its own perfection. 
For every thing is perfected when it obtains its proper perfection. 


PROPOSITION CCX. 

Every connascent vehicle of the soul, always possesses both the same 
figure and magnitude. But it is seen to be greater and less, and of a 
dissimilar figure, through the additions and ablations of other bodies. 

For if it derives its essence from an immoveable cause, it is evident 
that both its figure and its magnitude are defined by this cause, and each 
is immutable and invariable. Moreover, at different times it appears to 
be different, as likewise greater and less. Hence, through other bodies 
added from the material elements, and again taken away, it exhibits a 
different appearance both in quantity and form. 


PROPOSITION CCXI. 

Every partial soul descending into generation descends wholly; nor 
does one part of it remain on high, and another part descend. 

For if something pertaining to the soul remained on high in the intelli¬ 
gible world, it will always perceive intellectually, without transition or 
transitively. But if without transition, it will be intellect, and not a part 
of the soul, and this partial soul will proximately 1 participate of intellect. 
This, however, is impossible. But if it perceives intellectually withtran- 

1 For tuvroov here, 'the sense as well as the version of Patricias, require that we should read 

* That is, not through the medium of daemoniacal and divine souls. 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROP. CCXI. 


OF THEOLOGY. 


441 


sition, from that which always [and from that which sometimes*] energizes 
intellectually, one essence will be formed. This, however, also is impos¬ 
sible. For these always differ, as has been demonstrated. To which may 
be added, the absurdity resulting from supposing that the summit of the 
soul is always perfect, and yet does not rule over the other powers, and 
cause them to be perfect. Every partial soul, therefore, wholly descends. 


' From the version of Patricius, it is here necessary to supply the words uu tw mi mouvto;. 


Proc. 


Vo l. II. 


3 K 


Digitized by boogie 

