
THE 

SIX BOOKS OF PROCLUS 

CJj t platonic fenccwrooc, 

ON THE THEOLOGY OF PLATO, 

TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK; 

TO WHICH 

A SEVENTH BOOK IS ADDED, 

IN ORDER TO SUPPLY THE DEFICIENCY OF ANOTHER BOOK ON THIS SUBJECT, 

WHICH WAS WRITTEN BY PROCLUS, BUT 8INCE LOST. 

ALSO, A TRANSLATION FROM THE GREEK OF 

PROCLUS’ ELEMENTS OF THEOLOGY. 

TO WHICH ARE ADDED 

A TRANSLATION OF THE TREATISE OF PROCLUS, 

©n protJtuence ano jrate; 

A TRANSLATION OF EXTRACTS FROM HIS TREATISE, ENTITLED, 

TEN DOUBTS CONCERNING PROVIDENCE; 

AND 

A TRANSLATION OF EXTRACTS FROM HIS TREATISE 

ON THE SUBSISTENCE OF EVIL? 

As preserved in the Bibliotheca Gr. of Fabricius. 

BY THOMAS TAYLO R. 

AX A* wtiv, coti, %ac9 ti$ cyy eXa Xoyoo, 

Zw$, xm Itoi, jSpoTcift Xswr<rom$ wadi). Euripides. 

There are, there are, though laugh the scoffer may, 

Jove and the Gods, who mortal ills survey* 

uxmg cnti tm toXAoi, xou xugioi aroXAoi. Corinth. I. Cap. 8. v. 5. 

As there be Gods many, and Lords many. 

TWO VOLUMES. 

VOL. I. 

LONDON! 

PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, 

By A. J . Valpy, Tooke’s Court , Chancery Lane . 

A*D SOLD BY MESSRS. LAW AND Co.; LONGMAN AND Co.; BALDWIN AND Co.; 

AND ALL OTHER BOOKSELLERS. 

1816 . 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 




Digitized by 


Google 



TO 

WILLIAM MEREDITH, ESQUIRE, 


^WHO WITH A FIRMNESS AND MUNIFICENCE, 


UNPARALLELED IN MODERN TIMES, 


HAS PATRONIZED 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF PLATO AND ARISTOTLE, 

4 

AND ITS ENGLISH PROMULGATOR; 

AS AN ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF NO COMMON ESTEEM FOR HIS CHARACTER, 

AND A TRIBUTE OF THE WARMEST GRATITUDE FOR HIS PATRONAGE, 

THIS WORK IS DEDICATED 

f 

BY THE TRANSLATOR, 

THOMAS TAYLOR. 




Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



INTRODUCTION. 




I rejoice in the opportunity which is afforded me of presenting the truly philosophic reader, in 
the present work, with a treasure of Grecian theology; of a theology, which was first mystically 
and symbolically promulgated by Orpheus, afterwards disseminated enigmatically through images 
by Pythagoras, and in the last place scientifically unfolded by Plato and his genuine disciples. The 
peculiarity indeed, of this theology is, that it is no less scientific than sublime ; and that by a geo¬ 
metrical series of reasoning originating from the most self-evident truths, it developes all the deified 
progressions from the ineffable principle of things, and accurately exhibits to our view all the links 
of that golden chain of which deity is the one extreme, and body the other. 

That also which is most admirable and laudable in this theology is, that it produces in the mind 
properly prepared for its reception the most pure, holy, venerable, and exalted conceptions of the 
great cause of all. For it celebrates this immense principle as something superior even to being 
itself; as exempt from the whole of things, of which it is nevertheless ineffably the source, and does 
not therefore think fit to connumerate it with any triad, or order of beings. Indeed, it even apologises 
for attempting to give an appropriate name to this principle, which is in reality ineffable, and 
ascribes the attempt to the imbecility of human nature, which striving intently to behold it, gives 
the appellation of the most simple of its conceptions to that which is beyond all knowledge and all 
conception. Hence it denominates it the one , and the good; by the former of these names indica¬ 
ting its transcendent simplicity, and by the latter its subsistence as the object of desire to all beings. 
For all things desire good. At the same time however, it asserts that these appellations are in reality 
nothing more than, the parturitions of the soul which standing as it were in the vestibules of the 
Procl . 4 Vol. I. b 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



X 


INTRODUCTION. 


adytum of deity, announce nothing pertaining to the ineffable, but only indicate her spontaneous 
tendencies towards it, and belong rather to the immediate offspring of the first God, than to the first 
itself. 

Hence, as the result of this most venerable conception of the supreme, when it ventures not 
only to denominate the ineffable, but also to assert something of its relation to other things, it con¬ 
siders this as pre-eminently its peculiarity, that it is the principle of principles ; it being necessary 
that the characteristic property of principle, after the same maimer as other things, should not begin 
from multitude, but should be collected into one monad as a summit, and which is the principle of 
all principles. Conformably to this, Proclus, in the second book of this work 1 says, with match¬ 
less magnificence of diction : " Let us as it were celebrate the first God, not as establishing the 
earth and the heavens, nor as giving subsistence to souls, and the generation of all animals; for he 
produced these indeed, but among the last of things ; but prior to these, let us celebrate him as 
unfolding into light the whole intelligible and intellectual genus of Gods, together with all the 

supermundane and mundane divinities-as the God of all Gods, the unity of all unities, 

and beyond the first adyta,*—as more ineffable than all silence, and more unknown than all 
essence,—as holy among the holies, and concealed in the intelligible Gods.” 

The scientific reasoning from which this dogma is deduced is the following : As the principle of 
ell things is the one, it is necessary that the progression of beings should be continued, and that no 
vacuum should intervene either in incorporeal or corporeal natures. It is also necessary that every 
dung which has a natural progression should proceed through similitude. In consequence of this, 
it is likewise necessary that every producing principle should generate a number of the same order 
with itself, viz. nature , a natural number; soul, one that is psychical (i. e. belonging to soul); and 
intellect , an intellectual number. For if whatever possesses a power of generating, generates simi¬ 
lars prior to dissimilars, every cause must deliver its own form and characteristic peculiarity to its 
progeny ; and before it generates that which gives subsistence to progressions far distant aud 
separate from its nature, it must constitute things proximate to itself according to essence, and con¬ 
joined with it through similitude. It is therefore necessary from these premises, since there is one 
unity the principle of the universe, that this unity should produce from itself, prior to every thing 
else, a multitude of natures characterized by unity, and a number the most of all things allied to 
its cause; and these natures are no other than the Gods. 

According to this theology therefore, from the immense principle of principle*, in which all 
1 P. 139. * i. e. The highest order of intelligibles. 


Digitized by voooQie 



INTRODUCTION. 


W 

tilings causally subsist, absorbed in superessential light, and involved in unfathomable depths, a 
beauteous progeny of principles proceed, all largely partaking of the ineffable, all stamped with the 
occult characters of deity, all possessing an overflowing fulness of good. From these dazzling sum¬ 
mits, these ineffable blossoms, these divine propagations, being, life, intellect, soul, nature, and body 
depend; monads suspended from unities , deified natures proceeding from deities. Each of these 
monads too, is the leader of a series which extends from itself to the last of things, and which while 
it proceeds from, at the same time abides in, and returns to its leader. And all these principles 
and all their progeny are finally centered and rooted by their summits in the first great aU-compre- 
hending one. Thus all beings proceed from, and are comprehended in the first being; all inteh* 
lects emanate from one first intellect; all souls from one first soul; all natures blossom from one 
first nature ; and all bodies proceed from the vital and luminous body of the world. And lastly, all 
these great monads are comprehended in the first one, from which both they and all their depending 
series are unfolded into light. Hence this first one is truly the unity of unities, the monad of 
monads, the principle of principles, the God of Gods, one and all things, and yet one prior to aH. 

No objections of any weight, no arguments but such as are sophistical, can be urged against this 
most sublime theory which is so congenial to the unperverted conceptions of the human mind, that 
it can only be treated with ridicule and contempt in degraded, barren, and barbarous ages. Igno- 
ranee and priestcraft, however, have hitherto conspired to defame those inestimable works, 1 in 
which this and many other grand and important dogmas can alone be found; and the theology of 
the Greeks has been attacked with all the insane fury of ecclesiastical zeal, and all the imbecil flashes 
of mistaken wit, by men whose conceptions on the subject, like those of a man between sleeping 
and waking, have been turbid and wild, phantastic and confused , preposterous and vain . 

Indeed, that after the great incomprehensible cause of all, a divine multitude subsists, co-operating 
with this cause in the production and government of the universe, has always been, and is still admitted 
by all nations, and all religions, however much they may differ in their opinions respecting the nature 
of the subordinate deities, and the veneration which is to be paid to them by man ; and however 
barbarous the conceptions of some nations ou this subject may be when compared with those of 
others. Hence, says the elegant Maximus Tyrius, “ You w ill see one according law and assertion 
in all the earth, that there is one God, the king and father of all things, and many Gods, sons of God, 
ruling together with him. This the Greek says, and the Barbarian says, the inhabitant of the Continent, 

* Viz. the present and other works of Proclus, together with those of Plotinus, Porphyry, Jamblichus, 
Syrianus, Ammonius, Damascius, Olympiodorus, and Simplicius. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



xii 


INTBODUCTIO N. 


and he who dwells near the sea) the wise and the unwise. And if you proceed as.far as to the utmost 
shores of the ocean, there also there are Gods, rising very near to some, and setting very near to 
others.” 1 This dogma, too, is so far from being opposed by either the Old or New Testament, that 
it is admitted by both, though it forbids the religious veneration of the inferior deities, and enjoins 
the worship of one God alone, whose portion is Jacob, and Israel the line of his inheritance. The 
following testimonies will, I doubt not, convince the liberal reader of the truth of this assertion. 

In the first place it appears from the 32d chapter of Deuteronomy, v. 8. in the Septuagint 
version, that “ the division of the nations was made according to the number of the angels of 
God,” and not according to the number of the children of Israel, as the present Hebrew text 
asserts. This reading was adopted by the most celebrated fathers of the Christian church, such as, 
among the Greeks, Origen, Basil, and Chrysostom, and among the Latins, Jerom and Gregory. 
That this too, is the genuine reading, is evident from the 4th chapter of the same book and the 19th 
verse, in which it is said, “ And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the 
sun and the moon, and the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldst be driven to worship them, 
and serve them, which the Lord thy God hath divided unto all nations under the whole heaven” 
Here it is said that the stars are divided to all the nations, which is equivalent to saying that the 
nations were divided according to the number of the stars ; the Jewish legislator at the same time, 
considering his own nation as an exception, and as being under the government of the God of Israel 
alone. For in the following verse it is added, “ But the Lord hath taken you (i. e. the Jews), and 
brought you forth out of the iron furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto him a people of inheri- * 
tance, as ye are to this day.” By the angels of God therefore (in Deuteron.32. v. 8.) the stars are 
signified; and these in the same book (chapter 17. v. S.) are expressly called Gods; “ And hath 
gone and served other Gods, and worshipped them, either the sun or moon, or any of the host of 
heaven, which I have not commanded .” In the 3d chapter also, and the 24th verse, it is implied 
in the question which is there asked, that the God of the Jews is superior to all the celestial and 
terrestrial Gods : u For w hat God is there in heaven, or in earth, that can do according to thy 
works, and according to thy might?” As the attention of the Jews was solely confined to the 
worship of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they but little regarded the powers whom they 
conceived to be subordinate to this God, and considering all of them as merely the messengers of. 
their God, they gave them the general appellation of angels; though as we shall shortly prove from 

v Em i&otc at tt *ava yyj ofAofuitoi yo/xov net i \oyot } on 9to( tic tratrwt f&an\itjc nai lean jg, xai 9toi iroXXw, Otov natitc, cwafxcvrtc 
$iou. Taura xat o fXXtp Xtyu, xat o fray Sago; Xryu, %ai o nai odaXarno;, xat o ao fo; xat o curofc*. Kay rov wwavov «X0f; 

T *( nUraf, nanii 0w, to» ; pty anayjrtnc ay/jv juaXa, ro*< h xoretfcso/4f|0«. Dissert. I. Edit. PrUlC. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


xiii 


the testimony of the Apostle Paul, they were not consistent in confounding angels properly so 
called with Gods . 

But that the stars are not called Gods by the Jewish legislator as things inanimate like statues 
fashioned of wood or stone, is evident from what is said in the book of Job, and the Psalms: 
“ Behold even the moon and it shineth not, yea the stars are not pure in his sight. How much 
less man that is a worm, and the son of man which is a worm V* (Job. xxv. v. 5. and 6.) And, 
“ When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou hast 
ordained ; what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him.” 
(Psalm viii. v. 3. and 4.) It is evident therefore from these passages, that the heavens and the stars 
are more excellent than man; but nothing inanimate can be more excellent than that which is 
animated. To which may be added, that in the following verse David says, that God has made 
man a little lower than the angels. But the stars, as we have shown, were considered by Moses as 
angels and Gods; and consequently, they are animated beings, and superior to man. 

Farther still, in the Septuagint version of verse the 4th of the 19th Psalm, God is said to have 
placed his tabernacle in the sun , (ev rw ijXiep tiero to tnojveojua avrov) which is doubtless the genuine 
reading, and not that of the vulgar translation, “ In them (i. e. the heavens) hath he set a taberna¬ 
cle for the sun.” For this is saying nothing more of the sun than what may be said of any of 
the other stars, and produces in us no exalted conception of the artificer of the universe. But to say 
that God dwells in the sun, gives us a magnificent idea both of that glorious luminary, and the deity 
who dwells enshrined, as it were, in dazzling splendor. To which we may add in confirmation of 
this version of the Septuagint, that in Psalm xi. v. 4. it is said, “ The Lord's throne is in heaven.” 
And again in Isaiah lxvi. v. 1. a Thus .saith the Lord, the heaven is my throne, and the earth is my 
footstool.” If therefore the heavens are the throne, and the sun the tabernacle of deity, they must 
evidently be deified. For nothing can come into immediate contact with divinity without being 
divine. Hence, says Simplicius, 1 “ That it is connascent with the human soul to think the celes* 
tral bodies are divine, is especially evident from those, (the Jews) who look to theses bodies through 
preconceptions about divine natures. For they also say that the heavens are the habitation of God, 
and the throne of God, and are alone sufficient to reveal the glory and excellence of God to those 
who are worthy ; than which assertions what can be more venerable ?” 


1 In his commentary on the second book of Aristotle’s treatise On the Heavens. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



XIV 


INTRODUCTION, 


Indeed, that the heavens are not the inanimate throne and residence of deity, is also evident from 
die assertion in the l{Hh Psalm, “ That the heavens declare the glory of God.” For R. Moses, 
a very learned Jew, says, 1 “ that the word saphar , to declare or set forth, is never attributed to 
things inanimate.” Hence he concludes, “ that the heavens are not without some soul, which, says he, 
is no other than that of those blessed intelligences, who govern the stars, and dispose them into such 
letters as God has ordained; declaring unto us men by means of this writing, what events we are 
to expect. Aud hence, this same writing is called by all the ancients chetab hamelachim, that is to 
say, the writing of the angels .” 

The Gods therefore, which were distributed to all the nations but the Jew's, were the sun and 
moon, and the other celestial bodies, yet not so far as they are bodies, but so far as they are ani¬ 
mated beings. Hence the Hebrew prophets never reprobate and prohibit the worship of the stars 
as things which neither see, nor hear, nor understand, as they do the worship of statues. Thus in 
Deuteron. iv. and 28. “ And there ye shall serve Gods the work of men’s hands, wood and stone, 
which neither see nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.” And the Psalmist, “ They have a mouth but 
speak not, &c.” These, and many other things of the like kind are said by the prophets of the 
Jews against the worship of images and statues, but never of the sun and moon, and the other 
stars. But when they blame the worship of the heavenly bodies, they assign as the cause 
that the people of Israel are not attributed to them as other nations are, in consequence of 
being the inheritance of the God that brought them out of the land of Egypt, and out of the house 
of bondage. This is evident from the before cited passage in the 4th chapter of Deuteronomy, in 
which it is said that the stars are divided unto all nations under the whole heaven but the Jews. 

Indeed, as the emperor Julian 2 justly observes, “ unless a certain ethnarchic God presides over 
eveiy nation, and uiider this God there is an angel, a daemon, and a peculiar genus of souls, sub¬ 
servient and ministrant to more excellent natures, from which the difference in laws and manners 
arises,—unless this is admitted, let it be shown by any other how this difference is produced. For 
it is not sufficient to say, " God said, and it was done,” but it is requisite that the natures of 
things which are produced should accord with the mandates of divinity. But I will explain more 
clearly what I mean. God, for instance, commanded that fire should tend upward, and earthly 
masses downward; is it not therefore requisite, in. order that the mandate of God may be accom- 

« See Gaffarert Unheard-of Curiosities, p. 391. 1 Apud Cyril. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



INTRODUCTION* 


XV' 


plished, that the former should be light, and the latter heavy ? Thus also in a similar manner in 
other things. Tlius too, in divine concerns. But the reason of this is, because the human race is frail 
and corruptible. Hence also, the works of man are corruptible and mutable, and subject to all-various 
revolutions. But God being eternal, it is also fit that his mandates should be eternal. And being 
such, they are either the natures of thiugs, or conformable to the natures of things* For how can 
nature contend with the mandate of divinity ? How can it fall off from this concord? I/, there¬ 
fore, as he ordered that there should be a confusion of tongues, and that they should not accord 
with each other, so likewise he ordered that the political concerns of nations should be dis¬ 
cordant ; he has not only effected this by his mandate, but has rendered us naturally adapted to this 
dissonance. For to effect this, it would be requisite, in the first place, that the natures of those 
should be different, whose political concerns among nations are to be different. This, indeed, is 
seen in bodies, if any one directs his attention to the Germans and Scythians, and considers how 
much the bodies of these differ from those of the Lybians and Ethiopians. Is this therefore, a 
mere mandate, and does the air contribute nothing, nor the relation and position of the region with 
respect to the celestial bodies ?” 

Julian adds, “ Moses, however, though he knew the truth of this, concealed it; nor does he 
ascribe the confusion of tongues to God alone. For he says, that not only God descended, nor one 
alone with him, but many, though he does not say who they were. Byt it is veiy evident, that he 
conceived those who descended with God to be similar to him. If, therefore, not the Lord only, 
but those who were with him contributed to this confusion of tongues, they may justly be consi¬ 
dered as the causes of this dissonance.” 

In short, that the heavens and the celestial bodies are animated by certain divine souls, was not 
only the opinion of the ancient poets and philosophers, but also of the most celebrated fathers of 
the church, and the most learned and acute of the schoolmen. Thus for instance, this is asserted 
by Jerom in his exposition of the 6th verse of the first chapter of Ecclesiastes. And by Origen in 
his book On Principles, who says that the heavenly bodies must be animated, because they are said 
to receive the mandates of God, which is only consentaneous to a rational nature. This too is 
asserted by Eusebius in his Theological Solutions, and by Augustine in his Enchiridion. Among 
the schoolmen too, this was the opinion of Albertus Magnus in his book De quatuor Coaequaevis ; 
of Thomas Aquinas in his treatise De Spiritualibus Creaturis; and of Johannes Scotus Super 
Secundo Sententiarum. ' To these likewise may be added, the most learned Cardinal Nicolaus 
Cusanus. Aureolus indeed strenuously contends for the'trulh of this opinion, and does not even 



Digitized by v^ooQle 


INTRODUCTION. 


*vi 

think it improper to venerate the celestial bodies with outward worship (duliae cultu) and to implore 
their favour and assistance. And Thomas Aquinas says, that he has no other objection to this 
than that it might be the occasion of idolatry. Hence, though it may seem ridiculous to most of 
the present time, that divine souls should be placed in the stars, and preside over regions and cities, 
tribes and people, nations and tongues, yet it did not appear so to the mofe intelligent Christians 
of former times. 

I had almost forgotten however the wisest of the ancient Christians, but as he was the best of 
them, I have done well in reserving him to the last; and this is no other than the Platonic bishop 
Synesius. This father of the church therefore, in his third hymn, sings as follows: 

Ss 9 TTOLTtg K<XT(JM)V, 

xetreg oumm, 
avrovgye Sewv, 
evxyeg aivew. 
tre j&ev oi voegoi 
fj,eXxou<riv f acvot£, 

<re Se xo<rfiayot , 

OfJLfUtToXMfiirttg, 
voeg oumgiot, 

VfjLvovcn fjutxctg, 
ovg iregi x\ei yov 
(TCOfJLA %ogeuei. 
ncuroi <rff fJLeX.ir.Bi 
ymot (JLaxagoov. 
o< iregi HoafMV, 
oi xetra xovfuov, 

0i OVOUOI, 

01 T «£«V0l 
XOVfJLOV (JLOlgCtg 

e$«rou<n, rofoi 
etfi^tfiuntges, 

Oi iroLgoL xkeivovg 
onjxofogouj. 
oog ayyeKixoc 



Digitized by 


Google 



INTRODUCTION. 


IfU 


Tf ox»w €Mfm 
to, rc xvSi)n 
yovof ygwwv, 
cgyot tol tnfrmv 
xgufiatrt* o So if 
Biavtrrofitvov, 
igya /3 Igonix. 
fax* r *x\iyrj$,' 
xeu xKtvofiovot 

*§ fJA\XVUVyn$ 

xtovmf oyxov$. 

viz. “ Thee, father of the worlds, father of the aeones/ artificer of die Gods, it is holy to praise. 
Thee, O king, the intellectual Gods sing, thee, O blessed God, the Comagi, those fulgid eyes, and 
starry intellects, celebrate, round which the illustrious body [of the world] dances. All the race of 
the blessed sing thy praise, those that are about, and those that are in the world, the zonic Gods, 
and also the azonic,* who govern the parts of the world, wise itinerants, stationed about the illus¬ 
trious pilots [of the universe,] and which the angelic series pours forth. Thee too, the renowned 
genus of heroes celebrates, which by occult paths pervades the works of mortals, and likewise the 
soul which does not incline to the regions of mortality, and the soul which descends into dark terres¬ 
trial masses." 

In another part also of the same hymn, he informs us that he adored the powers that 
preside over Thrace and Chalcedon. 

IxtTOVT* itOV$, 

Bppryg*S otoi 
yorifioy Ogfxtjg 

1 What these are will be shortly explained, when we come to speak of the Apostle Paul 

a Syneshis does not here speak conformably to the Chaldean theologists, from whom he has derived these ap¬ 
pellations. For the fmm and the are according to them Gods, the former being the divinities of the stars, 
and the latter forming that order of Gods which is called by Proclus in the sixth book of this work wroxurtf, £. 
berated. Both these orders therefore, are superior to the angelic series. This unscientific manner however of catting 
both the highest and lowest divine powers by the common name of angels, is not pe^di^r to Syneshis jmd the 
Jews, but to all the fathers of the church, and all the Christian divines that succeeded them. 

Proe . Vol. I. c 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



XVlii INTRODUCTION. 

xa rrtpgowf ff$oy> 

Of r* arrtngat 

^aAxijSovia* 
tfntova’t yvt»$. 

i. e. w I have supplicated the ministrant Gods that possess the Thracian soil, and also those that, 
in an opposite direction, govern the Chalcedonian land.” 


And in the last place he says (in Hymn I.) 

Noos OfitTOS, TOXVjWV 
Otoxotgcnoov arwoggatf:, 
oXiya /xsv, «AA* txuvwv 
qXo$ qvto$, us Tt Tumj 
o\os us oAov Mvxws, 

i. i 

xutos ougavoov tXunrw 
TO S' oAov toutq QvXotccoov, 
vevtfjuiiitvum ftogfoi> 

(Mfjugicrpms iragtc nf 
o jxty, ourrtgcoy fofgueusy 
o S* ff ayytXoov %o gems, 
o Si xou gtxovrt Sur/Mj, 

X$owav eager o fiogfxy. 

The substance of which is,“ that incorruptible intellect which is wholly an emanation of divinity, 
is totally diffused through the whole world, convolves the heavens, and preserves the universe with 
which it is present distributed in various forms. That one part of this intellect is distributed 
among the stars, and becomes, as it were, their charioteer ; but another part among the angelic 
choirs; and another part is bound in a terrestrial form.” 

1 confess I am wholly at a loss to conceive what could induce the modems to controvert the 
dogma, that the stars and the whole world are apimated, as it is an opinion of infinite antiquity, and 
is friendly to the most unperverted, spontaneous, and accurate conceptions of the human mind. 
Indeed, the rejection of it appears to me to be just as absurd as it would be in a maggot, if it 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



iNTBODy CTION. zix 

were capable of syllogizing, to infer that man is a machine impelled by some external force when 
he walks, because it never saw any animated reptile so large. 

The sagacious Kepler, for so he is called even by the most modem writers, 1 appears to have had 
a conception of this great truth; but as he was more an astronomer than a philosopher, he saw this 
truth only partially, and he rather embraced it as subservient to his own astronomical opinions, than 
as forming an essential part of the true theory of the universe. But from what I have seen of the 
writings of Kepler, I have no doubt, if he had lived in the time of the Greeks, or if he had made 
the study of the works of Plato and Aristotle the business of his life, he would have become an 
adept in, and an illustrious and zealous champion of their philosophy. Kepler then (in Harmo- 
nices Mundi, lib. 4, p. 158) says, “ That he does not oppose the dogma, that there is a soul of the 
universe, though he shall say nothing about it in that book, He adds, that if there is such 
a soul, it must reside in the centre of the world, which, according to him, is the sun, and 
from thence by die communication of the rays of light, which are in the pWe of spirits in 
an animated body, is propagated into all the amplitude of the world.” x In the following passages 
also he confidently asserts that the earth has a soul. For he says, “ That the globe of the earth is 
a body such as is that of some animal; and that what its own soul is to an animal, that the sublunary 
nature which he investigates will be to the earth.’” He adds, “ That he sees for the most part 
every thing which proceeding from the body of an animal testifies that there is a soul in it, 
proceeds also from the body of the earth. For as the animated body produces in the super¬ 
ficies of the skin hairs, thus also the earth produces [on its surface] plants and trees ; and as in the 
former lice are generated, so in the latter the worms called erucae, grasshoppers, and various insects 
and marine monsters are produced. As the animated body likewise produces tears, mucus, and the 
recrement of the ears, and sometimes gum from the pustules of the face, thus also the earth pro- 

* Dr. Gregory, in the 70th proposition of. the first book of hi. Elements of Astronomy, says of Kepler, « That hi* 
archetypal ratios, geometrical concumities, and harmonic proportions, show such a force of genins as is not to be found 
in any of the writer* of physical astronomy before him. So that Jeremiah Horrex, a very competent jndge of these mat. 
ten, though a little averse to Kepler, in the beginning of his astronomical studies, after having in vain tried others, 
entirely falling in with Kepler’s doctrine and physical reasons, thus addresses bis reader: Kepler it a pertou whom I map 

Justlg admin above all msrfsls betide: Imug mU him great, divine, tr eon temetking mare ; thtee Kepler it to be valued 
above the whole tribe qf philosophers. Him alone let the fords shy of.—Him .tone let the phUtttphert read; bring tatufi ei 
qf this, that he who hat Kepler hat all thhgt,* 

l quote this passage, not from the justness of the encomium it contains; for it is extravagant, and by no true; 
but that the reader may see what an exalted opinion some of the greatest of the moderns have had of the genius of 
Kepler. 

* “ Et primnm qnidem de anima to tins nnivetsi etsi non repogno, nihil tamen hoc fibre IV. dicam. Videtur «mn («| 

est tails aliqna) in centre mundi, qnod mihi sol est, residere, indeque in omnem ejus amplitudinem commercio rediorum 
lucisy qui sint loco spirituum in corpora propagari.” 

* “ Deniqae terra globus tale corpus erit, quale est alicqjus aninudi*: modqoe aahnaH est sea anima, hoc erit tellur! 
h*c, quam qmerimus, nature snblunaris.* 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



XX 


INTRODUCTION. 


duces amber and bitumen. As the bladder too produces urine, thus likewise mountains pour forth 

rivers. And as the body produces excrement of a sulphureous odour, and crepitus which may also 

be inflamed, so the earth produces sulphur, subterranean fires, thunder, and lightning. And as in 

the veins of an animal blood is generated, and together with it sweat which is ejected out of the 

body, so in the veins of the earth, metals, add fossils, and a rainy vapour are generated.” 1 And in * 
» 

cap. 7, p* 162, after having shown that there is in the earth the sense of touching, that k respires, and 
is subject in certain parts to languors, and internal vicissitudes of the viscera, and that subtemneau 
heat proceeds from the soul of the earth, he $dds, “ That a certain image of the zodiac m resplend¬ 
ent in this soul, and therefore of the whole firmament, and is the bond of the sympathy of things 
Celestial and terrestrial.”* 

Bishop Berkeley also was by no means hostile to this opinion, that the world is one great 
animal, as is evident from the following extract from his Siris, (p. 131). 


“ Blind fate and blind chance are at bottom much die same thing, add one no more intelligible 
than the other. Such is the mutual relation, connection, motion, and sympathy of the parts of this 
world, that (hey seem, as it were, animated and held together by one soul: and such is theirharmony, 
order, and regular course, as shows the soul to be governed anddirected by a mind. It was an opinion 
of remote antiquity (hat the world urns an animal. If we may trust die Hermaic writings, the 
Egyptians thought all things did partake of life. This opinion was also so general and current 
among the Greeks, that Plutarch asserts all others held the world to be an animal, and governed by 
providence, except Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus. And although an animal containing 
all bodies within itself, could not be touched or sensibly affected from without; yet it is plain they 
attributed to it an inward sense and feeling, as well as appetites and aversions ; and that from all 
the various tones, actions, and passions of the universe, they supposed one symphony, one animal 
wet and life to result. 

“ Iamblichus declares the world to be one animal, in which the parts, however distant each from 
other, are nevertheless related and connected by one common nature. And he teaches, what is 

1 * Videbam plmqne omnia, quae ex corpore animantis provenientia, testantur auimam in illo incase, provenira 
etiam ex telluri* corpora. Ut enim corpus in cutis snperficie pilos, aic terra plantaa arboreaque profert; inque iia ibi 
pedicnli, hie erucae, cicadas, variaque insecta et monatra xnarjpa naaenntor: et ut corpus lachrymas, blenuam, anriumque 
recrementa, eat nbi et gummi ex faciei pnstulis, aic tellua eleetrnm, bit omen: utque vesica urioam, aic montea flumina 
fondunt; etut corpus excrementam sulphurei odoria, crepitusque, qui etiam inflamroari possunt, aic terra sulphur, ignea 
•ubterraneoa, tonitrua, fulgura: utque in veuis animantia generator sanguis, et cum co sudor, extra corpus ejectus; 
aic in venia terras, metalla et losailiu, vaporque pluviua.” 

* 44 Relocct igitmr in anima tcUuria imago quedaxu circoli sodiaci aenaibilia, totiusque adeo firmaiqenti, vinculum 
sympathise rerum ceeleatium at terrestrium. 9 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



INTUOOITCTION. 


XXI 


•Iso a received notion of the Pythagoreans and Platonics, that there is no chasm in nature, but a 
chain or scale of beings risiog by gentle uninterrupted gradations from the lowest to the highest, 
each nature being informed and perfected by the participation of a higher. As air becomes 
igneous, so the purest fire becomes animal, and the animal soul becomes intellectual, which is to be 
understood, not of the change of one nature into another, but of the connection of different natures, 
each lower nature being, according to those philosophers, as it were, a receptacle or subject for the 
next above it to reside and act in. 

“ It is also the doctrine of Platonic philosophers, diet intellect is the very life of living filings, 
the first principle and exemplar of all, from whence, by different degrees, are derived die inferior 
classes of life; first the rational, then the sensitive, after that the vegetable, but so as in the rational 
animal there is still somewhat intellectual, again in the sensitive there is somewhat rational, and in 
the vegetable somewhat sensitive, and lastly in mixed bodies, as metals and minerals, somewhat of 
vegetation. By which means the whole is thought to be more perfecdy connected. Which doc¬ 
trine implies that all the faculties, instincts, and motions of inferior beings, in their several 
reqpieehve subordinations, are derived from, and depend upon intellect. 

“ Both Stoics and Platonics held the world to be alive, though sometimes it be mentioned as a 
•eofient animal, sometimes as a plant or vegetable. But in this, notwithstanding what has been 
surmised by some learned men, there seems to be no atheism . For so long as the world is sup¬ 
posed to be quickened by elementary fire or spirit , which is itself animated by soul, and directed 
by understanding, it follows that all parts thereof originally depend upon, and may be reduced 
unto , the same indivisible stem or principle , to wit, a supreme mind; which is the concurrent 
doctrine of Pythagoreans, Platonics, and Stoics.” 

Compare now the Newtonian with this theory, tbat the heavenly bodies are vitalized by their 
informing souls, that their orderly motion is the result of this vitality, and that the planets move 
harmonically round the sun, not as* if urged by a centripetal force, but from an animated tendency 
to the principle and fountain of their light, and from a desire of partaking as largely as possible of 
his influence and power. In the former theory all the celestial motions are the effect of violence, 
in the latter they are all natural. The former is attended with insuperable difficulties, the latter, 
when the principle on which it is founded is admitted, with none. And the former is unscientific 
and merely hypothetical; but the latter is the progeny of the most accurate science, and is founded 
on the mast gtnidoe.aad < uqper verted conceptions of'the human mind. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



XXII 


INTRODUCTION. 


I have said that I should prove from the testimony of the Apostle Paul, that the Jews were not 
consistent in confounding angels properly so called with Gods. And this appears to me to be evident 
in the first place from the following passage in Hebrews ii. v. 3. mem poou/h tv xanjgrtricu rwg cuwsctg 
QfifLcm itw, ro pi) cx $<%jvo/x*va>y tci /Skswofitpct yeyowai. This in the English version is erro¬ 
neously rendered; a Through faith we understand, that the worlds were framed by the word of 
God, so that things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear.” I say this is erro¬ 
neously translated, because in the first place, the worlds is evidently a forced interpretation of 
monfag ; and even admitting it is not, leaves the passage very ambiguous, from the uncertainty to 
what world# Paul alludes. If we adopt ages , which is the general sense of the word in the New 
Testament, we shall indeed avoid a forced and ambiguous interpretation, but we shall render the 
meaning of the Apostle trifling in the extreme. For as he has elsewhere said, “ that all things 
were framed by the word of God,” what particular faith does it require to believe, that by the 
same word he framed the ages ? 

In the second place, from the definition of faith, given in the first verse of this chapter, that it is 
“ the evidence of things not seen/ 9 it is clear, that Paul is speaking in this passage of something 
invisible . Since then oucovug is neither worlds nor ages, what shall we say it is ? I answer, the 
<eones of the V alentinians. And agreeably to this, the whole passage should be translated as 
follows: " By faith we understand, that the aones were framed by the word of God, in order that 
things which are seen, might be generated from such as do not appear (i. e. from filings invisible ).” 
Every one who is much conversant with Greek authors, must certainly be convinced that ng ro 
means in order that ; and Bishop Pearson translates as I have done the latter part of this verse. 

Now we learn from the second book of Irenaeus against the heretics, that according to the 
Valentinians, all created things are the images of the aones , resident in the pleroma , or fulness of 
deity. And does it not clearly follow from the above version, that according to Paul too, the 
aeones are the exemplars of visible or created things f To which we may add, that this sense of 
the passage clearly accords with the assertion that “ faith is the evidence of things not seen.” For 
here the things which do not appear are the aones; these, according to the Valentinians, subsisting 
in *eity. So that from our version, Paul might say with great propriety, that “ we understand by 
faith, that the aones were framed by the word of God, in order that things which are seen, might be 
generated from such as do not appear,” for this naturally follows from his definition of faith. 

I farther add, that among these aones of the Valentinians were mg, /9 viog, ciyy, aktfina, <ropj«, 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



INTRODUCTION. 


xxiii 

«. e. intellect, a profundity, silence, truth, and wisdom, which as Gale well observes in his notes on 
lamblichu8 de Mysteriis, 8tc. prove their dogmas to be of Chaldaic origin. For these words per¬ 
petually occur in the fragments of die Chaldaic oracles. And the middle of the Chaldean intelli¬ 
gible triad is denominated cum won, 1 i. e. eternity, and is also perfectly conformable to the 
theology of Plato, as is very satisfactorily shown by Proclus in the third book of the following 
work. According to the Chaldeans therefore, the aeones are Gods; and considered as the exem¬ 
plars of the visible universe, they are analogous to the ideas of Plato, which also are Gods, as is 
evident from the Parmenides of that philosopher.* According to Paul too, as the aones are the 
fabricators of the visible world, they must be beings of a much higher order than angels, and con¬ 
sequently must be Gods; productive power being one of die great characteristics of a divine 
nature. 

Again, in the Episde to the Ephesians, chap. i. v. 21. Paul says that God has exalted Christ 
“ far above every principality, and power, and might, and dominion,” umgavco xa<rrig agxyg xcu 
egowtag, xcu tivvaptoog xcu xvgiQTyrog. And in die 6th chapter and 12th verse he conjoins with princi¬ 
palities and powers, the rulers of the world, i. e. the seven planets, xgog rag ag%ag, rgog rag tgov- 
ouig, xgog rag xocrfLoxgarogag. Augustin 3 confesses that he is ignorant what the difference is 
between those four words, (principality, power, might, and dominion,) in which the Apostle Paul 
seems to comprehend all the celestial society. " Quid inter se distent quatuor ilia vocabula, 
quibus umversam ipsam coelestem societatem videtur Apostolus esse complexus, dicant qui possunt, 
si tamen possunt probare quod dicunt; ego me ista ignorare fateor.” Ignatius also (in Epist ad 
Trallianos) speaks of the angelic orders, the diversities of archangels and armies, the differences of 
the orders characterised by might and dominion, of thrones and powers, the magnificence of the 
wonesf and thd transcendency of Cherubim and Seraphim,” xott yog eyto ov xad’ o, n BiBe/xcu, xat 
twafjm |i sons ra cxovgctma, xxt rag ctyytktxag ra£stg, xcu rag rm ag^ctyytXm xcu oTgxrtm e^xWxyxg, 

Prodiu begins the sixth book of the following work with observing that he has celebrated in the preceding book the 
hebdoznadic we* of the intellectual Gods. The wanes therefore, though the cause of them exists in the intelligible, pro- 
perly belong to the intellectual order; and the Demiingus or artificer of the universe subsists at the extremity of that 
order. But the demiurgns according to Orpheus, prior to the fabrication of the world absorbed in himself Phanes the 
exemplar of the universe. Hence he became full of ideas of which the forms in the sensible universe are the images. And 
as all intellectual natures are in each, it is evident that things which are seen were generated from the invisible wanes, 
conformably to the assertion of Paul. 

* I refer the reader who is desirous of bang fully convinced of this to the notes accompanying tny translation of that 
dialogue, in vol. 3 of my Plato* 

3 Ad Lauren tium, c. 58. 

♦ Here we see the cues are acknowledged by Irenara* to be beings of an order superior to angels. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



XXIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


%m rt nm KUgimiTMv fatfopts, hymn rt urn egourm* at$p&X*y*s 9 tus ss m 8r ft9y*Xonpr«f, re* re 
x«i <rt$*Qfp to{ wregox*{. 

The opinion of Grotius* therefore, is highly probable, that the Jews obtained the names of 
Powers, Dominations, and Principalities, from their Babylonic captivity; and Gale in his notes on 
Iamblichus* says, that certain passages of Zoroaster and Ostanes cited by the author of Arithm. 
Theolog. confirm this opinion of Grotius. Indeed, the appellation of *qx m principles, which are 
the first of the four powers mentioned by Paul, was given by the Chaldeans to that order of Gods 
called by the Grecian theologists supermundane and assimilative, Hie nature of which is unfolded 
by Proclus in the sixth book of the following work; and Proclus in the fourth book of his MS. 
Commentary On the Parmenides of Plato shows that the order of Gods denominated roars; xou 
toeps, intelligible and at the same time intellectual, is according to the Chaldean oracles* princi¬ 
pally characterized by domination In proof of this, the two following oracles are cited by him, 
the first, concerning the empyrean, and the second concerning the material Synoches. 4 

Toi; $f yoegou rosgoi; *jn<mjg<nr atartu 

Etxecie SovXsvovtcl, pooXp. 

i. e. “ All filings yield ministrant to the intellectual presters of intellectual fire, through the per¬ 
suasive Will of the father.” And 

aXXa xeu vXouoig o <r* lovXevu Xwox§vn. 
i. e. ° But likewise such as are in subjection to the material Synoches.” 

Farther still, Paul in the Epistle to the Romans, chap. viii. v. 38, says, u For 1 am persuaded 
that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities , nor powers , nor things present, nor things 
to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the lore 
of God, file.” From this arrangement therefore, it is evident that principalities and powers are 
not the same with angels; and as according to Paul they are beings so exalted, that in his Epistle 

i 

1 Ad Cap. 18. Mattlwei. 

* De Myst. p. S06? 

i Sec my Collection of these Oracle* in the old Monthly Magazine. 

4 The Synodic* form the second triad of the intelligible, and at the same time intellectual erder of Gods* 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


U? 


to the Ephesians, he could not find any thing more magnificent to say of Christ, than that he 
is raised even above them, it follows that they must be Gods, since they are superior to the angelic 
order. It is remarkable too, that he coarranges height and depth (v^ncfix xat /3«8o$) with printipali-' 
ties and powers; and (iutos is one of the (tones according to the Valentinians. 

In the first Epistle to the Corinthians likewise, chap. viii. v. 5 . Paul expressly asserts that there 
is a divine multitude. For he says, “ Though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or 
in earth, (as there be Gods many and Lords many ;)” in the parenthesis of which verse, it is incon- 
trovertibly evident that he admits the existence of a plurality of Gods, though as well as the 
heathens he believed that one God only was supreme and the father of all things. Nor am I singu¬ 
lar in asserting that this was admitted by Paul. For the Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite in the 
second chapter of bis treatise On the Divine Names observes concerning what is here said by Paul 
as follows : “ Again, from the deific energy of God, by which every thing according to its ability 
becomes deiforui, many Gods are generated; in consequence of which there appears and is said to 
be a separation and multiplication of the one [supreme] God. Nevertheless, God himself, who is 
the chief deity, and is superessentially the supreme, is still one God, remaining impartible in the 
Gods distributed from him, united to himself, unmingled with the many, and void of multitude.*’ 
And he afterwards adds, “ that this was in a transcendent manner understood by Paul, who w as 
the leader both of him and his preceptor, to divine illumination,” in the above cited verse. And, 
“ that in divine natures, unions vanquish and precede separations, and yet nevertheless they are 
united, after the separation which does not in proceeding depart from the one , and is unical.” 1 Paul 
therefore, according to this Dionysius, considered the Gods, conformably to Plato and the best of 
his disciples, as deiform processions from the one f and which at the same time that they have a dis¬ 
tinct subsistence from, are profoundly united to their great producing cause. Dionysius also 
employs the very same expression which Proclus continually uses when speaking of the separation 
of the Gods from their source j for he says that the divine multitude avtxfotrryrof too wa$, i. e. does 
not depart from, but abides in the one . Hence Proclus in the fifth book of bis MS. Commentary 
On 4 the Parmenides of Plato, speaking of the divine unities says, “ Whichever among these yon 
assume, it is the same with ihe others, because all of them are in each other, and are rooted in the 

* IUXiv t*i if at/Tiu Btwrtt, rut Harm Iwajuuv ix eurrou dnitlit Sc mn froXXon ytyvoj now?, ioxti fuy tivut wu Xtytrmt rov not Btov heufirtp 
*»< mOXmWXmvMTfAte' nrrt li win rrrvi # n^Btot *•* uwtfBiof t/vipv#**, jif i*to; « f*» ftr rot fxnot nufw, nm to*; 

mfjuynf nm arXnBvr . Km rouro vmtfxms iyy$n**t o notyf nfxm nm w nuBnytfjumf nr* r*n Bum ftroiomay *n fmymyof 9 
• roXuf r* $n* t rt pmg rov **t(xqv, r* it nBtmrr ixw; n rote avrov yfnfAfxmrt, K at yaf uwtf tin Xtyopnot Sim, nti it 

iiti i»i yuf, ».X.- Ken yrtf wri rwy Bunn a* na.ru; rwy hmnfi rmrt nrixwovr* tun 9fmnrnfyovm 9 nmt ovin nrroy im» 

nfwjA$9* t nmt (xtrm rqt rov not «yncf«tr*irev x*i mmm hmnftrn, 

Proe. Vol. I. d 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



xx*i j * 


INTRODUCTION. 


one. For Mircts by their summit! (i. e. their roots) are fixed in the *artb> and through these are 
earthly after the same manner also divine natures are rooted by their summits in the one, and each 
of them is a unity <and one, through unconfosed union with^Ae one itself." Hr yag av tommy Xotr 
fat, njv atmjf t out xKXxit Xxp/iavsit, Jiot* Si) icxom xsu tv aAAijXatf enrt, xsi tvipgityvrcn rep fvi. 
y* j Ta SrvSpa t«i$ rauTcov cyiSguvrai tij yp, xai sot* yipva x«t* txwett, rov avrov rporor xcu rot lux 

ran^^mntmf xx^ov^rtv empp^arrou rep sn, xcu sxctrrot otvrwv eva; sari, xcu tv, Sictnjy rptf to tv asvy^urov 
svewm* ' 

This Diouysitts, who certainly lived posterior to Proclus, because he continually borrows from 
his* works,' barbarously confounding that scientific arrangement of these deiform pi occasions 
from the one> which is so admirably unfolded by Proclus in the following work, classes 
them as follows. The first order, according to him, consists of Seraphim, Cherubim, and 
Thiones. The second of the divine essences characterized by dominion, might, and power. 
And the third of Principalities, Archangels, and Angels. Hence he has transferred the character¬ 
istic* of the intelligible triad of Gods to Seraphim, Cherubim, and Thrones. For symmetry, 
troth, and beauty, which characterize this triad, are said by Plato in the Philebus to subsist 
in the vestibule of the good ; (exi /mv to*$ rou ayxiov vt/v ij&ij xgoivpois tpwraveui) and Dionysius says 1 
of his first order that “ it is as it were arranged in the vestibules of deity ” Goodness, wisdom, 1 
and beauty also, are shown by Proclus in the third book of the following work to belong to the 
intelligible triad; goodness to its summit, wisdom to the middle of it, and beauty to its extremity* 
And Dionysius says, that according to the Hebrews, the word Cherubim signifies a multitude of 
knowledge, or an effusion of wisdom, tijv h £fgoo/9i/x tp.$aweiv, rXrfiot yvcoctoos, ij ymn eoQutf* The 
characteristics of the Gods called voijTOf xai vo spot intelligible and at the same time intellectual , 
and of the Gods that are votpot intellectual alone, he appears to have transferred to his middle triad 
which is characterized by dominion, might , and power. And he baq adapted his third triad consist¬ 
ing of Principalities, Archangels, and Angels, to the supermundane , liberated, and mundane 
orders of Gods. For the supermundane Gods are called by Proclus in the sixth book of the fol¬ 
lowing work ctpx at Principalities, or rulers, which is the word employed by Dionysius and Paul. 
And the mundane Gods are said by Proclus (in Parmenid.) to be the sources of a winged life, and 
angels are celebrated by Dionysius as having. wings. Hence it is evident that Dionysius has accom¬ 
modated the peculiarities of the different orders of Gods to the nine orders which he denominate* 
celestial powers; and his arrangement has been adopted by all succeeding Christian theologists. 

1 Ta*f zfwrai; ovtnai;, tu fxi rn m* ovwnotTt avrwi ttyvfxtfai, xai oio11* WjdufMif avmf inri* #«(wu 

%ai trtr*p£»£»pti/*a* yxyoiviaf ivyu^tw; } w; ttxuoi oiqriov itrct, xeu xar» T*T i DC Cttlest. Hierarch, 

cap. 7. 


Digitized by 


Google 




A XTVJXDMCTIOV. 


xxvii 

Vestiges therefore of the itfeehlogy of Plato way beaceu botbi*t the Jewish and Christian religion; 
and in a similar manner, a resemblance in ihn religions of all other nations -to it might be easily 
pointed out, and its universality be clearly demonstrated. Omitting however, a discussion of this 
kind for the present, I shall further observe respecting this theology, jhat the deification of dead 
men, and; die worshipping men as Gods form noipart of it when it is considered according to its 
-genuine purity. Numerous instances of the truth of thistinight be adduced, Jbut I aball mention for 
'this^purpose, as unexceptionable witnesses, the-writings of Plato, the Golden Pythagoric verses, 1 
•and/ the treatise of Plutarch On Isis and Osiris. All the works of Plato indeed, evince the truth 
»• of this position, but this ta particularly manifest from his Laws* The Golden* verses order, that the 
immortal Gods be honoured first as they are disposed by law; afterwards the illustrious i Heroes, 
under which appellation, the author of the verses comprehends also, angels; and daemons. properly 
, so called : and in the last place the terrestrial«hemns, k<u such good men. as transcend kivirtue the 
rest of mankind. But to honour the Gods as they are disposed by law, is, as H ieroclea observes* to 
reverence them as they are arranged by their fabricator and fathet; and this is to honour tbanu 
beings superior to man. Hence, to honour men, however excellent they may be, as Gods, is? not to 
honour the Gods according to the rank in which they are placed by their Creatpr, for it is con¬ 
founding the divine with the human nature, and is thus acting directly contrary to ithe Pythagoric 

1 “ Diogenes Laertius says of Pythagoras, That he charged his disciples not to give equal degrees qf honour to the 
Gods and heroes. Herodotus (in Euterpe) says of the Greeks, That they worshipped Hercules two ways , one as cm 
immortal deity and so they sacrificed to him: and another as a Hero, and so they celebrated/hie memory. > lacerates 
(Encom. Helen.) distinguishes between the honours of herpes and Gods, when he speaks of Menelaus 
and Helena. But the distinction is no where more fully expressed than in the Greek inscription upon 
the statue of Hegilla, wife to Herodes Atticus, as Salmasius thinks, which was set up in his temple 
at Triopium, and taken from the statue itself by Sirmondus; where it is said, That she had neither Jkg 
honour of a mortal, nor yet that which was proper to the Gods : •*/!« tty* 0 wtoi;, aruf c vtt ttoinv #/xc u». It seems by 
the inscription of Herodes, and by the testament of Epicteta extant in Greek in the Collection of Inscriptions, 
that it was in the power of particular families to keep festival days in honour of some of their own family, and to « 
give hcroical honours to them. In that noble inscription at Venice, we find three days appointed every year to 
he kept, and a confraternity established for that purpose with the laws of it. The first day to be observed in 
honour of the Muses, and sacrifices to be offered to them as deities • The second and third days in honour of/the 
heroes of the family; between which honour and that of deitic*, they shewed the difference by the distance of 
time between them, and the preference given to the other. But wherein soever the difference lay, that there was 
a distinction acknowledged among them appears by this paseage of Valerius in his excellent oration extant in 
Dionysius Halicarnass. Antiq. Rom. lib. 11. p. 696, I call, says he,rile God* to wiitiess, whose temples and altars our 
family has worshipped with common sacrifices; and next after them, I call the Genii of our ancestors, to whom 
we give fartf%e npn, the second honours next to the Gods, as Celsus calls those t«; *\wwo**e npatf the duo 
honours that belong to the lower demons. From which we take notice, that the Heathens did not confouud all 
degrees of divine worship, giving to the lowest object the same which they supposed to be due to the celestial 
deities, ot the supreme God. So that if the distinction of divine worship will excuse from idolatry, tb* Heathens 
were not to blame for it.” See Stillingfleet’s answer to a book entitled Catholics no Idolaters, p-. 510, 5 IS,'die. 


Digitized by 


Google 



xxviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


precept. Plutarch too in his above-mentioned treatise most forcibly and clearly shows the impiety 
of worshipping men as Gods, as is evident from the following extract: 

u Those therefore, who think that things of this kind [i. e. fabulous stories of die Gods as if they 
were men] are but so many commemorations of the actions and disasters of kings and tyrants, Who 
through transcendency in virtue or power, inscribed the title of divinity on their renown, and after¬ 
wards fell into great calamities and misfortunes, these employ the most easy method indeed • of 
eluding the story, and not badly transfer things of evil report, from the Gods to men; and they 
are assisted in so doing by the narrations themselves. For the Egyptians relate, that Hermes was 
as to his body, with one arm longer than the other; that Typhon was in his complexion red; but 
Orus white, and Osiris black, as if they had been by nature men. Farther still, they also call 
Osiris a commander, and Canopus a pilot, from whom they say the star of that name was denomi¬ 
nated. The ship likewise, which the Greeks call Argo, being the image of the ark of Osiris, and 
which therefore in honour of it is become a constellation, they make to ride not far from Orion and 
the Dog; of which they consider the one as sacred to Orus, but the other to Isis. 

“ I fear, however, that this [according to the proverb] would be to move things immoveable, and 
to declare war, not only, as Simonides says, against a great length of time, but also against many 
nations and families of mankind who are under the influence of divine inspiration through piety to 
these Gods; and would not in any respect fall short of transferring from heaven to earth, such great 
and venerable names, and of thereby shaking and dissolving that w orship and belief, which has been 
implanted in almost all men from their very birth, would be opening great doors to the tribe of 
atheists, who convert divine into human concerns; and would likewise afford a large license to the 
impostures of Euetnerus of Messina, who devised certain memoirs of an incredible and fictitious 
mythology, 1 and thereby spread every kind of atheism through the globe , by inscribing all the 
received Gods , without any discrimination , by the names of generals , naval-captains , and kings , 
who lived in remote periods of time . He further adds, that they are recorded in golden characters, 
in a certain country called Panchoa, at which neither any Barbarian or Grecian ever arrived, 
except Euemerus alone, who, as it seems, sailed to the Panchoans and Triphyllians, that neither 
have,' nor ever had a being. And though the great actions of Semiramis are celebrated by the 
Assyrians, and those of Sesostris in Egypt; and though the Phrygians even to the present time, call 

1 Both Arnobius therefore and Minucius Felix were very unfortunate in quoting this impostor to prove that 
the Gods of the ancients had formerly been men. Vid. Arnob. lib. 4. Advcrsus Gentcs, ct Minucii Fchcia 
Octavo, p. 35Q. 8vo. Parisiis, 1605. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


nil 


*11 splendid and admirable actions Manic, because a certain person named Manis who was one of 
their ancient kings, whom some call Masdes, was a brave and powerful man; and farther still, 
though Cyrus among the Persians, and Alexander among the Macedonians, proceeded in their no¬ 
taries, almost as far as to the boundaries of the earth, yet they only retain the name of good kings, 
and are remembered as such, [and not as Gods.] 

“ But if certain persons, inflated by ostentation, as Plata says, having their soul at one and the 
same time inflamed with youth and ignorance, have insolently assumed the appellation of Gods, and 
had temples erected in their honour, yet this opinion of them flourished but for a short time, and 
afterwards they were charged with vanity and arrogance, in conjunction with impiety and lawless 
conduct; and thus, 

Like smoke they flew away with swift»pac’d fate. 

• 

And being dragged from temples and altars like fugitive slaves, they have now nothing left 
them, but their monuments and tombs. Hence Antigonus the elder said to one Hermodotus, who 
had celebrated him in his poems as the offspring of the sun and a God, ‘ he who empties my 
close-stool-pan knows no such thing of me/ Very properly also, did Lysippus the sculptor blame 
Apelles the painter, for drawing the picture of Alexander with a thunder-bolt in his hand, whereas 
he had represented him with a spear, the glory of which, as being true and proper, no time would 
take away/ 9 

In another part of the same work also, he admirably reprobates the impiety of making the Gods 
to be things inanimate, which was very common with Latin writers of the Augustan age, and of the 
ages that accompanied the decline and fall of the Roman empire. But what he says on this sub¬ 
ject is as follows ; 

“ In the second place, which is of still greater consequence, men should be careful, and very 
much afraid, lest before they are aware, they tear in pieces and dissolve divine natures, into blasts 
of wind, streams of water, seminations, earings of land, accidents of the earth, aud mutations of 
the seasons, as those do w ho make Bacchus to be wine, and V ulcan flame. Cleanthes also some¬ 
where says, that Persephone or Proserpine is the spirit or air that passes through ($ipo/ytrw) the 
fruits of the earth, and is then s/ot/#, (<povtuofitvov.) And a certain poet says of reapers, 

Then when the youth the limbs of Ceres cut. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



XXX 


INTRODUCTION. 


For these men do not m an; respect differ from those who conceive the sails, the cables, and the 
anchor of a ship, to be the pilot, the yarn and the web to be the weaver, and the bowl, or the 
mead, or the ptisan, to be the physician. But they also produce dire and atheistical opinions, by 
giving the names of Gods to natures and things deprived of sense and soul, and that are necessarily 
destroyed by men, who are in want of and use them. For it is not possible to conceive that these 
things are Gods ; since, neither can any thing be a God to men, which is deprived of soul, or is 
subject to human power. From these things however, we are led to conceive those beings to be 
Gods, Who both use them and impart them to us, and supply them perpetually and without ceaang. 
Nor do we conceive that the Gods who bestow these, are different in different countries, nor that 
some of them are peculiar to the Barbarians, but others to the Grecians, nor that some are 
southern, and others northern; but as the sun and moon, the heavens, the land, and the sea, are 
common to all men, yet are differently denominated by different nations; so the one reason that 
adorns these things, and the one providence that administers them, and the ministrant powers that 
preside over all nations, have different appellations and honours assigned them according to law by 
different countries. Of those also that have been consecrated to their service, some employ 
obscure, but others clearer symbols, not without danger thus conducting our intellectual concep¬ 
tions to the apprehension of divine natures. For some, deviating from the true meaning of these 
symbols, have entirely slipt into superstition; and others again flying from superstition as a quag¬ 
mire, have unaware fallen upon atheism as bn a precipice. Hence, in order to avoid these dangers, 
it is especially necessary that resuming the reasoning of Philosophy as our guide to mystic know¬ 
ledge, we should conceive piously of every thing that is said or done in religion; lest that, as 
Theodorus said, while he extended his arguments with his right hand, some of his auditors received 
them with their left, so we should fall into dangerous errors, by receiving what the laws have well 
instituted about sacrifices and festivals in a manner different from their original intention/’ 

The Emperor Julian, as well as Plutarch appears to have been perfectly aware of this confusion 
in the religion of the Heathens arising from the deification of men, and in the fragments of his 
treatise against the Christians, preserved by Cyril, he speaks of it as follows: " If any one wishes 
to consider the truth respecting you [Christians.] he will find that your impiety is composed of the 
Judaic audacity, and the indolence and confusion of the Heathens . For deriving from both, not 
that which is most beautiful, but the worst, you have fabricated a web of evils. With the 
Hebrews ndeed, there are accurate and venerable laws pertaining to religion, and innumerable 
precepts which require a most holy life and deliberate choice. But when the Jewish legislator 
forbids the serving all the Gods, and enjoins the worship of one alone, whose portion is Jacob, and 


Digitized by 


Google 



1 NTIL OlMJCTl ON* 


xni 


Israel the line of' his inheritance,and >not only says this, but also omits to add, I thiftk, you shall 
not revile the Gods^ the detestable wickedness and audacity of those in after times, wishing to take, 
away all religious reverence from the multitude, thought that not to worship should foe followed by 
blaspheming the Gods. This you have alone thence derived ; but there is no similitude in any" 
thing else between you and them. Hence, from the innovation of the Hebrews, you have seized 
blasphemy towards the venerable Gods; but from our religion you have cast aside reverence to 
every nature more excellent than man, and the love of paternal institute ” 

u So great an apprehension indeed, says Dr. StjUingfleet,* had the Heathens of the necessity of 
appropriate acts of divine worship , that some of them have chosen to die, rather than to give them 
to what they did not believe to be God. We have a remarkable story to this purpose in Arrian 
and Curtius* concerning Callisthenes. Alexander arriving at that degree of vanity, as to desire 
to have divine worship given him, and the matter being started out of design among the courtiers, 
either by Anaxarchus, as Arrian, or Cleo the Sicilian, as Curtius says; and the way of doing it 
proposed, viz. by incense and prostration; Callisthenes vehemently opposed it, as that which 
would confound the difference of human and divine worship , which had been preserved inviolable 
among them. The worship of the Gods had been kept up in temples, with altars, and images, and 
sacrifices, and hymns, and prostrations, and such like; but it is by no means fitting , says he,ybr 
us to confound these things , either by lifting up men to the honours of the Gods, or depressing the 
Gods to the honours of men. For neither would Alexander suffer any man to usurp his royal dig¬ 
nity by the votes of men ; how much more justly may the Gods disdain for any man to take then- 
honours to himself. And it appears by Plutarch , 1 that the Greeks thought it a mean and base - 
thing for any of them, when sent on an embassy to the kings of Persia, to prostrate themselves 
before them, because this was only allowed among them in divine adoration. Therefore, says he, 
when Pelopidas and Ismenias were sent to Artaxerxes, Pelopidas did nothing unworthy, but 
•Ismenias let fall his ring to the ground, and stooping for that was thought to make his adoration; 
which was altogether as good a shift as the Jesuits advising the crucifix to be held in the Mandarins’ 
hands while they made their adorations in the Heathen temples in China. 

“ Conon 4 also refused to make his adoration , as a disgrace to his city; and Isocrates’ accuses 

1 Answer to Catholics no Idolaters Lond. 1676. p. 211. 

* Arrian, de Exped. Alex. 1. 4. et Curt. lib. 8. 

3 Vit. Artaxerx. iElian. Var. hist. lib. 1. c. tl. 

* Justin, lib. 6. 

5 Panegyr. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



xxxfi 


INTRODUCTION. 


the Persians for doing it, because herein they shewed , that they despised the Gods rather than men , 
by prostituting their honours to their princes . Herodotus* mentions Sperchius and Bulis, who 
could not with the greatest violence be brought to give adoration to Xerxes, because it was against 
the law of their country to give divine honour to men .* And Valerius Maximus* says, the Athe¬ 
nians put Timagoras to death for doing it; so strong an apprehension had possessed them, that 
the manner of worship which they used to their Gods, should be preserved sacred and inviolable.” 
The philosopher Sallust also in his treatise On the Gods and the World says , t( It is not unreasona¬ 
ble to suppose that impiety is a species of punishment, and that those who have had a knowledge 
of the Gods, and yet despised them, will in another life be deprived of this knowledge. And it is 
requisite to make the punishment of those who have honoured their kings as Gods to consist in 
being expelled from the Gods /’ 1 

When the ineffable transcendency of the first God, which was considered as the grand principle 
in the Heathen theology * by its most ancient promulgators Orpheus, Pythagoras, and Plato, was 
forgotten, this oblivion was doubtless the principal cause of dead men being deified by the Pagans. 
Had they properly directed their attention to this transcendency they would have perceived it to be 
so immense as to surpass eternity, infinity, self-subsistence, and even essence itself, and that these 
in reality belong to those venerable natures which are as it were first unfolded into light from the 
unfathomable depths of that truly mystic unknown, about which all knowledge is refunded into 
ignorance. For as Simplicius justly observes, “ It is requisite that he who ascends to the princi¬ 
ple of things should investigate whether it is possible there can be any thing better than the sup¬ 
posed principle; and if something more excellent is found, the same enquiry should again be 
made respecting that, till we arrive at the highest conceptions, than which we have no longer any 
more venerable. Nor should we stop in our ascent till we find this to be the case. For there is 
no occasion to fear that our progression will be through an unsubstantial void, by conceiving some¬ 
thing about the first principles which is greater and more transcendent than their nature. For it is 
not possible for our conceptions to take such a mighty leap as to equal, and much less to pass 
beyoud the dignity of the first principles of things.” He adds, u This therefore is one and the best 
extension [of ihe soul] to [the highest] God, and is as much as possible irreprehensible; vi*. to 
kpow firmly, that by ascribing to him the most venerable excellencies we can conceive, and the 
most holy and primary names and things, we ascribe nothing to him which is suitable to his dignity. 

1 Lib. r. 

1 Lib. 6-Cap. 3. 

J Kto xo Si Iiiof inrai t$Sn%v ovx #*««;, Tovc yaf yrorraf Oiov(, x«» xrtTafp«w«fTa;, ftAoym n trtfw xat rnt ywvw; 
wit ifirfrtt, rtu; tnvrmn fian'ktaf Sttvg rtfAiravraf, tlu t*it iixnr avrwy mi n<rtu run Stun fxvirm. Cap. 18 . 


Digitized by boo le 



INTRODUCTION. 


xxxiii 




It is sufficient however, to procure our pardon [for the attempt,] that we can attribute to him 
nothing superior /’ 1 If it is not possible therefore to form any ideas equal to the dignity of the 
immediate progeny of the ineffable, t. e. of the first principles of things, how much less can our 
conceptions reach that thrice unknown darkness, in the reverential language of the Egyptians,* 
which is even beyond these i Had the Heathens therefore considered as they ought this trans¬ 
cendency of the supreme God, they would never have presumed to equalize the human with the 
divine nature, and consequently would never have worshipped men as Gods. Their theology, 
however, is not to be accused as the cause of this impiety, but their forgetfulness of the sub- 
limest of its dogmas, and the confusion with which this oblivion was necessarily attended. 


In the last place, I wish to adduce a few respectable testimonies to prove that statues were not 
considered nor worshipped by any of the intelligent Heathens as Gods, but as the resemblances of 
the Gods, as auxiliaries to the recollection of a divine nature, and the means of procuring its assist¬ 
ance and favour. For this purpose, I shall first present the reader with what the philosopher 
Sallust says concerning sacrifices and the honours which were paid to the divinities, in his golden 
treatise On the Gods and the World. u The honours, says he, which we pay to the Gods are per¬ 
formed for the sake of our advantage; and since the providence of the Gods is every where 
extended, a certain habitude or fitness'is all that is requisite in order to receive their beneficent 
communications. But all habitude is produced through imitation and similitude. Hence temples 
imitate the heaveris, but altars the earth ; statues resemble life, and on this account they are similar 
to animals; prayers imitate that which is intellectual; but characters superior ineffable powers; 
herbs and stones resemble matter; and animals which are sacrificed the irrational life of our souls. 
But from all these nothing happens to the Gods beyond w'hat they already possess; for what acces¬ 
sion can be made to a divine nature ? But 'a conjunction with our souls and the Gods is by these 
means produced. 

** I think however, it will be proper to add a few things concerning sacrifices. And in the first 


* K*4 xf* 1 TOf tvt ra( aya^airoyra fnruy, i< ivrarot tirat n xpurrry mg vmnBumg **' 

fttrifv, twg ay ug rag axforarap moiag txduffxn, *rr ov«n aipaonpag i^o^rr sum fxn cm<rai my ayafiartr, Ovii yap tvlafanor pxn 
uiytp/barwfAiy, pAii^oya riya mi v*§ g/Sotmra rag rpvrag apyag xtpi avrwy tmwvrtg. Ov yap ivyaroy mXixov toy mitffxa minrai rag 
f}(juri{ag moiag f wg *a{i<rw9rir*i rip afia run vpwrwy afttry, tv Xiy« not vxiprmvar pxia yaf avm rpog 9m ayaraeig aptrm, mi vg 
ivyaroy avrairrog. Kat wv moovpxty ayaivr ra cipxtorara 9 %ai ayiwrara 9 mi vpwrovfya, mi orofxara, nai rgaypxara avrw afar i9nrag 
01 Sty at fitf&aiag, on fxnia ayariitimpAty a(m* agiui It n/uuv tig <rvyyywfxny t to ryjn ixtiwr vriprtpoy, Simplic. in Epiet. 

Enchir. p. 207. Lond. 1670. 8vo. 

* Of the first principle, says Dama 9 cius (in M. S. the Egyptians said notliing, but celebrated it as 

a darkness beyond all intellectual conception, a thrice unknown darkness, rpwm apx 1 ** orog v*tp mtv 

y*l<ny, «nt0T0 g ayrmrrov, rpig rovro **if *fxi {*ng, 

Proc. Vol. I. e 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



XXXIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


place, since we possess every thing from the Gods, and it is but just to offer the first fruits of gifts 
to the givers ; hence, of our possessions we offer the first fruits through consecrated gifts ; of our 
bodies through ornaments ; and of our life through sacrifices. Besides, without sacrihces, prayers 
are words only ; but accompanied with sacrifices they become animated words; the words indeed 
corroborating life, but life animating the words. Add too, that the felicity of ever) thing is its 
proper perfection ; but the proper perfection of every thing consists in a conjunction with its cause. 
And on this account we pray that we may be conjoined with the Gods. Since therefore life pri¬ 
marily subsists in the Gods, and there is also a certain human life, but the latter desires to be 
united to the former, a medium is required ; for natures much distant from each other cannot be 
conjoined without a medium. And it is necessary that the medium should be similar to the con¬ 
nected natures. Life therefore must necessarily be the medium of lifeand hence men of the 
present day that are happy, and all the ancients, have sacrificed animals. And this indeed not rashly, 
but in a manner accommodated to every God, with many other ceremonies respecting the cultiva¬ 
tion of divinity /* 1 

In the next place, tlie elegant Maximus Tyrius admirably observes concerning the worship of 
statues 1 as follows : “ It appears to me that as external discourse has no need, in order to its com¬ 
position, of certain Phoenician, or Ionian, or Attic, or Assyrian, or Egyptian characters, but human 
imbecility devised these marks, in which inserting its dulness, it recovers from them its memory ; 
in like manner a divine nature has no need of statues or altars; but human nature being very imbe¬ 
cile, and as much distant from divinity as earth from heaven, devised these symbols, in w hich it 
inserted the names and the renown of the Gods. Those, therefore, whose memory is robust, and 
who are able, by directly extending their soul to heaven, to meet with divinity, have, perhaps , 3 no 
need of statues. This race is, however, rare among men, and in a whole nation you will not find 
one who recollects divinity, and who is not in want of this kind of assistance, which resembles that 
devised by writing masters for boys, who give them obscure marks as copies; by writing over 

* See chap. 15 and 16, of my translation of this excellent work. 

1 See Vol. 2 of my translation of his Dissertations, Dissertat. 38, the title of which is, u Whether statues 
should be dedicated to the Gods." 

3 The philosopher Isidorus was a man of this description, as we are informed by Damascius in the extracts 
from his life preserved by Photius. For he says of him : wrt t» ayaXuaT* xpooxwuv *0»xw; v, «xx» nin «t/rot* Toi/f 

$tov( itfAtroc, tta-uf xpurro/xtroug ovx tv aJvroif, aXX* n avrw rut axoppnrw, o, n xort tort vt if vavTiXot/f ayyoxria;' ovy ,*» avrovc 
ttro TWowTovf ovra; ; tpwrt ittvp axoppnrw xat vovr?' xctt ng it aXXof n ayyvoro; xat o tpotf ; xat rtva rotrro f afxtv , toaotv ot xttpm* 

9nrte ttwnv it aiuvarov, xat von oat yt ovln fMtteov paitor, i. e. “ He was not willing to adore statues, but approached to 
the Gods themselves, who are inwardly concealed not in adyta, but in the occult itself, whatever it may be of all¬ 
perfect ignorance. How therefore to them being such did he approach ? Through vehement love, this also 
being occult. And what else indeed, could conduct him to them than a love which is also unknown? What 
my meaning is those who have experienced this love know; but it is impossible to reveal it by words, and it is 
no less difficult to understand what it is.” 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


XXXV 


which, their hand being guided by that of the master, they become, through memory, accustomed 
to the art. It appears to me therefore, that legislators devised these statues for men, as if for a 
certain kind of boys, as tokens of the honour which should be paid to divinity, and a certain manu- 
duction as it were and path to reminiscence. 

i€ Of statues however, there is neither one law, nor one mode, nor one art, nor oue matter. For 
the Greeks think it fit to honour the Gods from things the most beautiful in the earth, from a pure 
matter, the human form, and accurate art: and their opinion is not irrational who fashion statues in 
the human resemblance. For if the human soul is most near and most similar to divinity, it is not 
reasonable to suppose that divinity would invest that which is most similar to himself with a most 
deformed body, but rather w ith one which would be an easy vehicle to immortal souls, light, and 
adapted to motion. For this alone, of all the bodies on the earth, raises its summit on high, is 
magnificent, superb, and full of symmetry, neither astonishing through its magnitude, nor terrible 
through its strength, nor moved with difficulty through its weight, nor slippery through its smooth¬ 
ness, nor repercussive through its hardness, nor groveling through its coldness, nor precipitate 
through its heat, nor inclined to swim through its laxity, nor feeding on raw flesh through its fero¬ 
city, nor on grass through its imbecility; but is harmonically composed for its proper works, and 
is dreadful to timid animals, but mild to such as are brave. It is also adapted to walk by nature, 
but winged by reason, capable of swimming by art, feeds on corn and fruits, and cultivates tha 
earth, is of a good colour, stands firm, has a pleasing countenance, and a graceful beard. Iu the 
resemblance of such a body, the Greeks think fit to honour the Gods.” 

He then observes, u that w ith respect to the Barbarians, all of them in like manner admit the 
subsistence of divinity, but different nations among these adopt different symbols.” After which he 
adds, “ O many and all-various statues! of which some are fashioned by art, and others are 
embraced through indigence: some are honoured through utility, and others are venerated through 
the astonishment which they excite; some are considered as divine through their magnitude, and 
others are celebrated for their beauty * There is not indeed any race of men, neither Barbarian nor 
Grecian, neither maritime nor continental, neither living a pastoral life, uor dwelling in cities, which 
can endure to be without some symbols of the honour of the Gods. How, therefore, shall any one 
discuss the question whether it is proper that statues of the Gods should be fabricated or not ? For 
if we were to give laws to other men recently sprung from the earth, and dwelling beyond our 
boundaries and our air, or who were fashioned by a certain Prometheus, ignorant of life, and law, 
and reason, it might perhaps demand consideration, whether this race should be permitted to adore 
these spontaneous statues alone, which are not fashioned from ivory or gold, and which are neither 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



XX XVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


oak* nor cedars, nor rivers, nor birds, but the rising sun, the splendid moon, the variegated heaven, 
the earth itself and the air, all fire and all water; or shall we constrain these men also to the neces¬ 
sity of honouring wood, or stones or images ? If, however, this is the common law of all men, let 
us make no innovations, let us admit the conceptions concerning the Gods, and preserve their sym¬ 
bols as well as their names. 

“ For divinity indeed, the father and fabricator of all things, is more ancient than the sun and the 
heavens, more excellent than time and eternity, and every flowing nature, and is a legislator with¬ 
out law, ineffable by voice, and invisible by the eyes. Not being able, however, to comprehend his 
essence, we apply for assistance to words and names, to animals, and figures of gold and ivory and 
silver, to plants and rivers, to the summits of mountains, and to streams of water; desiring indeed 
to understand his nature, but through imbecility calling him by the names of such things as appear 
to us to be beautiful. And in thus acting, we are affected in the same manner as lovers, who are 
delighted with surveying the images of the objects of their love, and with recollecting the lyre, the 
dart, and the seat of these, the circus in which they ran, and every thing in short, which excites the 
memory of the beloved object. What then remains for me to investigate and determine respecting 
statues ? only to admit the subsistence of deity. But if the art of Phidias excites the Greeks to the 
recollection of divinity, honour to animals the Egyptians, a river others, and fire others, I do not 
condemn the dissonance : let them only koow, let them only love, let them only be mindful of the 
object they adore.” 

With respect to the worship of animals, Plutarch apologizes for it in the following excellent man¬ 
ner in his treatise On Isis and Osiris. 

“ It now remains that we should speak of the utility of these animals to man, and of their sym¬ 
bolical meaning ; some of them partaking of one of these only, but many of them of both. It is 
evident therefore that the Egyptians worshipped the ox, the sheep, and the ichneumon, on account 
of their use and benefit, as the Lemnians did larks, for discovering the eggs of caterpillars and 
breaking them; and the Thessalians storks, because, as their land produced abundance of ser¬ 
pents, the storks destroyed all of them as soon as they appeared. Hence also they enacted a law, 
that whoever killed a stork should be banished. But the Egyptians honoured the asp, the weezle, 
and the beetle, in consequence of observing in them certain dark resemblances of the power of the 
Gods, like that of the sun in drops of water. For at present, many believe and assert that the 
weezle engenders by the ear, and brings forth by the mouth, being thus an image of the generation 
of reason, [or the productive principle of things.] But the geous of beetles has no female; and 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



INTRODUCTION. 


xxxvii 


ail the males emit their sperm into a spherical piece of earth, which they roll about thrusting it 
backwards with their hind feet, while they themselves move forward; just as the sun appears to 
revolve in a direction contrary to that of the heavens, in cousequence of moving from west to east. 
They also assimilated the asp to a star, as being exempt from old age, and performing its motions 
unassisted by organs with agility and ease. Nor was the crocodile honoured by them without a 
probable cause; but is said to have been considered by them as a resemblance of divinity, as being 
the only animal that is without a tongue. For the divine reason is unindigent of voice, and proceed¬ 
ing through a silent path, and accompanied with * justice, conducts mortal affairs according to it. 
They also say it is the only animal living in water that has the sight of its eyes covered with a thin 
and transparent film, which descends from his forehead, so that he sees without being seen, which 
is likewise the case with the first God. But iu whatever place the female crocodile may lay her 
eggs, this may with certainty be concluded to be the boundary of the increase of the Nile. For 
not being able to lay their eggs in the water, and fearing to lay them far from it, they have such an 
accurate pre-sensation of futurity, that though they enjoy the benefit of the river in its access, during 
the time of their laying and hatching, yet they preserve their eggs dry and untouched by the water. 
They also lay sixty eggs, are the same number of days in hatching them, and those that are the 
longest lived among them, live just so many years; which number is the first of the measures 
employed by those who are conversant with the heavenly bodies. 

“ Moreover, of those animals that were honoured for both reasons, we have before spoken of the 
dog. But the ibis, killing indeed all deadly reptiles, was the first that taught men the use of medi¬ 
cal evacuation, in consequence of observing that she is after this manner washed and purified by 
herself. Those priests also, that are most attentive to the laws of sacred rites, when they conse¬ 
crate water for lustration, fetch it from that place where the ibis had been drinking; for she will 
neither drink nor come near unwholesome or infected water; but with the distance of her feet from 
each other, and her bill she makes an equilateral triangle. Farther still, the variety and mixture of 
her black wings about the white represents the moon when she is gibbous. 

“ We ought not, however, to wonder'if the Egyptians love such slender similitudes, since the 
Greeks also, both in their pictures and statues, employ many such like resemblances of the Gods. 
Thus in Crete, there was a statue of Jupiter without ears. For it is fit that he who is the ruler 
and lord of all things, should bear no one.* Phidias also placed a dragon by the statue of 

* Instead of I read 

* j. e. Should be perfectly impartial 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


xxxviii 

Minerva! and a snail by that of Venus at Elis, to show that virgins require a guard, and that keep¬ 
ing at home and silence become married women. But the trident of Neptune is a symbol of the 
third region of the world, which the sea possesses, having an arrangement after the heavens and the 
air. Hence also, they thus denominated Ampbitrite and the Tritons. The Pythagoreans likewise 
adorned numbers and figures with the appellations of the Gods. For they called the equilateral 
triangle Minerva Coryphagenes, or begotten from the summit, and Tritogeneia, because it is divided 
by three perpendiculars drawn from the three angles. But they calied the one Apollo, being per¬ 
suaded to this by the obvious meaning of the word Apollo [which signifies a privation of multi¬ 
tude] and by the simplicity of the monad. 1 The duad they denominated strife and audacity ; and 
the triad justice. For since injuring and being injured are two extremes subsisting according to 
excess and defect, justice through equality has a situation in the middle. But what is called the 
tetractys, being the number 36, was, as is reported, their greatest oath, and was denominated the 
world. For this number is formed from the composition of the four first even, and the four first 
odd numbers, collected into one sum.* If therefore the most approved of the philosophers did not 
think it proper to neglect or despise any occult signification of a divine nature when they perceived 
it even in things which are inanimate and incorporeal, it appears to me, that they in a still greater 
degree venerated those peculiarities depending on manners which they saw in such natures as had 
sense, and were endued with soul, with passion, and ethical habits. We must embrace therefore, not 
those who honor these kings, but those who reverence divinity through these, as through most clear 
mirrors, and which are produced by nature, in a becoming manner, conceiving them to be the instru* 
ments or the art of the God by whom all things are perpetually adorned. But we ought to think that no 
inanimate being can be more excellent than one that is animated, nor an insensible than a sensitive 
being, not even though some one should collect together all the gold and emeralds in the universe. For 
the divinity is not ingenerated either in colours, or figures, or smoothness; but such things as neither 
ever did, nor are naturally adapted to participate of life, have an allotment more ignoble than that of 
dead bodies. But the nature which lives and^sees, and has the principle of motion from itself, and a 
knowledge of things appropriate and foreign to its being, has certainly derived an efflux and portion 
of that wisdom, which, as Heraclitus says, considers how both itself, and the universe is governed, 
Hence the divinity is not worse represented in these animals, than in the workmanships of copper 
and stone, which in a similar manner suffer corruption and decay, but are naturally deprived of all 
sense and consciousness. This then I consider a* the best defence that can be given of the adora¬ 
tion of animals by the Egyptians. 

* Instead of owroic as in the original, which is nonsense, it is necessary tq read, as in tfie above 

translation me 

* For 3+4+6+8=30; and l+3+5+7=:16j and 20+16=36, 


Digitized by kjOOQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


xxxix 


Witli respect however to the sacred vestments, those of Isis are of various hues; for her power 
is about matter, which becomes and receives all things, as light and darkness, day and night, fire 
and water, life and death, beginning and end; but those of Osiris are without a shade and have no 
variety of colours, but have one only which is simple and luciform. Hence when the latter hate 
been once used, they are laid aside end preserved; for the intelligible is invisible and intangible. 
But the vestments of Isis are used frequently. For sensible things being in daily use and at hand, 
present us with many developements and views of their different mutations: but the intellectual 
perception of that which i 9 intelligible, genuine, and holy, luminously darting through the soul like 
a coruscation* is attended with a simultaneous contact and vision of its object. Hence Plato and 
Aristotle call this part of philosophy epoptic or intuitive, indicating that those who have through 
the exercise of the reasoning power soared beyond these doxastic, mingled and all-various natures, 
raise themselves to that first, simple, and immaterial principle, and passing into contact with the 
pure truth which subsists about it, they consider themselves as having at length obtained the end 
of philosophy. 1 And that which the present devoted and veiled priests obscurely manifest with 
great reverence and caution is that this God is the ruler and prince of the dead, and is not different 
from that divinity who is called by the Greeks Hades and Pluto, the truth of which assertion not 
being understood, disturbs the multitude, who suspect that the truly sacred and holy Osiris dwells 
in and under ihe earth, where the bodies of those are concealed who appear to have obtained all 

end of their being. But he indeed himself is at the remotest distance from the earth, unstained, 

\ 

unpolluted, and pure from every essence that receives corruption and death. The souls of men 
however, being here encompassed with bodies and passions, cannot participate of divinity except 
as of an obscure dream by intellectual contact through philosophy. But when they are liberated 
from the body, and pass into the invisible, impassive, and pure region, this God is then their leader 
and king, from whom they depend, insatiably beholding him, and desiring to survey that beauty 
which cannot be expressed or uttered by men; and which Isis, as the ancient discourse evincet, 
always loving, pursuing, and enjoying fills such things in these lower regions as participate of gene* 
ration with every thing beautiful and good.” 

And lastly, the Emperor Julian, in a fragment of an Oration or Epistle on the duties of a priest* 
has the following remarks on religiously venerating statues: a Statues and altars, and the preser¬ 
vation of unextinguished fire, and in short, all such particulars, have been established by our fathers 
as symbols of the presence of the Gods; not that we should believe that these symbols are 
Gods, but that through these we should worship the Gods . For since we are connected with body, 

* For ***** *x** v it is necessary to read as in the translation, nx»; «x«* ?**•*>? 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



xl 


INTRODUCTION. 


it is also necessary that our worship of the Gods should be performed in a corporeal manner; but 
they are incorporeal. And they indeed have exhibited to us as the first of statues, that which 
ranks as the second genus of Gods from the first, and which circularly revolves round the whole of 
heaven. 1 Since, however, a corporeal worship cannot even be paid to these, because they are 
naturally unindigent, a third kind of statues was devised on the earth, by the worship of which we 
render the Gods propitious to us. For as those who reverence the images of kings, who are not 
in want of any such reverence, at the same time attract to themselves their benevolence; thus also 
those who venerate the statues of the Gods, who are not in want of any thing, persuade the Gods 
by this veneration to assist and be favourable to them. For alacrity in the performance of things 
b our power is a document of true sanctity; and it is very evident that he who accomplishes the 
former, will in a greater degree possess the latter. But he who despises things in his power, and 
afterwards pretends to desire impossibilities, evidently does not pursue the latter, and overlooks the 
former. For though divinity is not b want of any thing, it does not follow that on this account 
nothbg is to be offered to him. For neither is he in want of celebration through the ministry of 
words. What then ? [Is it therefore reasonable that he should be deprived of this ? By no means. 
Neither therefore is he to be deprived of the honour which is paid him through works; which 
honour has been legally established, not for three, or for three thousand years, but in all precedmg 
ages, among all nations of the earth. 


« But [the Galileans will say,] O! you who have admitted bto your soul every multitude of daemons, 
whom, though according to you they are formless and unfigured, you have fashioned b a corporeal 
resemblance, it is not fit that honour should be paid to divinity through such works. How, then, 
do not we [heathens'] consider as wood and stones those statues which are fashioned by the hands 
of men? O more stupid than even stones themselves! Do you fancy that all men are to be 
drawn by the nose as you are drawn by execrable damans, so as to think that the artificial resets 
blances of the Gods are the Gods themselves# Looking therefore to the resemblances of the 
Gods, we do not think them to be either stones or wood ; for neither do we think that the Gods 
are these resemblances; since neither do we say that royal images are wood, or stone, or brass, nor 
that they are the kings themselves, but the images of kings. Whoever, therefore, loves his king, 
beholds with pleasure the image of his kbg; whoever loves his child is delighted with his image; 
and whoever loves his father surveys bis image with delight. 1 Hence also, be who is a lover of 


» Meaning those divine bodies the celestial orbs, which in consequence of participating a divine life from the 

pended, may be very properly called secondary Gods. 
extract, in his answer to a book entitled Catholics no Idolaters, and 

c alls Julian the devout emperor. 


incorporeal powers from which they are sus 
* Dr. Stillingfleet quotes this part of the 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


Xti 

divinity gladly surveys the statues and images of the Gods; at the same time venerating and fearing 
with a holy dread the Gods who invisibly behold him. 1 

The Catholics have employed arguments similar to these, in defence of the reverence which they 
pay to the images of their saints. Indeed, it is the doctrine of the Church of England/ that the 

1 “ Dio Chrysostome (says Dr. Stillingfleet in the before-cited work, p. 414) at large debates the case about 
images, in bis Olympic Oration; wherein he first shows, that all men have a natural apprehension of one 
supreme God the father of all things; and that this God was represented by the statue made by Phidias of 
Jupiter Olympius, for so he said wap* p m before whom we now are; and then describes him to be the king, 
ruler, and father of all, both Gods and men. This image he calls the most blessed, the most excellent, the most 
beautiful, the most beloved image of God. He says there are four ways of coming to the knowledge of God, by 
nature, by the instructions of the poets, by the laws, and by images; but neither poets, nor lawgivers, nor arti¬ 
ficers were the best interpreters of the deity, but only the philosophers who both understood and explained the 
divine nature most truly and perfectly. After this, he supposes Phidias to be called to account for making such 
an image of God, as unworthy of him; when Iphitus, Lycurgus, and the old Eleans, made none at all of him, as 
being out of the power of man to express his nature. To this Phidias replies, that no man can express mind and 
understanding by figures, or colours, and therefore they are forced to fly to that in which the soul inhabits, and 
from thence they attribute the seat of wisdom and reason to God, having nothing better to represent him by. 
And by that means joining power and art together, they endeavour by something which may be seen and painted, 
to represent that which is invisible and inexpressible. But it may be said, we had better then have no image or 
representation of him at all. No, says he; for mankind doth not love to worship God at a distance, but to com* 
near and feel him, and with assurance to sacrifice to him and crown him. like children newly weaned from 
their parents, who put out their hands towards them in their dreams as if they were still present; so do men out 
of the sense of God’s goodness and their relation to him, love to have him represented as present with them, and 
so to converse with him. Thence have come all the [representations of God among the barbarous nations, in 
mountains, and trees, and stones.* 9 

The same conceptions also about statues are entertained by the Brachmans in Benares on the Ganges. For 
Monsieur Bernier when he was at their university, and was discoursing with one of the most learned men among 
them, proposed to him the question about the adoration of their idols, and reproaching him with it as a thing 
very unreasonable, received from him this remarkable answer: “ We have indeed in our temples many different 
statues, as those of Brahma, Mahaden, Genick, and Gavani, who are some of the chief and most perfect Deutas 
(or Deities); and we have also many others of less perfection, to whom we pay great honour, prostrating our¬ 
selves before them, and presenting them flowers, rice, oyles, saffron, and the like, with much ceremony. But 
we do not believe these statues to be Brahma or Bechen, &c. themselves, but only their images and representa¬ 
tions, and we only give them that honour on account of the beings they represent They are in pur temples, 
because it is necessary in order to pray well, to have something before our eyes that may fix the mind. And 
when we pray, it is not the statue we pray to, but he that is represented by it.” The Brahmans have also ano- 
ther way of defending their worship of statues, of which the same author gives the following account: “ That 
God, or that sovereign being whom they call Achar (immutable) has produced or drawn out of his own substance, 
not only souls, but also whatever is material and corporeal in the universe, so that all things in the world are 
but one and the same thing with God himself, as all numbers are but one and the same unity repeated.” Ber¬ 
nier Memoires, tome 3. p. 171.178. 

From this latter extract it appears that the Brachmans as well as the ancient Egyptians, believe that the 
supreme principle is all things. According to the best of the Platonists likewise, this principle is all things prior 
to all . For by being the one, it is all things after the most simple manner, i. e. so as to transcend all multitude. 

* See its Homilies, tome 3. p. 46. 

Proc, Vol. J, f 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



I N TRODUCT10N# 


xlii 

Catholics form the same opinions of the saints whose images they worship as the Heathens did of 
their Gods ; and employ the same outward rites in honouring their images, as the Heathens did 
in the religious veneration of their statues. Thus as the Heathens had their tutelar Gods , such as 
were Belus to the Babylonians and Assyrians, Osiris and Isis to the Egyptians, and V ulcan to 
.the Lemnians, thus also the Catholics attribute the defence of certain countries to certain saints. 
Have not the saints also to whom the safeguard of particular cities is committed, the same office 
as the Dii Presides of the Heathens? Such as were at Delphi, Apollo; at Athens, Minerva; 
at Carthage, Juno ; and at Rome, Quirinus. And do not the saints to whom churches are built 
and altars erected correspond to the Dii Patroni of the Heathens? Such as were in the Capitol, 
Jupiter, in the temple at Paphos, Venus, in the temple of Ephesus, Diana. Are not likewise, our 
Lady of Walsingham, our Lady of Ipswich, our Lady of Wilsdon, and the like, imitations of Diana 
Agrotera, Diana Coriphea, Diana Ephesia, Venus Cypria, Venus Paphia, Venus Gnidia, and the 
like ? The Catholics too, have substituted for the iharine deities Neptune, Triton, Nereus, Castor 
and Pollux, Venus, &c. Saint Christopher, Saint Clement, and others, and especially our Lady, 
as she is called by them, to whom seamen sing Ave Maris stella . Neither has the fire escaped 
their imitation of the Pagans. For instead of Vulcan and Vesta, the inspective guardians of fire 
according to the Heathens, the Catholics have substituted Saint Agatha, on the day of whose nati¬ 
vity they make letters for the purpose of extinguishing fire. Every artificer likewise and profession 
has a special saint in the place of a presiding God. Thus scholars have Saint Nicholas and Saint 
Gregory; painters Saint Luke; nor are soldiers in want of a saint corresponding to Mars, nor lovers 
of one who is a substitute for Venus. 

All diseases too have their special saints instead of Gods, who are invoked as possessing a healing 
power. Thus the venereal disease has Saint Roche; the falling Sickness Saint Cornelius, the tooth- 
ach Saint Apollin, &c. Beasts and cattle also have their presiding saints: for Saint Loy (says the 
Homily) is the horse-leach, and Saint Antony the swineherd, &c. The Homily adds, 1 “ that in 
many points the Papists exceed the Gentiles in idolatry, and particularly in honouring and wor¬ 
shipping the relics and bones of saints, which prove that they be mortal men and dead, and there¬ 
fore no Gods to be worshipped, which the Gentiles would never confess of their Gods for very 
shame.” Aud after enumerating many ridiculous practices of the Catholics in reference to these 
relics, the Homily concludes with observing, “ that they are not only more wicked than the Gen¬ 
tile idolaters, but also no wiser than asses, horses, and mules, w'hich have no understanding.” 

In the second place the Homilies shew 1 that the rites and ceremonies of the Papists in honour 
* Tome 3. p. 54. a p. 49* 


Digitized by Looq le 



INTRODUCTION. 


xlitf 


ing and worshipping their images or saints, are the same with the rites of the Pagans. “ This, 
say they, is evident in their pilgrimages to visit images which had more holiness and virtue in them 
than others. In their candle-religion, burning incense, offering up gold to images, hanging up 
crutches, chairs, and ships, legs, arm9, and whole men and women of war, before images, as though 
by them, or saints (as they say) they were delivered from lameness, sickness, captivity, or shipwrack.” 
In spreading abroad after the manner of the Heathens, the miracles that have accompanied images^ 
“ Such an image was sent from heaven, like the Palladium, or Diana of the Ephesians. Such an 
image was brought by angels. Such a one came itself far from the east to the west, as Dame 
Fortune fled to Rome. Some images though they were hard and stony, yet for tender-heart and 
pity wept. Some spake more monstrously than ever did Balaam’s ass, who had life and breath 
in him. Such a cripple came and saluted this saint of oak, and by and by he was made whole, 
and here hangeth his crutch. Such a one in a tempest vowed to Saint Christopher, and scaped, and 
behold here is his ship of war. Such a one, by Saint Leonard’s help, brake out of prison, and eee 
where his fetters hang. And infinite thousands more miracles by like, or more shameless lies were 
reported.” 

After all this, I appeal to every intelligent reader, whether the religion of the Heathens, accord¬ 
ing to its genuine purity as delineated in this Introduction, and as professed and promulgated by 
the best and wisest men of antiquity, is not infinitely preferable to that of the Catholics i And 
whether it is not more holy to reverence beings the immediate progeny of the ineffable principle of 
all things, and which are eternally centered and rooted in him; and to believe that in reverencing 
these, we at the same time reverence the ineffable , because they partake of his nature, and that 
through these as media we become united with him, 1 than to reverence men, and the images of 
men, many of whom when living, were the disgrace of human nature ? The Church of England as 
we see prefers the Pagans to the Papists; and I trust that every other sect of Protestant Christians 
will unanimously subscribe to her decision. And thus much in defence of the theology of Plato, 
and the religious worship of the Heathens, 

It now remains that I should speak of the following work, of its author, and the translation. The 
work itself then is a scientific developement of the deiform processions from the ineffable principle 

1 The ineffable principle of things, as is demonstrated in the Elements of Theology in this work, is beyond 
self-subsistence. Hence the first ineffable evolution from him consists of self-subsistent natures. As we 
therefore are only the dregs of the rational nature, many media are necessary to conjoin us with a principle so 
immensely exalted above us. And these media are the golden chain of powers that have deified summits, or 
that have the ineffable united with the efiable. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


Xhf 

of things, and this, as it appears to me in the greatest perfection possible to man. For die reason¬ 
ing is every where consummately accurate, and deduced from self-evident principles; and the 
conclusions are the result of what Plato powerfully calls geometrical necessities. To the reader 
of this work indeed, who has not been properly disciplined in Eleatic and Academic studies, and 
who has not a genius naturally adapted to such abstruse speculations, it will doubtless appear to 
be perfectly unintelligible, and in the language of critical cant, nothing but jargon and revery. 
This, however, is what Plato the great hierophant of this theology predicted would be the case, if 
ever it was unfolded to the multitude at large. “ For as it appears to me, says he, there are 
scarcely any particulars which will be considered by the multitude more ridiculous than these; nor 
again , any which will appear more wonderful and enthusiastic to those who are naturally adapted 
to perceive them." 1 * 3 

In his seventh epistle also he observes a9 follows: “ Thus much, however, I shall say respecting 
all those who either have written or shall write, affirming that they know those things which are 
the objects of my study (whether they have heard them from me or from others, or whether they 
have discovered them themselves) that they have not heard any thing about these things conform¬ 
able to my opinion: for I never have written nor ever shall write about them.* For a thing of this 
kind cannot be expressed by words like other disciplines, but by long familiarity, and living in 
conjunction with the thing itself, a light* as it were leaping from a fire will on a sudden be enkindled 
in the soul, and there itself nourish itself/’ And shortly after he adds; “ But if it appeared to me 
that the particulars of which I am speaking could be sufficiently communicated to the multitude 
by writing or speech, what could we accomplish more beautiful in life than to impart a mighty 
benefit to mankind, and lead an intelligible nature into light, so as to be obvious to all men l I 
think, however, that an attempt of this kind would only be beneficial to a few, who from some 
small vestiges previously demonstrated are themselves able to discover these abstruse particulars. 
But with respect to the rest of mankind, some it will fill with a contempt by no means elegant, and 
others with a lofty and arrogant hope that they shall now learn certain venerable things/’ 4 

1 2x«Jov yag tfx 01 loxu, ovx im nurwr ir p*s rov? ToXXoi/f %arayt\aerrrtpa axovr/uu tra, ov t* av rpvs tvpuns Oaufxaeronpa rt 

xat nSovetaenxvnpa, Epist. 2. 

* Plato means by this, that he has never written perspicuously about intelligible* or true beings, the proper 
objects of intellect. 

3 This light is a thing of a very different kind from that which is produced by the evidence arising from 
truths perceptible by the multitude, as those who have experienced it well know. 

♦ T<xrov$i ya npt waynuy tyv fgafaiy rwv yaypaforvy xa* ypa^arnur, oeoi farty ntiyat x*gi wy tyw evovlafw, nr* i/uov 
awiK09T«c, nr' aXXay, n$* vs ivgorri; a urn, rovrovs owe ten Kara yt my ifxnf lofay *tpi row vpoy/uaro? uraariy ovJir. ov% ouy ajuwy 
yi nipt avrvy ten evyypafxfxa, ovtt fxn iron ymrar p nroy yap wSafJM; tertv, vs aXka fxa 9 nfxara, aXX' n woXAnj evywetas yiyiofxwts 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



INTRODUCTION* 


xlv 

The prediction of Plato therefore, hat been but too truly fulfilled hi the fate which has attended 
the writings of the best of his disciples, among whom Proclus certainly maintains the most distin¬ 
guished rank. This indeed, these disciples well knew would be the case ; but perceiving that the 
hand of Barbaric and despotic power was about to destroy the schools of the philosophers, and 
foreseeing that dreadful night of ignorance and folly which succeeded so nefarious an undertaking, 
they benevolently disclosed in as luminous a manner as the subject would permit, the arcana of 
their master’s doctrines, thereby, as Plato expresses it, giving assistance to Philosophy, and also 
preserving it as a paternal and immortal inheritance, to the latest posterity. Proclus in the first 
book of this work has enumerated the requisites which a student of it ought to possess ; and it is 
most certain that he who does not possess them, will never fathom the depths of this theology, or 
perceive his mind irradiated with that admirable light, mentioned by Plato in the foregoing 
extract, and which is only to be seen by that eye of the soul which is better worth saving than ten 
thousand corporeal eyes. 

With respect to the diction of Proclus in this work, its general character is that of purity, 
clearness, copiousness, and magnificence; so that even the fastidious critic, who considers every 
Greek writer as partially barbarous who lived after the fall of the Macedonian empire, must, how¬ 
ever unwillingly, be forced to acknowledge that Proclus is a splendid exception. The sagacious 
Kepler, whose decision on this subject, outweighs in my opinion, that of a swarm of modern 
critics, after having made a long extract from the commentaries of Proclus on Euclid, gives the 
following animated encomium of his diction. “ Oratio Suit ipsi torrentis instar, ripas inundans, et 
coeca dubitationum vada gurgitesque occultans, dum mens plena majestatis tantarum rerum, 
luctatur in angustiis linguae, et conclusio nunquam sibi ipsi verborum copi& satisfaciens, proposi- 
tionum simplicitatem excedit.” i. e. “ His language flows like a torrent, inundating its banks, and 
hiding the dark fords and whirlpools of doubts, while his mind full of the majesty of things of such 
a magnitude, struggles in the straits of language, and the conclusion never satisfying him, exceeds 
by the copia of words, the simplicity of the propositions.” If we omit what Kepler here says 
about the struggle of the mind of Proclus, ahd his never being satisfied with the conclusion, the 
rest of his eulogy is equally applicable to the style of the present work, so far as it is possible for 
the beauties of diction to be combined with the rigid accuracy of geometrical reasoning. 


«ffi ro ipayp* mvro f xat to v <rv{nt 9 * fa fine otot am irvpog xn&mrarrog (lege miJnw) t(a$9tt qmg 9 »r rtf ympAMtot aur© tavm 

qfii rptfti, _Et h fxot tfaittro ypavrta 9 * mat mg utcu ttpog rovg iroXXov; xat pira, ft rovrov xaXXtov tTiirpaxr' at *ifjut it reu fitm 9 « 

rote T« atOpunrotTi /xtya ofiXo; ypa-fat, xat mt fvatt tig fwg rot g wa<ri TgoTayaytit ; aXX* out* av9pwmig nyovfxai mt itciyju^nait wif! 
avrwt y»yo fxttnt ayaBot, ti nait oXtyo tg, ovoaot ivtar 01 at tv put avroi iia fxmpag ttlufaf rvt n it§ aXXtor, to vg put uarafptPirmg 
•uxo p9wg ifMT'htcutt atoviapxij ifjtfxtXougf TOvg it y+nXnf xat %avtng »X*tlo wg rtfxt* arra fxtfxt$9nxorag. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


xlvi 

With respect to the life of Proclus, it has been written with great elegance by his disciple Mari- 
nus; and a translation of it by me prefixed to my version of the commentaries of Proclus was pub¬ 
lished in 1788. From the edition of that life therefore, by Fabricius, die following particulars 
relative to this very extraordinary man are extracted, for the information of the reader who may not 
have the translation of it in his possession. According to the accurate chronology then of 
Fabricius, Proclus was born at Byzantium in die year of Christ 412, on the 6th of the Ides 
of February, and died in the one hundred and twenty-fourth year after the reign of the empe¬ 
ror Julian, on the seventeenth day of the Attic Munichion, or the April of the Romans, 
Nicagoras the junior, being at that time the Athenian archon. His father Patricius, and his 
mother Marcella, were both of them of the Lycian nation, and were no less illustrious for their 
virtue than their birth. As soon as he was bom, his parents brought him to their native country 
Xanthus, which was sacred to Apollo. And this, says Marinus, happened to him by a certain divine 
allotment. “ For, he adds, I think it was necessary that be who was to be the leader of all 
sciences, should be nourished and educated under the presiding deity of the Muses/’ The person 
of Proclus was uncommonly beautiful; and he not only possessed all the moral and intellectual 
virtues in the highest perfection, but the vestigies of them also, which are denpminated the physical 
virtues, were clearly seen, says Marinus, in his last and shelly vestment the body. Hence he 
possessed a remarkable acuteness of sensation, and particularly in the most honourable of the 
senses, sight and hearing, which, as Plato says, were imparted by the Gods to men for the purpose 
of philosophizing, and for the well being of the animal life. In the second place, he possessed so 
great a strength of body, that it was neither injured by cold, nor any endurance of labours, though 
these were extreme, both by night and day. In the third place, he was, as we have before observed, 
very beautiful. " For not only, says Marinus, did his body possess great symmetry, but a living 
light as it were beaming from his soul was efflorescent in his body, and shone forth with au admira¬ 
ble splendor, which it is impossible to describe/’ Marinus adds, “ Indeed he was so beautiful, 
that no painter could accurately exhibit his resemblance; and all the pictures of him which were 
circulated, though very beautiful, were very inferior to the beauty of the original.” And in the 
fourth place, he possessed health in such perfection, that he was not ill above twice or thrice in 
the course of so long a life as seventy-five years. 

Such then were the corporeal prerogatives which Proclus possessed, and which may be called 
the forerunners of the forms of perfect virtue. But he possessed in a wonderful manner what 
Plato calls the elements of a philosophic genius. 1 For he had an excellent memory, learned with 
facility, was magnificent and graceful, and the friend and ally of truth, justice, fortitude, and tem-i 

* See the sixth book of the Republic of Plato. 


Digitized by LjOOQie 



INTRODUCTION. 


xlvii 


perance. Haying for a short space of time applied himself in Lycia to grammar, he went to Alex¬ 
andria in Egypt, and was there instructed in rhetoric by Leonas who derived his lineage from 
Isaurus, and in grammar by Orion, whose ancestors discharged the sacerdotal ^office among the 
Egyptians, and who composed elaborate treatises on that art. A certain good fortune however, 
says Marinus, brought him back to the place of his nativity. For on his return his tutelar Goddess 
exhorted him to philosophy, and to visit the Athenian schools. Having therefore, first returned to 
Alexandria and bade farewell to rhetoric, and the other arts which he had formerly studied, he gave 
himself up* to the discourses of the philosophers then resident at Alexandria. Here, he became an 
auditor of Olympiodorus, 1 the most illustrious of philosophers, for the sake of imbibing the doc¬ 
trine of Aristotle; and was instructed in the mathematical disciplines by Hero, a religious man, 
and eminently skilful in teaching .those sciences. Proclus however, not being satisfied with the 
Alexandrian schools, went to Athens, “ with a certain splendid procession, says Marinus, of all elo¬ 
quence and elegance, and attended by the Gods that preside over philosophy, and by beneficent 
daemons. For that the succession of philosophy, might be preserved legitimate and genuine, the 
Gods led him to the city over which its inspective guardian presides.” Hence Proclus was called 
xar f£o%Y)v by way of eminence , the Platonic Successor . At Athens therefore, Proclus fortunately 
met with the first of philosophers, Syrianus,* the son of Philoxenus, who not only much assisted 
him in his studies, but made him his domestic as to other concerns, and the companion of his philo¬ 
sophic life, having found him such an auditor and successor as he had a long time sought for, and one 
who was capable of receiving a multitude of disciplines and divine dogmas. 

In less than two whole years therefore, Proclus read with Syrianus all the works of Aristotle, viz. 
his logic, ethics, politics, physics, and theological science. And being sufficiently instructed in these 
as in certain proteleia , or things preparatory to initiation, and lesser mysteries, Syrianus led hirt* 
to the mystic discipline of Plato, in an orderly progression, and not according to the Chaldean 
oracle with a transcendent foot. He likewise enabled Proclus to survey in conjunction with him, 
says Marinus, truly divine mysteries, with the eyes of his soul free from material darkness, and 
with undefiled intellectual vision. But Proclus employing sleepless exercise and attention, both 

* 

1 This Olympiodorus is not the same with the philosopher of that name whose learned commentaries on cer¬ 
tain dialogues of Plato are extant fn manuscript; as in these, not only Proclus, but Damascius who flourished 
after Proclus is celebrated. 

* This truly great man appears to have been the first who thoroughly penetrated the profundity contained in 
the writings of the more ancient philosophers, contemporary with and prior to Plato, and to have demon¬ 
strated the admirable agreement of their doctrines with each other. Unfortunately but few of his works are 
extant. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


xlvui 

by night and by day, and synoptically and judiciously committing to writing what he heard from 

Syrianus, made so great a progress in a little time, that by then he was twenty-eight years of age, 
9 . 

be had composed r a multitude of works and among the rest his commentaries on the Timaeus which 
are truly elegant and full of science. But from such a discipline as this, his manners became more 
adorned; and as he advanced in science he increased in virtue. 

Marinus after this, shows how Proclus possessed all the virtues in the greatest possible perfec¬ 
tion; and how he proceeded from the exercise of the political virtues, which are produced by 
reason adorning the irrational part as its instrument, to the cathartic virtues which pertain to reason 
alone, withdrawing from other things to itself, throwing aside the instruments of sense aa vain, 
repressing also the energies through these instruments, and liberating the soul from the bonds of 
generation. He then adds, “ Proclus having made a proficiency, through these virtues, as it were 
by certain mystic steps, recurred from these to such as are greater and more telestic, being con¬ 
ducted to them by a prosperous nature and scientific discipline. For being now purified, rising 
above generation, and despising its thyrsus-bearers, 1 he was agitated with a divinely inspired fury, 
about die first essences, and became an inspector of the truly blessed spectacles which they contain. 
No longer collecting discursively and demonstratively the science of them, but surveying them as 
it were by simple intuition, and beholding through intellectual energies the paradigms in a divine 
intellect, assuming a virtue which can no longer be denominated prudence, but which ought rather 
to be called wisdom, or something still more venerable than this. The philosopher therefore ener¬ 
gizing according to this virtue, easily comprehended all the theology of the Greeks and Barbarians, 
and that which is adumbrated in mythological fictions, and brought it into light, to those who are 
w illing and able to understand it. He explained likewise every thing in a more enthusiastic man¬ 
ner, and brought the different theologies to an harmonious agreement. At the same time also, 
investigating the writings of the ancients, whatever he found in them genuine, he judiciously 
adopted; but if he found any tiling of a spurious nature, this, he entirely rejected as erroneous. 
He also strenuously subverted by a diligent examination such doctrines as were contrary to truth. 
In his associations too with others, he employed no less force and perspicuity. For he was a man 
laborious beyond measure; as, in one day, he gave five, and sometimes more lectures, and wrote 

• Socrates in the Phwdo of Plato, Orphically calls the multitude thyrsus-bearers as living Titannically. For 
the thyrsus, says Olympiodoras, (in MS. comment in Pined.) is a symbol of material and partible fabrication, on 
account of its divulsed continuity, whence also it is a Titannic plant. “ For it is extended, says he, before Bac¬ 
chus, instead of his paternal sceptre, and through this they call him into a partial nature. He adds, “ Besides 
the Titans are thyrsus-bearers; and Prometheus concealed fire in a reed, whether by this we are to understand 
that he draws down celestial light into generation, or impels soul into body, or calls forth divine illumination, the 
whole of which is ungenerated, into generation,” 



Digitized by 


Google 



INTRODUCTION. 


xlix 

as many as seven hundred verses. Besides this, he went to other philosophers, and spent the 
evening in conversation with them. And all these employments he executed in such a manner as 
not to neglect his nocturnal and vigilant piety to the Gods, and assiduously supplicating the sun 
when rising, when at his meridian altitude, and when he sets.” 

Marinus farther observes of this most extraordinary man, “ that he did not seem to be without 
divine inspiration. For words similar to the most white and thick-falling snow 1 proceeded from his 
wise mouth, his eyes appeared to be filled with a fulgid splendor, and the rest of his face to partici¬ 
pate of divine illumination. Hence Rufinus, a man illustrious in the Republic, and who was also 
a man of veracity, and in other respects venerable, happening to be present with him when he was 
lecturing, perceived that his head was surrounded with a light. And when Proclus had finished 
his lecture, Rufinus rising, adored him, and testified by an oath the truth of the divine vision which 
he had seen/’ 

Marinus also informs us, “that Proclus being purified in an orderly manner by the Chaldean puri¬ 
fications, was an inspector of the lucid Hecatic visions, as he himself somewhere mentions in one 
of his writings. By opportunely moving likewise a certain Hecatic sphaerula,* he procured showers 
of rain, and freed Athens from an unseasonable heat. Besides this, by certain phylacteria or 
charms, he stopt an earthquake, and had made trial of the divining energy of the tripod, having 
been instructed by certain verses respecting its failure. For when he was in his fortieth year, he 
appeared in a dream to utter the following verses : 

High above aether there with radiance bright, 

A pure immortal splendor wings its flight; 3 

W hose beams divine with vivid force aspire, 

And leap resounding from a fount of hre. » 

1 Alluding to the beautiful description given of Ulysses in the third book of the Iliad, v. 32. which is thus 
elegantly paraphrased by Pope. 

But when he speaks what elocution flows! 

Soft as the fleeces of descending snows 
The copious accents fall with easy art; 

Melting they fall and sink into the heart. 

* Nicephorus in his commentary on Synesius de Insomniis, p. 363. informs us that the Hecatic orb is a golden . 
sphere, which has a sapphire'stone inclosed in its middle part, and through its whole extremity characters, and 
various figures. He adds, that turning this sphere round, the Chaldeans perform invocations which they call 
Iyngae. Thus too, according to Suidas, the magician Julian of Chaldea, and Amuphis the Egyptian brought 
down showers of rain, by a magical power. And by an artifice of this kind, Empedocles was accustomed to 
restrain the fury of the winds; on which account he was called an expcller of wind. 

3 This signifies that the divine splendor which is the cause of the prophetic energy, would leave the earth, 
in consequence of the then existing inaptitude of persons, places, and instruments, to receive it. 

Proc. Vol. I. g 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



1 


INTRODUCTION. 


And in the beginning of his forty-second yea* he appeared to himself to pronounce with a loud 
voice these verses : 

Lo ! on my soul a sacred fire descends, 

Whose vivid power the intellect extends; 

From whence far beaming thro* dull body's night, 

It soars to aether deck’d with starry light; 

And with soft murmurs thro’ the azure round, 

The lucid regions of the Gods resound. 

Besides, he dearly perceived that he belonged to the Mercurial series; and was persuaded from a 
dream, that he possessed the soul of Nicomachus the Pythagorean .” 1 

In the last place, Marinus adds, “ that the lovers of more elegant studies may be able to conjec¬ 
ture from the position of the stars under which he was bom, that the condition of his life, was by 
no means among the last or middle, but among the first orders, we have thought fit to expose in 
this place the following scheme of his nativity.” 

r 

! © 16 ° 26 * ~ 

> 17 29 n 

1 No opinion is more celebrated, than that of the metempsychosis of Pythagoras; but perhaps no doctrine is 
more generally mistaken. By most of the present day it is exploded as ridiculous; and the few who retain some 
veneration for its founder, endeavour to destroy the literal, and to confine it to an allegorical meaning. By some 
of the ancients this mutation was limited to similar bodies; so that they conceived the human soul might trans¬ 
migrate into various human bodies, but not into those of brutes. And this was the opinion of Hierocles, as may 
be seen in his Commentary on the Golden Verses. But why may not the human soul become connected with 
subordinate, as well as with superior lives, by a tendency of inclination ? Do not similars love to be united; and 
is there not in all kinds of life something similar and common ? Hence when the affections of the soul verge to 
a baser nature, while connected with a human body, these affections, on the dissolution of such a body, become 
enveloped as it were, in a brutal nature, and the rational eye, in this case, clouded with perturbations, is oppressed 
by the irrational energies of the brute, and surveys nothing but the dark phantasms of a degraded imagination. 
But this doctrine is vindicated by Proclus with his usual acuteness, in his admirable Commentaries on the Timaius 
lib. 5. p. 329, as follows: “ It is usual, says he, to enquire how human souls can descend into brute animals. 
And some indeed, think that there are certain similitudes of men to brutes, which they call savage lives : for they 
by no means think it possible that the rational essence can become the soul of a savage animal. On the contrary, 
others allow it may be sent into brute?, because all souls are of one atid the same kind; so that they may become 
wolves and panthers, and ichneumons. But true reason indeed, asserts that the human soul may be lodged in 
brutes, yet in such a manner, as that it may obtain its own proper life, and that the degraded soul may, as it 
were, be earned above it, and be bound to the baser nature by a propensity and similitude of affection. And that 
this is the only mode of insinuation, we have proved by a multitude of arguments, in our Commentaries on the 
Phaedrus. If however, it be requisite to take notice, that this is the opinion of Plato, we add that in his Republic 
he says, that the soul of Thersites assumed an ape, but not the body of an ape: and in the Phadrus, that the 
soul descends into a savage life, but not into a savage body. For life is conjoined with its proper soul. And in 
this place he says it is changed into a biutal nature. For a brutal nature is not a brutal body, but a brutal life.” 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



li 


h 

% 

$ 

? 

5 

Horos. 

Mid. ^ 

Heaven. 3 


INTRODUCTION. 


24 

23 

8 

24 

41 

8 

29 

50 

/ 

— 

23 

X 

4 

42 

£C 

8 

19 

T 

4 

42 

Vf 

the head of 

the drag* 


24 S3 ^ 

The new moon preceding his birt 
8 51 - 


And thus much for the life of Proclus. 


With respect the of the following work, On the Theoing, of Pl„„, I can only an, 

' h ** e “ -ode, it a, faithful as posable, Md „ pyeserv. mlliner is „ 

t matter of the author; this being indispensably necessary, both from the importance of the sub- 
ject and the scientiSc acenme, of the reuoning with uhich it i. di,cased. I h„e added a aevettth 
book m order to coder the work complete; for without the de.elopemeot of the mnndtme God* 
aod the more excellent genera their perpetual attendants, it would obviously be incomplete. From 
the catalogue of the manuscript, in the late French king', lib™,, it U o vident d„ t p roc| „, h , d 
-nttc a ae.cn,h hook,' anme chapter, it , here be ^ ^ 

I hare endea.mtred, bn, without success, to obtain. The warn of thi. ae.cth hook by Prod.,, 

»' be C00!id ' red ■» *“ «0"d» of Greek literature, and particularly by all who me 

oveia o the doctrines of Plato, as a loss of no common magnitude. It is, however, a fortunate 
circumstance, that in the composition of the seventh book I have hem able to aupply the dehciancy 
arming from the want of that which waa written by Proclus, in a great meaanre from other work, 
of Proclua himself, and particularly from hi, very elegant and acientific commentaries on the 
Tmueus of Plato. So that I trust the loss is in some measure supplied; though 1 am sensible, 
very made,mttel,, could it be compared with the book which „ written by a man of such gigantic 
. ' Proclus at the end of the first book of this work savs “ a- ■ 

him, when he comes to speak of partial power. ” Thi, h ’ h d DameS b * accuratol >' discussed by 
that are extant; which shows that another book is wanling"^’ “ ^ ^ °" e ° f ,he sU b °° ks 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



lii 


INTRODUCTION. 


powers of mind as Proclus, and who had also sources of information on the subject, which at the 
present period, it is impossible to obtain. 

A translation of the Elements of Theology is added in order to render the treatise On the 
Theology of Plato, more complete, and to assist the reader who wishes to penetrate the depths of 
that most abstruse and sublime work; for the former elucidates, and is elucidated by the latter. 

In translating the treatise of Proclus On Providence and Fate, I had great difficulties to encoun¬ 
ter, as the original Greek is lost, and nothing but a Latin translation, which Fabricius observes, is 
all but barbarous , remains. If the reader compares that translation with mine, he will at once 
acknowledge the truth of my remark. Indeed, that translation is in some parts so barbarous, that 
nothing but an intimate acquaintance with the writings of Proclus, and the philosophy of Plato 
could enable any one to render them intelligible in another language. The same observation is 
partially applicable to the translation of the Extracts from two other treatises of Proclus. 

The Greek text of Proclus abounds with errors, so that the emendations which I have made, 
and the deficiencies which 1 have supplied in this volume, amount to more than four hundred. 
And the Latin translation of Portus is so very faulty, as to be almost beyond example bad. 
Having discovered this to be the case, and having in so many places corrected the original, I 
scarcely think that any of my critical enemies will be hardy enough to say, that any part of this 
volume was translated from the Latin, where the Greek could be obtained. As 1 am conscious 
however, that in what is now offered to the public, I had no other view than to benefit those who 
are capable of being benefited by such sublime speculations; that wishing well to all mankind, and 
particularly to my country, I have laboured to disseminate the philosophy and theology of Plato, as 
highly favourable to the interests of piety and good government, and most hostile to lawless conduct 
and revolutionary principles; and that I have done my best to deserve the esteem of the wise and 
worthy part of mankind, 1 am wholly unconcerned as to the reception it may meet with from the 
malevolent, though I wish for the approbation of the candid critics of the day. For in all my labours 
I have invariably observed the following Pythagoric precept: “ Do those things which you judge 
to be beautiful, though in doing them you should be without renown; for the rabble is a bad judge 
of a good thing/’ 1 

1 nom . xfii iif iiwi jwXji, iuii turn fiiMns ir f.vXt; yaf xfuntf *»Xcv w/ay/tant o^Xo;, DCmophiltu. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



CONTENTS 


OF 

THE CHAPTERS OF BOOK I. 


CHAPTER I. 


The Preface, in which the scope of the treatise is unfolded, together with the praise of Plato him¬ 
self, and of those that received the philosophy from him. 

CHAPTER II. 

What the mode of the discussion is in the present treatise, and what preparation of the auditors of 
it is previously necessary. 

CHAPTER III. 

What a theologist is according to Plato, whence he begins, as far as to what hypostases he ascends, 
and according to what power of the soul he particularly energizes. 

CHAPTER IV. 

The theological types or forms according to all which Plato disposes the doctrine concerning the 
Gods. 


CHAPTER V. 

What the dialogues are from which the theology of Plato may especially be assumed; and to what 
orders of Gods each of these dialogues refers us. 


Digitized by 



liv 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER VI. 

An objection against collecting the Platonic theology from many dialogues, in consequence of its 
being partial, and distributed into minute parts. 

CHAPTER VII. 

A solution of the before mentioned objection, referring to one dialogue, the Parmenides, the 
whole truth concerning the Gods according to Plato. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


An enumeration of the different opinions concerning the Parmenides, and a division of the objec¬ 
tions to them. 


CHAPTER IX. 


A confutation of those who assert that the Parmenides is a logical dialogue, and who admit that the 
discussion in it is argumentative, proceeding through subjects of opinion. 

CHAPTER X. 

How far they are right who assert that the hypotheses of the Parmenides are concerning the princi¬ 
ples of things, and what is to be added to what they say from the doctrine of our preceptor 
[Syrianus.] 

CHAPTER XI. 

Many demonstrations concerning the conclusions of the second hypothesis, and of the division of 
it according to the divine orders. 


CHAPTER XII. 

The intention of the hypotheses, demonstrating their connexion with each other, and their consent 
with the things themselves. 1 

CHAPTER XIII. 

What the common rules concerning the Gods are, which Plato delivers in the Laws. And also 
concerning the hyparxis of the Gods, their providence, and their immutable perfection. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

How the hyparxis of the Gods is delivered in the Laws, and through what media the discourse 

recurs to the truly existing Gods.-How the providence of the Gods is demonstrated in 

the Laws, and what the mode of their providence is according to Plato.* 

1 The 12th chapter is not marked in the original; but it begins conformably to my translation. 

1 The I5tb chapter also is not marked in the original; and is comprehended in my translation in the 14th chap¬ 
ter. Perhaps it should begin at the words, 44 If therefore the Gods produce all things,” in p. 49. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CONTENTS. 


lv 


CHAPTER XV. 

Through what arguments in the same treatise [the Laws] it is demonstrated that the Gods provide 
[for all things,] immutably. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

What the axioms are concerning the Gods which are delivered in the Republic, and what order 
they have with respect to each other. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

What the goodness of the Gods is, and how they are said to be the causes of all good; and that 
evil according to every hypostasis is itself adorned and arranged by the Gods. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

What the immutability is of the Gods; where also it is shown what their self-sufficiency, and firm 
impassivity are; and how we are to understand their possessing an invariable sameness of 
subsistence. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

. What the simplicity is of the Gods; and how that which is simple in them appears to be various 
in secondary natures. 

CHAPTER XX. 

What the truth is in the Gods; and whence falsehood is introduced in the participations of the 
Gods by secondary natures. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

From the axioms in the Phaedrus concerning every thing divine [it follows] that every thing divine 
is beautiful, wise, and good. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

A discussion of the dogmas concerning the goodness [of the Gods,] and an investigation of the 
elements of the good in the Philebus. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

What the wisdom of the Gods is, and what elements of it may be assumed from Plato. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

Concerning divine beauty, and the elements of it, as delivered by Plato. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



Ivi 


CONTENT*. 


CHAPTER XXV. 

What the triad is which is conjoined with the good, the wise, and the beautiful, and what auxili¬ 
aries to the theory of it, Plato affords us . 1 * 3 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

Concerning the axioms delivered in the Phaedo , 1 respecting an invisible nature. What the divine 
nature is. What the immortal, and the intelligible 3 are$ and what order these possess with 
reference to each other. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

What the uniform and indissoluble are, and how sameness of subsistence [and the unbegotten are] 
to be assumed in divine natures. 

« 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

How paternal, and how maternal causes are to be assumed in the Gods. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

Concerning divine names, and the rectitude of them as delivered in the Cratylus. 


CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF BOOK II. 

CHAPTER I. 

A method leading to the superessential principle of all things, according to die intellectual concep¬ 
tion of the one and multitude. 


CHAPTER II. 

A second method unfolding the hypostasis of the one , and demonstrating it to be exempt from all 
corporeal and incorporeal essences. 

1 Such is the title of this chapter in the Greek, which is obviously erroneous. For the proper title is, “ What 
that is which unites us to the good; and that it is divine faith.” What is said indeed in the Greek to be the coin 
tents of this, belong to the preceding chapter. 

* For faityw it is necessary to read *f 

3 In the Greek rtfAwuhg the uniform, but it should evidently be vtftww, the intelligible . 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CONTENTS. 


Ivii 


CHAPTER HI. 

Many arguments in confirmation of die same thing, and evincing the irreprehensible hypothesis of 
the one . 

CHAPTER IV. 

A confutation of those who say that the first principle is not according to Plato above intellect, and 
demonstrations from the Republic, the Sophista, the Philebus, and the Parmenides, of the 
superessential hypostasis 1 of the one . 

CHAPTER V. 

What the modes are of ascent to the one according to Plato; and that the modes are two, through 
analogy, and through negations. Likewise, where Plato treats of each of these, and through 
what cause. 

CHAPTER VI. 

By what, and by how many names Plato unfolds the ineffable principle, and why he unfolds it by 
such and by so many names. And how these names accord with the modes of ascent to it. 

CHAPTER VII. 

What the assertions are in the Republic concerning the first principle, through its analogy to the 
sun; where also it is shown, how it is celebrated as the good, and as the most splendid of 
being. How the sun is the offspring of the good; and that according to each order of 
divine natures, there is a monad analogous to the first principle. And how the first principle 
is the cause of all beings, and is itself prior to power and energy. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

What Plato in his Epistle to Dionysius says the first king is. And admonitions, that the first God 
is discussed in that Epistle. 

CHAPTER IX. 

What the three conceptions are which are delivered [in that Epistle] concerning the first king. How 
all things are about him. How all things are for his sake. How he is the cause of all 
beautiful things. What the order is of these conceptions. And from what hypotheses they 
are assumed. 

CHAPTER X. 

How in the first hypothesis of the Parmenides, Plato delivers the doctrine concerning the one, 
employing for this purpose negations. And on what account the negations are such and so 
many. 

1 For u*o9io-iutf I read 

Proc. Vol. I. h 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



lviii 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER XI. 

How it is necessary to enter on the theory concerning the one , through negations. And what dis¬ 
position of the soul is most adapted to discussions of this kind. 

CHAPTER XII. 

A celebration of the one , demonstrating through negative conclusions that it is exempt from all the 
orders of beings, according to the order delivered in the Parmenides. 


CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF BOOK III. 

CHAPTER I. 

That after the discussion in common of the one principle of things, it is requisite to treat of the 
divine orders, and to show how many they are, and how they are divided from each other. 

CHAPTER II. 

That the multitude of unities according to which the Gods have their hypostasis, subsists after 
the one . 

CHAPTER III. 

How many the particulars are which ought to be demonstrated previous to the discovery of the 
multitude of the divine orders, and an uninterrupted narration of the doctrine of these. 

CHAPTER IV. 

That all the unities are participate. And that there is only one truly superessential one ; but that 
all the other unities are participated by essences.' 

CHAPTER V. 

That the participations of the unities which are nearer to the one , proceed into more simple hypos¬ 
tases ; but the participations of those that are remote from the one, proceed into more com¬ 
posite hypostases. 

1 These four chapters are comprehended in one in my translation, as they are not parked in the Greek; and 

1 had not divided them, when this work was sent to the press, as I have done the chapters of the other books, 

in which there is a similar defect in the original. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CONTENTS. 


lix 


CHAPTER VI. 

What the natures are which participate of the divine unities, and what the order of them is with res¬ 
pect to each other. And that being indeed, is the most ancient of these ; life, the second; 
intellect, the third; soul, the fourth ; and body, the last. And that there are also as many 
orders of the divine unities. 1 2 

CHAPTER VII. 

A resumption of the doctrine concerning the one , and a discussion of the biformed principles pos¬ 
terior to the one. 


CHAPTER VIII. 

What the two principles are of all things posterior to the one ; how Socrates the Philebus calls 
them bound and infinity; and of what things they are the causes 3 to beings.’ 


• CHAPTER IX. 

What the third thiug is which is produced from the two principles. Why Socrates in the Philebus 
calls it that which is mixed. That it is nothing else than that which is primarily being. 4 5 6 
And how this proceeds from the two principles, and from the one . 

CHAPTER X. 

How from images also, it may be inferred, that the first thing which subsists from bound and infi¬ 
nity is being. x How this may be demonstrated. And how bound and infinity are twofold; 
one order of these subsisting in being, but the other existing prior to being.’ * 

CHAPTER XI. 

What the triad is, which Socrates in the Philebus says is inherent in every thing that is mixed • 

CHAPTER XII. 

Concerning the first intelligible triad in common; and how the second triad proceeds analogous to 
this. 7 


1 The fifth and sixth chapters are comprehended in the second chapter in my translation. 

2 For owim, it is necessary to read eunat, 

3 The seventh and eighth chapters form the third in my translation. 

4 For it is necessary to read <*. 

5 And the ninth and tenth are the fourth and fifth chapters in my translation. 

6 This, is the sixth chapter in my translation. 

7 It appears from this account of the contents of the twelfth chapter, that a considerable part of it is wanting 
in the original• because nothing is said in it about the manner in which the second triad proceeds analogous to 
the first. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



w CONTENT!. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

What the second intelligible triad is. A more accurate account of it, as subsisting from that which 
predominates, from that which is participated, and from that which characterizes the mix ture* 

CHAPTER XIV. 

What the third intelligible triad is; what that is which predominates, and is participated in this. 
And at the end, a discourse in common concerning the distinction of the three triads. 

CHAPTER XV. 

How the intelligible triads are delivered in the Timseus. And many admonitions concerning animal 
itself, [evincing] that it has the third order in intelligibles. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Many demonstrations that eternity subsists according to the middle order of intelligibles. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

That the one in which eternitytaides is the summit of intelligibles. 

CHAPTER XVIH. 

Concerning all the intelligible orders in common, according to the doctrine of Timaeus. And a 
more accurate account of the peculiarities in the intelligible triads. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Concerning intelligible forms, and the doctrine unfolding the peculiarity of them. How likewise 
they are four, and from what causes they subsist. 

CHAPTER XX. 

That also from what is said in the Sophista, it is possible to discover the three intelligible orders; 
viz. in that part of the Sophista, in which it is shown what the one being, what whole, and 
what all are. 

CHAPTER XXL 

A summary account of 4 what has been said concerning the intelligible triads. And admonitions 
from Plato that it is possible to divide them into father, power, and intellect. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

How in the Phatdrus it is said that every thing divine is beautiful, wise, and good. What triple 
elements of each of these Plato delivers. And how from these it is possible to accede to the 
union and separation of the intelligible triads. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CONTENT*. 


U i 


CHAPTER XXIII. 

How Parmenides delivers the multitude of Gods in the second hypothesis. And how we should 
discourse about each order of them, employing for this purpose the conclusions of that 
hypothesis. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

What the first intelligible triad is according to Parmenides. Whence he begins, and how far he 
proceeds, teaching concerning it. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

What the second intelligible triad is. How it is delivered by Parmenides in continuity with the 
triad prior to it. And how far he produces the discourse concerning it. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

What the third intelligible triad is. And how Parmenides unfolds it through the third conclusion. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

Concerning the three conclusions in common, through which the three orders of intelligible* are 
characterized. And how through these it is possible to dissolve the most difficult of theolo¬ 
gical doubts. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

A celebration of the intelligible Gods, unfolding at the same time the union of intelligibles themselves 
with the good, and their exempt hypatxis. 


CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF BOOK IV. 

CHAPTER I. 

What the peculiarity is of the intelligible and intellectual Gods. How they illuminate imparticipa- 
ble life, and are in continuity with the intelligible Gods. 

CHAPTER II. 

How the intelligible and intellectual Gods subsist from the intelligible Gods. And how they com¬ 
municate with the intelligible Gods. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



lxii 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER III- 

What the division is of the intelligible and intellectual Gods according to triads. And what the dif¬ 
ference is of these triads with respect to the intelligible triads. 

CHAPTER IV. 

How Socrates in the Phaedrus leads us to this order of Gods, 

CHAPTER V. 

That it is not proper to understand the Heaven, and celestial circulation [celebrated in the Phae- 
drus] as pertaining to sensibles ; and many admonitions from the Platonic words themselves, 
that these are to be referred to the first order of Heaven. 

CHAPTER VI. 

That the supercelestial place is not simply intelligible ; but demonstrations from what is delivered 
about it [in the Phaedrus,] that it is allotted an intelligible order as in intellectuals, 

CHAPTER VII. 

That the subcelestial arch is the boundary of the intelligible and intellectual Gods, evinced from the 
peculiarities of it. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Why Plato characterizes this order of Gods from the middle which it contains, and delivers the 
names of the extremes according to the habitude to this middle. 

CHAPTER IX. 

That Plato delivers the same mode of ascent to the intelligible, as is delivered by initiators into the 
mysteries. 

CHAPTER X. 

What the supercelestial place is. How it proceeds from the first intelligibles. How it is supreme 
in intellectuals. And how Plato demonstrates its prolific power. 

CHAPTER XI. 

How Plato has indicated the unknown peculiarity of the summit of intelligibles and intellectuals, 
and why he celebrates it at one and the same time affirmatively and negatively. 

CHAPTER XII. 

What the negations are of the supercelestial place. That they are produced from the divine orders, 
What kind of negations also designate the uncoloured, what, the unfigured, and what, the prit 
yation of contact, 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



CONTENTS. 


lxiii 


CHAPTER XIII. 

What the things are which Plato affirms of the supercelestial place, and from what intelligible pecu¬ 
liarities, he ascribes to it affirmative signs. 


CHAPTER XIV. 

What the three deities of the virtues, viz. science, temperance, and justice, are in the supercelestial 
place ; what order they have with respect to each other; and what perfection each of them 
imparts to the Gods. 

CHAPTER XV. 


What the plain of Truth, and wHat the meadow are. What the unical form of intelligible nutri¬ 
ment is. What the twofold nutriment of the Gods is which is distributed from this intelligible 
food. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Many admonitions that die supercelestial place is triadic. And what the signs are of the three 
hypostases in it. 

CHAPTER XVII. 


Who Adrastia is. What the sacred law of Adrastia is. That she ranks in the supercelestial place. 
And on what account she does so. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

A summary account of what is said about the supercelestial place, unfolding the peculiarities of it. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Demonstrations that the connectedly-containing order is in the intelligible and intellectual Gods. 
And that it is necessary there should be three connective causes of wholes. 


CHAPTER XX. 

That according to Plato the celestial circulation is the same with the connective order. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


How we may obtain auxiliaries from what is said by Plato of the triadic division in the connective 
deity. And why he especially venerates the union in this triad. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

What the theology in the Cratylus is concerning Heaven. And how it is possible to collect from it 
by a reasoning process the middle of the intelligible and intellectual Gods* 


Digitized by kjOOQle 



CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 

That the most divinely-inspired of the interpreters have defined the subcelestial arch to be a certain 
peculiar order. And that our preceptor has unfolded it in the most perfect manner. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

Many admonitions that the peculiarity of the subcelestial arch is perfective, from what Plato has 
delivered concerning it, and from the souls that are elevated to it. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

What the triadic division is of the perfective order, which Plato has delivered in the subcelestial 
arch. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

What the elevation is of souls separate from bodies to the intelligible and intellectual triads. 
What the most blessed telete is. What mucsis, and epopteia are. What the entire, simple, 
and unmoved visions are. And what the end is of all this elevation, 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

How Plato unfolds in the Parmenides, from intelligibles the intelligible and intellectual orders. 
And what that which is common, and that which is different are, in the theology concerning 
these, 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

How the intelligible and intellectual number proceeds from intelligibles. And in what it differs 
from intelligible multitude 

' CHAPTER XXIX, 

How divine number adorns all beings. And what the powers in it are which are symbolically deli¬ 
vered from the division of number. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

How Parmenides has delivered the feminine and generative peculiarity [of first number] in what he 
says concerning number, 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

How we may discover in what is delivered concerning number, the triadic division of the summit of 
intelligibles and intellectuals. f 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

Whether it is proper to place number prior to animal itself, or in animal itself, or posterior to it, 


Digitized by 


Google 



CONTENTS. 


Ixv 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 

Whence Parmenides begins to speak about number. How far he proceeds in what he says about 
it. And how he unfolds the different orders in it. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

What the unknown is in divine numbers. What the generative is in them. And admonitions of 
these things from what is elsewhere said by Plato concerning numbers. 


CHAPTER XXXV. 

How Parmenides delivers the middle order of intelligibles and intellectuals through the one> whole , 
and finite. And what the peculiarities are of these. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 


Whence Parmenides begins to speak about this order. And how far he proceeds in what he says 
about it. How he likewise unfolds the three monads in it conformably to what is said in die 
Phaedrus concerning them. 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

How Parmenides delivers the third order of intelligibles and intellectuals. And how he unfolds 
the perfective peculiarity, and triadic division of it. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


An admonition what the union is of the three intelligible and intellectual triads, from the conclu¬ 
sions of Parmenides. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 


How many theological dogmas we may assume, through the order of the conclusions delivered by 
Parmenides in his discourse concerning the intelligible and intellectual Gods. 


CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF BOOK V. 

CHAPTER I. 

How the intellectual orders proceed from the intelligible and intellectual Gods. And according to 
what peculiarities they subsist. 

CHAPTER II. 

What the division is of the intellectual Gods. And the progression according to hebdomads in this 
order of Gods. 

Proc. VOL. II. a 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CONTENTS. 


Ini 


CHAPTER HI. 

Who die three intellectual fathers are according to Plato. What the three tmdefiled monads are. 
And who the seventh deity is, that is co-arranged with the two triads. 

CHAPTER CV. 

How from the writings of Plato, the procession of the intellectual Gods into seven hebdomads may 
be collected by a reasoning process. 

CHAPTER V. 

Who the mighty Saturn is, according to die theology in the Cratylus. And how he is in a certain 
respect intelligible, and in a certain respect intellectual. In which also, the dogmas are dis¬ 
cussed concerning the uniou of intellect with the intelligible, and its separation from it. 


CHAPTER VI. 

What the kingdom of Saturn is. In wbat manner it is delivered by Plato in die Politicus. And 
of what it is the cause to the world, to the mundane Gods, and to partial souls. 


CHAPTER VII. 

What the Saturnian life of souls is. And what peculiarities of this circulation the Elean Guest 
delivers. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

How souls are said to be nourished by intelligibles. And wbat the difference is of the nutriment 
derived from different intelligibles* 

CHAPTER IX. 

What the orders are which the mighty Saturn causes to preside over wholes. In which also, who 
the Saturnian intellect is that is delivered in the Gorgias is unfolded. 

CHAPTER X. 

How diis God [Saturn] is peculiarly called by theologists insenescible, or free from old age. *And 
how Plato has delivered this peculiarity of him. 


CHAPTER XI. 

Who the vivific Goddess is. How she is the collector of the Saturnian and Jovian kingdoms. And 
what orders she possesses conjoined with both these kingdoms. 

CHAPTER XH. 

Who the third father in intellectuals is. How he proceeds from the causes prior to him. And 
that he is the demiurgus of the universe. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CONTENTS. 


brvfi 


CHAPTER XIH. 


Demonstrations that the whole demiurgus of the universe, is the third father of the intellectual 
Gods. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


An answer to those who say that there are three demiurgi according, to Plato, demo—taliag 
through many arguments that the demiurgic monad is arranged prior to the [demiurgic] triad, 
in the third order of intellectuals. 


CHAPTER XV. 

That Timaeus especially delivers the peculiarity of the demiurgus, by calling him intellect. And 
that this pertains to the third of the intellectual fathers. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

How according to another method it is requisite to discover the peculiarity of the demiurgus. And! 
how the demiurgus is called in the Timaeus effector and father. In which also, it is clearly 
shown, where the paternal, where the paternal and at the same time effective, whore the effec¬ 
tive and paternal, and where the effective only are, according to Plato. And in short, in 
what effector and father differ. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

How following Timaeus, according to a third method, we may purify our conceptions concerning 
the demiurgic monad. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

A theological explanation of the speech of the demiurgus in the Timaeus, distinctly evolving our 
conceptions about the demiurgic energy. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

What the seeond speech of the demiurgus is to divisible souls. In what it differs from the former. 
And how in this all the measures of the life of souls are defined. 

CHAPTER XX. 

A summary of all that is said about the demiurgus, following the doctrine of Timaeus. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

Admonitions from what is said in the Cratylus, that Plato attributes fabrication to Jupiter. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



lxviii 


CONTENT •• 


CHAPTER XXII. 

Admonitions from wliat is said in the Cratylus of the fabrication of Jupiter. In which also the 
concord i9 demonstrated of the theology from names, with the arrangement of the demiurgus 
in the Timaeus. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

Admonitions of the fabrication of Jupiter from what is demonstrated in (he Philebus. In which 
also it is shown, what the royal soul, and the royal intellect are. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

Demonstrations of the same thing, from what is said in the Protagoras about the political science. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

An argument shewing that Jupiter is the demiurgus and father of the universe 1 according to Plato, 
from what is said in the Politicus concerning the twofold circulation [of the universe.] 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

Admonitions of the same things, from what is said in the Laws concerning analogy, viz. that it is 
the judgment of Jupiter. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

How Jupiter subsists according to cause in animal itself, and how animal itself is in Jupiter. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

How Timaeus attributes to the demiurgus the unknown and ineffable. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

Why Timaeus thinks fit to denominate animal itself, and is of opinion that it may be known, but 
leaves the demiurgus unknown and ineffable. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

Concerning the Crater in the Timaeus, a theology teaching what the genera are that are mingled m 
it, and how it is the cause of the essence of souls. 

CHAPTER XXXL 

That the Crater in the Timaeus is fontal. And admonitions from the writings of Plato, concerning 
the principle and fountain of souls. 

For iimrws, it is necessary to read *«mj. 


I 


Digitized by 


Google 



contents. 


' \xix 


CHAPTER XXXII. 

That the three vivific fountains co-amtnged with the deroiurgus, may be assumed from what is said 
in the Timaeus, viz. the fountain of souls, the fountain of the virtues, and the fountain of 
natures. 

CHAPTER XXXIIi. 

Admonitions concerning the undefiled Gods; that there are such Gods according to Plato; and 
what the peculiarity is of their essence. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

More manifest demonstrations of the hypostasis of the undefiled Gods, according to Plato. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

Admonitions through many arguments how it is proper to denominate the undefiled Gods accord¬ 
ing to Plato. In which also, the union of them, what their separation, and what their pecu* 
liarity are, is delivered. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

How from what is mystically asserted by Plato, auxiliaries may be obtained, concerning the seventh 
monad of intellectuals. 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

How Plato delivers in the Parmenides the summit of the intellectual Gods.* 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

How Parmenides unfolds the middle order of the intellectual breadth, and through what signs. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

How Parmenides defines the third order of intellectuals, and through what peculiarities. 

CHAPTER XL. 

A common theory of the intellectual hebdomad, from the conclusions of Parmenides. 

1 The contents of chapter thirty-seven in the original erroneously form the conclusion of the contents of 
chapter thirty-six. And instead of to h ia therefore necessary to read to «xpoir». Hence what 

are marked as xf,**. M, and ***. xS, should be marked . x>», x*. x0, and »?. It will be found also that 
chapter forty is wanting. 




Digitized by L.OOQ le 



CONTENTS. 




CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF BOOK VL 

CHAPTER L 

That the ruling order of Gods is in continuity with the intellectual Gods. And that the division 
into fountains and principles may be assumed from the writings of Plato, through the theory 
about souls. 

CHAPTER IL 

How the ruling Gods proceed. And that the supermundane peculiarity pertains to these Gods 
alpqcs. 

CHAPTER III. 

What the peculiarity is of die ruling Gods. That the assimilative is especially characteristic of 
them. And how the causes of assimilation are antecedently assumed in the demiurgus; and. 
hovf in. the,inUlligible paradigm. 

CHAPTER IV. 

What the powers are of the assimilative Gods. What their energies. And how many goods are; 
imparted by them to the world, and to all mundane natures. 

CHAPTER V. 

What die divisions are of the assimilative Gods. And that the greatest part of the discourse about 
them is concerning the middle orders in them. 

CHAPTER VI. 

Many demonstrations, that both according to Plato' and other theologists, there is one demiurgus 
prior to the three demiurgi. 

CHAPTER VII. 

That Jupiter is~twofold; one indeed, being prior to the three sons of Saturn, [but die other being 
one of them.] And how the three proceed from Saturn, aud the one Jupiter. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

That according to Plato also, the demiurgic monad subsists prior to the three sons of Saturou 
Demonstrations of this from what is said in the Politicus, and in the Laws. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CONTENTS# 


lui 


CHAPTER IX. 

More manifest admonitions of the same things from what is said in the Gorgias, and in the 
Cratylus. 

CHAPTER X. 

Who the three demiurgi are, and what order they have with reference to each other. Likewise 
what their progressions are, and their divisions about the world. 

CHAPTER kl. 

What the vivific triad is among the ruling Gods. And whence we may derive auxiliaries from the 
writings of Plato concerning the union and division of this triad. 


CHAPTER XII. 

What the convertive triad of the ruling Gods is; and what the monad which it contains. In which 
also, the union of Apollo with the sun is demonstrated; and it is shewn, how from what is 
said about Apollo we may be led to the theory of the solar orders. 


CHAPTER XIII. 

What the undefiled order is of the ruling Gods. And how from the writings of Plato conceptions 
about it may be obtained. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

How Parmenides forms his conclusions about the ruling Gods, in continuity with the demiurgic 
order. And that he characterizes the whole order of them, through similitude and dis¬ 
similitude. 

CHAPTER XV. 

What die supermundane and at the same time mundane genus of Gods is. And how through their 
own medium they preserve the continuity of the Gods that proceed from the demiurgus. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

How die liberated Gods are characterized. And how from their liberated peculiarity they are 
exempt from the uuiverse, and are co-arranged with the mundane Gods. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

What the common powers, and what the common energies are of die liberated Gods, according 
with the essence that has been delivered of them. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CONTENT 


CHAPTER XVHI. 

Concerning Ae twelve leaders or rulers mentioned in the Phsedrus, and that they have, a liberated 
order. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

Many and clearer demonstrations that the great leader Jupiter, and all the dodecad of leaders, 
are liberated. 

CHAPTER XX. 

An explanation from precedaneous causes whence the number of the dodecad in the liberated 
Gods is derived. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

What die division of the liberated leaders is into two monads and one decad. And what the one 
division of them is. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

The theology concerning each of the twelve Gods, unfolding the peculiarities of them from the 
subjects of their government. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

Concerning the mother of the Fates mentioned in the Republic. Likewise concerning the triad of 
the Fates. What orders they have with reference to each other. What powers of them are 
delivered through divine symbols. What their energies are. And how Plato characterizes 
the liberated peculiarity. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

How Parmenides forms his conclusions concerning the liberated Gods immediately after the assi¬ 
milative Gods. And how he characterizes the order of them by touching and not touching. 


CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF BOOK VII. 

CHAPTER I. 

On the mundane Gods in general,—the source of their progression,—their orders, powers, and 
spheres. 

CHAPTER II. 

On the division, and allotments of the mundane Gods. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 


CONTENTS. 


lxxiii 


CHAPTER III. 

That the mundane do not differ from the supermundane Gods in habitudes to bodies. Sic.—That 
the providence of the Gods is not circumscribed by place.—That it pervades all things, and 
like the light of the sun, fills whatever is capable of receiving it. 

CHAPTER IV. 

After what manner the visible celestial orbs are Gods.—That a celestial body is eminently allied 
to the incorporeal essence of the Gods.—That the visible are connected with the intelligible 
Gods.—And that the perfectly incorporeal are united to the sensible Gods, through the 
essence of each being characterized by the one. 

CHAPTER V. 

The nature of the mundane Gods unfolded from the speech of the Demiurgus to them, in the 
Timaeus.—And what the whole conception of the speech is according to Proclus. 

CHAPTER VI. 

What the demiurgus effects in the multitude of mundane Gods by the first words of his speech.— 
That the words of the Demiurgus are addressed to the composite from soul and animal, vit. 
to the animal which is divine and partakes of a soul.—The meaning of the words, “ Of 
whom I am the demiurgus and father,” &,c. 

CHAPTER VII. 

The meaning of the words unfolded in the speech of the Demiurgus, “ Every thing therefore which 
is bound is dissoluble, but to be willing to dissolve that which is beautifully harmonized and 
well composed, is the province of an ill nature.” 

CHAPTER VIII. 

The following part of the speech of the Demiurgus to the mundane Gods unfolded.—The differ¬ 
ence between the primarily and secondarily immortal, and the primarily and secondarily 
indissoluble.—And that the mundane Gods are neither primarily immortal, nor primarily 
indissoluble. 

CHAPTER IX. 

That part of the speech of the Demiurgus unfolded, in which he says to the mundane Gods, 
“ Learn now therefore what I say to you indicating my desire.” 

CHAPTER X. 

The developement of the remaining part of the speech of the Demiurgus. 

Proc. Vol . I. k 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



hnr 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER XI. 

Who the junior Gods are, and why they are thus called. 


CHAPTER XII. 


Farther important particulars respecting the fabrication of the mundane Gods, collected from the 
Timseus, and unfolded. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


Continuation of the developement of these particulars. 


CHAPTER XIV. 

The peculiarities of the celestial Gods separately discussed.—Why the one sphere of the fixed stars 
comprehends a multitude of stars, but each of the planetary spheres convolves only one star. 
—And that in each of the planetary spheres, there is a number of satellites, analogous to the 
choir of the fixed stars, subsisting with proper circulations of their own. 

CHAPTER XV. 

The nature of the Moon, Mercury, Venus, and the Sun unfolded. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Extract from the Oration of the Emperor Julian to the Sovereign bun. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

Extract from the MS. Scholia of Proclus on the Cratylus of Plato concerning Apollo, in which 
the principal powers of the God are unfolded. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

The nature of the Muses unfolded from the above MS. Scholia. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

The nature of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, unfolded—The manner in which each of the seven plane* 
tary divinities becomes an animal, and is suspended from a more divine soul; and what kind 
of perfection it affords to the universe. 

CHAPTER XX. 

That all the celestial Gods are beneficent, and after a similar manner the causes of good.—And that 
the participation of them, and the mixture of material with immaterial influences, become the 
causes of the abundant difference in secondary natures. 


Digitized by LjOoq le 



CONTENTS. 


hX¥ 


CHAPTER XXI. 

The nature of Minerva unfolded from the Commentaries, of Proclus on theTimaeus.—The spear 
and shield with which this Goddess, in the statues of her, is represented as armed, explained 
from Iamblichus.—And observations respecting the mundane allotment of this Goddess. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

The nature of the great mundane divinity, the earth, unfolded from Proclus on the Timaeus of 
Plato. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

The manner in which the earth is said to be the most ancient, and the first of the Gods within the 
heavens, explained. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

On the essence of the sublunary deities.—What Plato says of them in the Timseus unfolded. 


CHAPTER XXV. 


Where the sublunary Gods are to be arranged.—And the meauing of the subsequent words of Plato 
developed. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


The nature of the sublunary Gods more fully unfolded.—On the daemoniacal order.—And that 
about each of the fabricators of generation, there is a co-ordinate angelical, cUemoniacal, and 
heroical multitude, which retains the appellation of its producing monad. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 

What Pythagoras says in the Sacred Discourse .—What the Orphic traditions are concerning 
Phanes, Night, Heaven, Saturn, J upiter, and Bacchus.—That Plato begins the Theogony of 
the sublunary Gods from Heaven and Earth, and not from Phanes and Night.—And whv he 
does so. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

On the two principles Heaven and Earth.—What each of them is ; and particularly concerning the 
power of Heaven. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

The whole theory of Earth unfolded.—And also the theory of Ocean and Tethys.—That tbe causes 
of these are in the intellectual Gods, and likewise in tbe sensible universe. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



bam 


CONTENTS, 


CHAPTER XXX. 

The theory of Phorcys, Saturn, and Rhea, unfolded. 

CHAPTER XXXr. 

The nature of the sublunary Jupiter and Juno unfolded.—And why Plato comprehends in this 
ennead, viz* Heaven and Earth, Ocean and Tetbys, Phorcys, Saturn, Rhea, Jupiter, and Juno, 
the Gods who are the fabricators of generation. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

Why Plato denominates the sublunary deities, “ such as become apparent when they please.”— 
General observations respecting the Gods that govern generation. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

On the summit, or monad of all the mundane Gods, Bacchus.—And on the mundane soul which is 
the immediate participant of the Bacchic intellect. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

How the mundane Gods are characterized in the Parmenides of Plato. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

A developement of what Plato says in the Phsedrus, about Boreas and Orithya, the Centaurs, 
Chimaeras, Gorgons, Pegasuses, Typhons, Achelous, and the Nymphs. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


The meaning of Plato unfolded, in what he says about Pan, Tartarus, Prometheus, Cadmus, and 
the Syrens. 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


A developement of Plato’s theological conceptions respecting Nature, Fate, and Fortune. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

What Time, Day and Night, Month and Year are, so far as they are deities, according to the 
theology of Plato. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

A discussion of the order of divine souls, who are deified by always participating of the Gods. 


Digitized by 


GoogI 



Contents* 


hx?S 


CHAPTER XL. 

A developement of die nature of Lore, from the MS. Commentary of Proclus on the First Aki- 
biades of Plato. 

CHAPTER XLI. 

A continuation of die same subject. 

CHAPTER XLII. 

The nature of daemons more fully disclosed.—An extract from the MS* Commentary of Proclus 
• on the First Alcibiades, on this subject. 

CHAPTER XLIII. 


On the daemons who are allotted the superintendence of mankind. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


On the daemon of Socrates.—The peculiarity^ this daemon; and that it belonged to the Apollo* 
niacal series. 


CHAPTER XLV. 


Important information concerning daemons from the MS. Scholia of Proclus on the Cratylus of 
Plato.—And also from the MS. Commentary of 01ympiodoru9 on the Phaedo of Plato. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 

The nature of those human souls that are of an heroic characteristic unfolded.—What Plato says of 
these souls in the Cratylus.—His meaning elucidated from the MS. Scholia of t Proclus on 
that dialogue. 

CHAPTER XLV1I. 

How the triple genera that are the perpetual attendants of the Gods, are indicated in the Parme¬ 
nides of Plato. 

CHAPTER XLV1II. 

An elucidation from Proclus of what Plato sayS in the Timapus, in celebration of the divinity of the 
World, so far as the whole of it is a God. 

CHAPTER XLIX. 

A further elucidation from Proclus of the same subject. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



lsivtii 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER L. 

The meaning of the words of Plato, “ And causing circle to revolve in a circle, he established 
heaven (i. e. the world) one, only, solitary nature,” unfolded from Produs. 

CHAPTER LI. 

What Plato says in the Tinueua about the name of the World,—with the elucidations of Proclus. 


Digitized by 


Google 



Ixxix 


An explanation of certain terms which are unusual, or have a meaning dif¬ 
ferent from their common acceptation, and which there was a necessity of 
introducing in the translation of this work. 


Composite, avvitros . 1 have used the word composite instead of compounded , because the 
latter rather denotes the mingling than the contiguous union of one thing with another, which the 
former, through its derivation from the Latin word compositus , solely denotes. 

Dbmiurgus of wholes, $i )[Juoupyos rtov oXov. The artificer of the universe is thus denomi¬ 
nated, because he produces the universe so far as it is a whole , and likewise all the wholes it con¬ 
tains, by his own immediate energy; other subordinate powers co-operating with him in the pro¬ 
duction of parts. Hence he produces the universe totally and at once . 

Desire, mfo/ti*. Is an irrational appetite solely directed to external objects, and to the 
gratification arising from the possession of them. 

Dianoia, avotot, from whence dianoelic, is the discursive energy of reason; (8ft£oSjxi) too Xoyoo 
evepyaa) or according to its most accurate signification, it is that power of the soul which reasons 
scientifically, deriving the principles of its reasoning from intellect, or the power which sees truth 
intuitively. 

Dox A stic, formed from opinion , is the last of the gnostic powers of the rational soul; and 

knows that a thing is, but is ignorant of the cause of it, or why it is. The knowledge of the Siot#, 
or why a thing is, being the province of dianoia. 

Guest, £tvo$. This word, in its more ample signification in the Greek, denotes a stranger , but 
properly implies one who receives another, or is himself received at an entertainment. In the dia¬ 
logues of Plato therefore, (and consequently in this work of Pioclus when he cites the dialogues in 
which this word occurs) wherever one of the speakers is introduced as a £«*©$, I have translated this 
word guest , as beiug more conformable to the genius of Plato's dialogues, which may be justly 
called rich mental banquets, and consequently the speakers in them may be considered as so many 
guests. Hence in the Timseus, the persons of that dialogue are expressly spoken of as guests from 
having been feasted with discourse. 

Hyparxis, wapfi*. The first principle, or foundation as it were, of the essence of a thing. 
Hence, also, it is the summit of essence. 


Digitized by ^jOoq le 



Ixxx 

Imparticipable, apedtKTOf. One thing is said to be imparticipable with respect to another, 
to which it is superior, when it is not consubsistent with it. 

Intellectual projection. The immediate energy of intellect is thus denominated, 
because it is an intuitive perception, or an immediate darting forth, as it were, to its proper object, 
the intelligible. 

Monad, /tova?, in divine natures is that which contains distinct, but at the same time pro¬ 
foundly-united multitude, and which produces a multitude exquisitely allied to itself. But in the 
sensible universe, the first monad is the world itself, which comprehends in itself all the multitude of 
which it is the cause (in conjunction with the cause of all). The second monad is the inerratic 
sphere. In the third place, the spheres of the planets succeed, each of w hich is also a monad, com¬ 
prehending an appropriate multitude. And in the fourth and last place are the spheres of the 
elements, which are in a similar manner monads. All these monads likewise are denominated 
oKotvitss, wholenesses , and have a perpetual subsistence. 

Permanency, (rroung. The proper word for rest, in Greek, is ijpsjxia. An3 Simplicius justly 
observes, that not every areuris is ijpffjxia, but that only which is after motion. This word is 
employed by Plato in the Sophista, to express oue of the five genera of being, viz. essence, perma¬ 
nency, (<rT 0 Mnf), motion, sameness , and difference ; in which place it evidently does not signify rest. 

Phantasy, or Imagination, fyamurict, is, pogpamxii nrpi$, i. e. a figured intelligence, because 
all the perceptions of this power are inward, and not external, like those of sense, and are accom¬ 
panied with figure . 

Psychical, 4/u^ixoj, i. e. pertaining to soul, in the same manner as Qwnxo$, physical, is some¬ 
thing pertaining to nature. 

Reason, Aoyo*. This word in Platonic writers signifies either that inward discursive energy 
called reasoning; or a certain productive and seminal principle; or that which is indicative and 
definitive of a thing. Hence Aoyoi or reasons in the soul, are, gnostically producing principles. 

Unical, fviaiof, that which is characterized by unity. 

Uniform tyoti&jf. This word when it occurs in Proclus, and other Platonic writers, signifies 
that which has the form of the one , and not as in Johnson, that which keeps its tenour, or is similar 
to itself. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



PROCLUS, 

THE PLATONIC SUCCESSOR, 

ON 

I 

C&e Cljeologp of $lato. 


BOOK I. 


CHAPTER I. 

o PERICLES, to me the dearest of friends, I am of opinion that the 
whole philosophy of Plato was at first unfolded into light through the 
beneficent will of superior natures, exhibiting the intellect concealed in 
them, and the truth subsisting together with beings, to souls conversant 
with generation (so far as it is lawful for them to participate of such 
supernatural and mighty good); and again, that afterwards having received 
its perfection, returning as it were into itself, and becoming unapparent to 
many who professed to philosophize, and who earnestly desired to engage 
in the investigation of true being, it again advanced into light. But I 
particularly think that the mystic doctrine respecting divine concerns, 
which is purely established on a sacred foundation, and which perpetually 
subsists with the gods themselves, became thence apparent to such as are 
Proc. Vol. I. - A 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



2 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


capable of enjoying it (for a time, through one man,' whom I should not 
err in calling the primary leader and hierophant of those true mysteries, 
into which souls separated from terrestrial places are initiated, and of 
those entire and stable visions, which those participate who genuinely 
embrace a happy and blessed life. But this philosophy shone forth at 
first from him so venerably and arcanely, as if established in sacred 
temples, and within their adyta, and being unknown to many who have 
entered into these holy places, in certain orderly periods of time, proceeded 
as much as was possible for it into light, through certain true priests, 
and who embraced a life corresponding to the tradition of such mystic 
concerns. It appears likewise to me, that the whole place became 
splendid, and that illuminations of divine spectacles every where 
presented themselves to the view. 

These interpreters of the epopteia (or mystic speculations) of Plato, who 
have unfolded to us all-sacred narrations of divine concerns, and who 
were allotted a nature similar to their leader, I should determine to be 
the Egyptian Plotinus, and those who received the theory from him, I 
mean Amelius and Porphyry, together with those in the third place who 
were produced like virile statues from th§se, viz.: Jamblichus and 
Theodoras, and any others, who after these, following this divine choir, 
have energized about the doctrines of Plato with a divinely-inspired 
mind. From these, he 1 who, after the gods, has been our leader to every 
thing beautiful and good, receiving in an undefiled manner the most 
genuine and pure light of truth in the bosom of his soul, made us a 
partaker of all the rest of Plato’s philosophy, communicated to us that 
arcane information which he had received from those more ancient than 
himself, and caused us, in conjunction with him, to be divinely agitated 
about the mystic truth of divine concerns. 

To this man, therefore, should we undertake to return thanks adequate 
to the benefits which we have received from him; the whole of time 
would not be sufficient. But if it is necessary, not only 3 that we should 
have received from others the transcendant good of the Platonic 

* Meaning Plato. * Meaning his preceptor Syrianus. * The word /mm is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. n. 


OF PLATO. 


a 


philosophy, but that we should leave to posterity monuments of those 
blessed spectacles of which we have been spectators, and emulators to 
the utmost of our ability, under a leader the most perfect of the present 
time, and who arrived at the summit of philosophy ; perhaps we shall 
act properly in invoking the gods, that they will enkindle the light of 
truth in our soul, and in supplicating the attendants and ministers of 
better natures to direct our intellect and lead it to the all-perfect, divine, 
and elevated, end of the Platonic theory. For I think that every where 
he who participates in the least degree of intelligence, will begin his 
undertakings from the Gods, and especially in explications respecting 
the Gods: for we can no otherwise be able to understand a divine nature 
than by being perfected through the light of the Gods ; nor divulge it to 
others unless governed by them, and exempt from multiform opinions, 
and the variety which subsists in words, preserving at the same time the 
interpretation of divine names. Knowing therefore this, and complying 
with the exhortation of the Platonic Timaeus, we in the first place establish 
the Gods as leaders of the doctrine respecting themselves. But may 
they in consequence of hearing our prayers be propitious to us, and 
benignantly approaching, guide the intellect of our soul, and lead it about 
the Vesta of Plato, and to the arduous sublimities of this speculation ; 
where, when arrived, we shall receive all the truth concerning-them, and 
shall obtain the best end of our parturient conceptions of divine concerns, 
desiring to know something respecting them, inquiring about them of 
others, and, at the same time, as far as we are able, exploring them 
ourselves. 


CHAPTER II. 

A Hd thus much by way of preface. But it is necessary that I should 
unfold the mode of the proposed doctrine, what it is requisite to expect 
it will be, and define the preparatives which a hearer of it ought to 
possess; that being properly adapted, he may approach, not to our 
discourses, but to the intellectually-elevated and deific philosophy of 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



4 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


Plato. For it is proper that convenient aptitudes of auditors should be 
proposed according to the forms of discourses, just as in the mysteries, 
those who are skilful in concerns of this kind, previously prepare 
receptacles for the Gods, and neither always use the same inanimate 
particulars, nor other animals, nor men, in order to procure the presence 
of the divinities; but that alone out of each of these which is naturally 
capable of participating divine illumination, is by them introduced to the 
proposed mystic rites. 

The present discourse, therefore, will first of all be divided by me into 
three parts. In the beginning, considering all those common conceptions 
concerning the Gods, which Plato summarily delivers, together with the 
power and dignity every where of theological axioms; but in the middle 
of this work, speculating the total orders of the Gods, enumerating their 
peculiarities, defining their progressions' after the manner of Plato, and 
referring every thing to the hypotheses of theologists; and, in the end, 
speaking concerning the Gods which are in different places celebrated in 
the Platonic writings, whether they are supermundane or mundane, and 
referring the theory respecting them to the total genera of the divine 
orders. 

In every part of this work, likewise, we shall prefer the clear, distinct, 
and simple, to the contraries of these. And such things as are delivered 
through symbols, we shall transfer to a clear doctrine concerning them ; * 

but such as are delivered through images, we shall transmit to their 
exemplars. Such things too as are written in a more affirmative way, 
we shall examine by causal reasonings; but such as are composed through 
demonstrations, we shall investigate; and besides this, explain the mode 
of truth ^yhich they contain, and render it known to the hearers. And 
of things enigmatically proposed, we shall elsewhere discover perspicuity, 
not from foreign hypotheses, but from the most genuine writings of Plato. 
But with respect to the things which immediately occur to the hearers, 
of these we shall contemplate the consent with things themselves. And 
from all these particulars, one perfect form of the Platonic theology will 
present itself to our view, together with its truth which pervades through 
the whole of divine intellections, and the one intellect which generated all 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. 11. 


OF PLATO. 


5 


the beauty of this theology, and the mystic evolution of this theory. 
Such, therefore, as I have said, will be my present treatise. 

But the auditor of the proposed dogmas is supposed to be adorned 
with the moral virtues, and to be one who has bound by the reason of 
virtue all the illiberal and inharmonious motions of the soul, and 
harmonized them to the one form of intellectual prudence: for, as 
Socrates says, it is not lawful for the pure to be touched by the impure. 
But every vicious man is perfectly impure ; and the contrary character 
is pure. He must likewise have been exercised in all the logical methods, 
and have contemplated many irreprehensible conceptions about analyses, 
and many about divisions, the contraries to these, agreeably, as it appears 
to me, to the exhortation of Parmenides to Socrates. For prior to such a 
contest in arguments, the knowledge of the divine genera, and of the truth 
established in them, is difficult and impervious. Butin the third place, 
he must not be unskilled in physics. For he who has been conversant 
with the multiform opinions of physiologists, and has after a manner 
explored in images the causes of beings, will more easily advance 
to the nature of separate and primary, essences. An auditor therefore 
of the present work, as I have said, must not be ignorant of' the truth 
contained in the phenomena, nor unacquainted with the paths of erudition, 
and the disciplines which they contain; for through these we obtain a 
more immaterial knowledge of a divine essence. But all these must be 
bound together in the leader intellect. Being likewise a partaker of the 
dialectic of Plato, meditating those immaterial energies which are separate 
from corporeal powers, and desiring to contemplate by intelligence* in 
conjunction with reason [true] beings, our auditor must genuinely apply 
himself to the interpretation of divine and blessed dogmas, and fill his 
soul, according to the Oracle, with profound love; since, as Plato 
somewhere observes, for the apprehension of this theory, a better assistant 
than love cannot be obtained. 

He must likewise be exercised in the truth which pervades through all 
things, and must excite his intelligible eye to real and perfect truth. He 


1 Instead of vo»j<ri$ ftira A oyov, it is necessary to read, vo>j<r«i fitra A oyov. 


% 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



6 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


must establish himself in a firm, immovable, and safe kind of divine 
knowledge, and must be persuaded not to admire any thing else, nor even 
to direct his attention to other things, but must hasten to divine light 
With an intrepid reasoning energy, and with the power of an unwearied 
life; and in short, must propose to himself such a kind of energy and 
rest as it becomes him to possess who intends to be such a coryphaeus as 
Socrates describes in the Thesetetus. Such then is the magnitude of our 
hypothesis, and such the mode of the discourses about it. Before, 
however, I enter on the narration of the things proposed, I wish to speak 
about theology itself, its different modes, and what theological forms 
Plato approves, and what he rejects; that these being previously known, 
we may more easily learn in what follows, the auxiliaries of the demon* 
strations themselves. 


CHAPTER III. 

All, therefore, that have ever touched upon theology, have called 
things first, according to nature, Gods ; and have said that the theological 
science is conversant about these. And some, indeed, have considered a 
corporeal essence, as that alone which has any existence, and have placed 
in a secondary rank with respect to essence, all the genera of incorporeal 
natures, considerii^g the principles of things as having a corporeal form, 
and evincing that the habit in us by which we know these, is corporeal. 
But others, suspending indeed all bodies from incorporeal natures, and 
defining the first hyparxis' to be in soul, and the powers of soul, call (as 
it appears to me) the best of souls, Gods ; and denominate the science 
which proceeds as far as to these, and which knows these, theology. 
But such as produce the multitude of souls from another more ancient 
principle, and establish intellect as the leader of wholes, these assert that 
the best end is a union of the soul with intellect, and consider the 
intellectual form of life as the most honourable of all things. They 

* Hyparxis, is the summit of any nature, or blossom, as it were, of its essence. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. HI. 


OF PLATO. 


7 


doubtless too consider theology, and the discussion of intellectual essence, 
as one and the same. All these, therefore, as I have said, call the first 
and most self-sufficient principles of things, Gods, and the science 
respecting these, theology. 

The divine narration however, of Plato alone, despises all corporeal 
natures, with reference to principles. Because, indeed, every thing divisible 
and endued with interval, is naturally unable either to produce or preserve 
itself, but possesses its being, energy, and passivity through soul, and the 
motions which soul contains. But Plato demonstrates that the psychical 
essence [i.e. the essence pertaining to soul] is more ancient than bodies, but 
is suspended from an intellectual hypostasis. Forevery thing which is moved 
according to time, though it may be self-moved, is indeed of a more ruling 
nature than things moved by others, but is posterior to an eternal motion. 
He shows, therefore, as we have said, that intellect is the father and cause 
of bodies and souls, and that all things both subsist and energize about 
it, which are allotted a life conversant with transitions and evolutions. 

Plato, however, proceeds to another principle entirely exempt from 
intellect, more incorporeal and ineffable, and from which all things, even 
though you should speak of such as are last, have necessarily a subsistence. 
For all things are not naturally disposed to participate of soul, but such 
things only as are allotted in themselves a more clear or obscure life. 
Nor are all things able to enjoy intellect and being, but such only as 
subsist according to form. But it is necessary that the principle of all 
things should be participated by all things, if it does not desert any thing, 
since it is the cause of all things which in any respect are said to have a 
subsistence. Plato having divinely discovered this first principle of 
wholes, which is more excellent than intellect, and is concealed in 
inaccessible recesses; and having exhibited these three causes and monads, 
and evinced them to be above bodies, I mean soul, the first intellect, and 
a union above intellect, produces from these as monads, their proper 
numbers; one multitude indeed being uniform,' but the second intellectual, 
and the third psychical. For every monad is the leader of a multitude 

% Wherever this word occurs in this translation, it signifies that which is characterized by unity. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



8 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


coordinate to itself. But as Plato connects bodies with souls, so likewise 
he connects souls with intellectual forms, and these again with the unities 
of beings. But he converts all things to one imparticipable unity. And 
having run back as far as to this unity, he considers himself as having 
obtained the highest end of the theory of wholes ; and that this is the 
truth respecting the Gods, which is conversant with the unities of beings, 
and which delivers their progressions and peculiarities, the contact of 
beings with them, and the orders of forms which are suspended from these 
unicar hypostases. 

But he teaches us that the theory respecting intellect, and the forms 
and the genera revolving about intellect, is posterior to the science which 
is conversant with the Gods themselves. Likewise that the intellectual 
theory apprehends intelligibles, and the forms which are capable of being 
known by the soul through the projecting energy of intellect; but that 
the theological science transcending this, is conversant with arcane and 
ineffable hyparxes, and pursues their separation from each other, and 
their unfolding into light from one cause of all: whence, I am of opinion, 
that the intellectual peculiarity of the soul is capable of apprehending 
intellectual forms, and the difference which subsists in them, but that 
the summit, and, as they say, flower of intellect and hyparxis, is conjoined 
with the unities of beings, and through these, with the occult union of all 
the divine unities. For as we contain many gnostic powers, through 
this alone we are naturally capable of being conjoined with and 
participating this occult union. For the genus of the Gods cannot be 
apprehended by sense, because it is exempt from all bodies; nor by 
opinion and dianoia,* for these are divisible and come into contact with 
multiform concerns ; nor by intelligence in conjunction with reason, for 
knowledge of this kind belongs to true beings; but the hyparxis of the 
Gods rides on beings, and is defined according to the union itself of 
wholes. It remains, therefore, if it be admitted that a divine nature can 
be in any respect known, that it must be apprehended by the hyparxis 
of the soul, and through this, as far as it is possible, be known. For wo 

* i. e. Of the nature of theme. 

* i. e. The discursive energy of reason, or the power of the soul that reasons scientifically. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. il. 


OF PLATO. 


9 


say that every where things similar can be known by the similar; viz. 
the sensible by sense, the doxastic' by opinion, the dianoetic by dianoia, 
and the intelligible by intellect. So that the most unical nature must be 
known by the one , and the ineffable by that which is ineffable. 

Indeed, Socrates in the [First] Alcibiades rightly observes, that the soul 
entering into herself will behold all other things, and deity itself. For 
verging to her own union, and to the centre of all life, laying aside mul¬ 
titude, and the variety of the all manifold powers which she contains, she 
ascends to the highest watch-tower of beings. And as in the most holy 
of the mysteries, they say, that the mystics at first meet with the multi¬ 
form, and many-shaped* genera, which are hurled forth before the Gods, 
but on entering the interior parts of the temple, unmoved, and guarded 
by the mystic rites, they genuinely receive in their bosom divine illumi¬ 
nation, and divested of their garments, as they would say, participate oi 
a divine nature;—the same mode, as it appears to me, takes place in the 
speculation of wholes. For the soul when looking at things posterior to 
herself, beholds the shadows and images of beings, but when she converts 
herself to herself she evolves her own essence, and the reasons which she 
contains. And at first indeed, she only as it were beholds herself; but, 
when she penetrates more profoundly into the knowledge of herself, she 
finds in herself both intellect, and the orders of beings. When however, 
she proceeds into her interior recesses, and into the adytum as il were of 
the soul, she perceives with her eye closed, the genus of the Gods, and 
the unities of beings. For all things are in us psychically, and through 
this we are naturally capable of knowing all things, by exciting the* 
powers and thp images of wholes which we contain. 

And this is the best employment of our energy, to be extended to a 
divine nature itself, having our powers at rest, to revolve harmoniously 
round it, to excite all the multitude of the soul to this union, and laying 
aside all such things as are posterior to the one, to become seated and 
conjoined with that which is ineffable, and beyond all things. For it is 
lawful for the soul to ascend, till she terminates her flight in the principle 

* if e. Evil daemon*. 

Vol. I. 3 


,* i. e. Hie object of opinion, 
froc. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



10 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


of things; but arriving thither, beholding the place which is there, de¬ 
scending thence, atid directing her course through beings ; likewise, 
evolving the multitude of forms, exploring their monads and their 
numbers, and apprehending intellectually how each is suspended from its 
proper unity, then we may consider her as possessing the most perfect 
science of divine natures, perceiving in a uniform manner the progressions 
of the Gods into beings, and the distinctions of beings about the Gods. 
Such then - according to Plato’s decision is our theologist; and theology is 
a habit of this kind, which unfolds the hyparxis itself of the Gods, se¬ 
parates and speculates their unknown and unical light from the peculia¬ 
rity of their participants, and announces it to such as are worthy of this 
energy, which is both blessed and comprehends all things at once. 


CHAPTER IV. 

' t 

After this all-perfect comprehension of the first theory, we mpst 
deliver the modes according to which Plato teaches us mystic conceptions 
of divine natures. For he appears not to have pursued every where the 
same mode of doctrine about these; but sometimes according to a deific 
energy, and at other times dialectically, he evolves the truth concerning 
them. And sometimes he symbolically announces their ineffable pecu¬ 
liarities, but at other times he recurs to them from images, and discovers 
in them the primary causes of wholes. For in the Phaedrus being inspired 
by the Nymphs, and having exchanged human intelligence for a better 
possession, fury, he unfolds with a divine mouth many arcane dogmas 
concerning the intellectual Gods, and many concerning the liberated 
rulers of the universe, who lead upwards the multitude of mundane Gods 
to the monads which are intelligible and separate from [mundane] wholes. 
But relating still more about those Gods who are allotted the world, he 
celebrates their intellections, and mundane fabrications, their unpolluted 
providence and government of souls, and whatever else Socrates delivers 
entheastically [or according to a divinely-inspired energy] in that dialogue. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. IV. 


OF PLATO. 


11 


as he clearly asserts, ascribing at the same time this fury to the deities o i 
the place. 

But iu the Sophista, dialectically contending about being, and the 
separate hypostasis of the one from beings, and doubting against those 
more ancient than himself, he shows how all beings are suspended from 
their cause, and the first being, but that being itself participates of the 
unity which is exempt from the whole of things, that it is a passive one, 
but not the one itself, being subject to and united to the one , but not 
being that which is primarily one. In a similar manner too, in the Par¬ 
menides, he unfolds dialectically the progressions of being from the one , 
and the transcendancy of the one, through the first hypotheses, and this, 
as he asserts in that dialogue, according to the most perfect division of 
this methods And again, in the Gorgias, he relates the fable concerning 
the three demiurgi [or fabricators] and their demiurgic allotment, which 
indeed is not only a fable, but a true narration. But in the Banquet, he 
speaks concerning the union of Love. And in the Protagoras, about the 
distribution of mortal animals from the Gods; in a symbolical manner 
conceding the truth respecting divine natures, and as far as to mere in¬ 
dication unfolding his mind to the most genuine of his hearers. 

If likewise, you are willing that I should mention the doctrine deli¬ 
vered through the mathematical disciplines, and the discussion of divine 
concerns from ethical or physical discourses, of which many may be con¬ 
templated in the Timseus, many in the dialogue called the Politicus, and 
many may be seen scattered in other dialogues; here likewise to you who 
are desirous of knowing divine concerns through images, the method will 
be apparent. Foi* all these shadow forth the powers of things divine. 
The Politicus, for instance, the fabrication in the heavens. But the 
figures of the five elements delivered in geometrical proportions in the 
Timaeus, 1 represent in images the peculiarities of the Gods who ride on 
the parts of the universe. And the divisions of the psychical essence in 
that dialogue shadow forth the total orders of the Gods. 

I omit to mention that Plato composes polities, assimilating them to 

r 

* rv rifjuKiop is omitted in the Greek* 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



12 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK L 


divine natures, and to the whole world, and adorns them from the powers 
which it contains. All these therefore, through the similitude of mortal 
to divine concerns, exhibit to us in images, the progressions, orders, and 
fabrications of divine natures. And such are the modes of thcologic doc¬ 
trine employed by Plato. 

It is evident however, from what has been already said, that they are 
necessarily so many in number. For those who treat of divine concerns 
in an indicative manner, either speak symbolically and fabulously, or 
through images. But of those who openly announce their conceptions, 
some frame their discourses according to science, but others according to 
inspiration from the Gods. And he who desires to signify divine con¬ 
cerns through symbols is Orphic, and in short, accords with those who 
write fables concerning the Gods: But he who does this through images 
is Pythagoric. For the mathematical disciplines were invented by the 
Pythagoreans, in order to a reminiscence of divine concerns, at which, 
through these as images they endeavour to arrive. For they refer both 
numbers and figures to the Gods, according to the testimony of their his¬ 
torians. But the entheastic character, or he who is under the influence 
of divine inspiration, unfolding the truth itself by itself concerning the 
Gods, most perspicuously ranks among the highest initiators. For these 
do not think proper to unfold the divine orders, or their 'peculiarities to 
their familiars, through certain veils, but announce their powers and their 
numbers, in consequence of being moved by the Gods themselves. But 
the tradition of divine concerns according to science, is the illustrious 
prerogative of the philosophy of Plato. For Plato alone, as it appears 
tome, of all those who are known to us, has attempted methodically to 
divide and reduce into order, the regular progression of the divine genera, 
their mutual difference, the common peculiarities of the total orders, and 
the distributed peculiarities in each. But the truth of this will be evi¬ 
dent when we frame precedaneous demonstrations about the Parme¬ 
nides, and all the divisions which it contains. 

At present we shall observe that Plato does not admit all the fabulous 
figments of dramatic composition, but those only which have reference 
to the beautiful and the good, and which are not discordant with a di- • 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. IV. 


OF PLATO. 


IS 


vine essence. For that mythological mode which indicates divine con¬ 
cerns through conjecture is ancient, concealing truth under a multitude 
of veils, and proceeding in a manner similar to nature, which extends 
sensible figments ofintelligibles, material, of immaterial, partible, of im¬ 
partible natures, and images, and things which have a false being, of 
things perfectly true. But Plato rejects the more tragical mode of my¬ 
thologizing of the ancient poets, who. thought proper to establish an 
arcane theology respecting the Gods, and on this account devised wan¬ 
derings, sections, battles, lacerations, rapes and adulteries of the Gods, 
and^many other such symbols of the truth about divine natures, which 
this theology conceals; this mode he rejects, and asserts that it is in 
every respect most foreign from erudition. But he considers those my¬ 
thological discourses about the Gods, as more persuasive, and more 
adapted to truth and the philosophic habit, which assert that a divine 
nature is the cause of all good, but of no evil, and that it is void of all 
mutation, ever preserving its own order immutable, and comprehending 
in itself the fountain of truth, but never becoming the cause of any de¬ 
ception to others. For such types of theology, Socrates delivers in the 
Republic. 

All the fables therefore of Plato, guarding the truth in concealment, 
have not even their externally apparent apparatus discordant with our 
undisciplined and unperverted anticipation respecting the Gods. But 
they bring with them an image of the mundane composition, in which 
both the apparent beauty is worthy of divinity, and a beauty more di¬ 
vine than this, is established in the unapparent lives and powers of the 
Gods. This therefore, is one of the mythological modes respecting di¬ 
vine concerns, which from the apparently unlawful, irrational, and inor¬ 
dinate, passes into order and bound, and regards as its scope the com¬ 
position of the beautiful and good. 

But there is another mode which he delivers in the Phaedrus. And 
this consists in every where preserving theological fables, unmixed with 
physical narrations, and being careful in no respect to confound or 
exchange theology, and the physical theory with each other. For, as a 
• divine essence is separate from the whole of nature, In like manner, it is 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



14 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


perfectly proper that discourses respecting the Gods should be pure from 
physical disquisitions. For a mixture of this kind is, says he, laborious : 
and to make physical passions the end of mythological conjecture, is the 
employment of ho very good man; such for instance^ as considering 
through his [pretended] wisdom, Chimeera, Gorgon, and things of a simi¬ 
lar kind, as the same with physical figments. Socrates, in the Phsedrus, 
reprobating this mode of mythologizing, represents its patrons as saying 
under the figure of a fable, that Orithya sporting with the wind Boreas, 
and being thrown down the rocks, means nothing more, than that Orithya 
who was a mortal, was ravished by Boreas through love. For it appears 
to me, that fabulous narrations about the gods, should always have their 
concealed meaning more venerable than the apparent. So that if certain 
persons introduce to us physical hypotheses of Platonic fables, and such 
as are conversant with sublunary affairs, we must say that they entirely 
wander from the intention of the philosopher, and that those hypotheses 
alone, are interpreters of the truth contained in these fables, which have 
for their scope, a divine, immaterial, and separate hypostasis, and which 
looking to this, make the compositions and analyses of the fables, adapted* 
to our inherent anticipations of divine concerns. 


CHAPTER V. 

' As we have therefore enumerated all these modes of the Platonic 
theology, and have shown what compositions and analyses of fables are 
adapted to the truth respecting the Gods, let us consider, in the next 
place, whence, and from what dialogues principally, we think the 
dogmas of Plato concerning the Gods may be collected, and by a spe¬ 
culation of what types or forms we may be able to distinguish his 
genuine writings, from those spurious compositions which are ascribed 
to him. 

The truth then concerning the Gods pervades, as I may say, through 
* For oikiixi;, it is necessary to read oixna;. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



CHAP. V. 


OF PLATO. 


15 


all 'the Platonic dialogues, and, in all of them conceptions of the first 
philosophy, venerable, clear, and supernatural, are disseminated, in 
some indeed, more obscurely, but in others. more. conspicuously ; con¬ 
ceptions Which excite those that are in any respect able to participate of 
thein, to the immaterial and separate essence of the.Gods. And, as in 
each part of the universe, and in nature herself, the demiurgus of all 
that the world contains, established resemblances of. the .unknown 
hyparxis of the Gods, that all things might be converted to a divine na¬ 
ture, through their alliance with it, in like manner I am ofiopinion, that 
the divine intellect of Plato weaves conceptions about the.G.ods in all 
his Writings, and leaves nothing deprived .of the mention of divinity, that 
from the whole of them, a reminiscence of wholes may. be obtained, and 
imparted to the genuine lovers of divine concerns. 

If however, it be requisite to lay before the reader those.dialogues out 
of many, which principally unfold to us the mystic discipline about the 
gods, I should not err in ranking among this number,, the Phaedo and 
Phtedrus, the Banquet, and the Philebus, and together with these, the 
Sophista and Politicus, the Cratylus and the Timaeus. For all these are 
full through the whole of themselves, as I may say, of . the divine science 
of Plato. But I should place in the second rank after these, the fable in 
the Gorgias, and that in the. Protagoras; likewise the assertions about 
the providence of the Gods in the Laws, and such things as are delivered 
about the Fates, or the mother of the Fates, or the circulations of the 
universe, in the tenth book of the Republic. 1 Again, you may, .if you 
please, place in the third rank those Epistles, through which we .may be 
able to arrive at the science about divine natures. For in these, mention 
is made of the three kings; and very many other divine dogmas worthy 
the Platonic theory are delivered. It .is necessary therefore, looking to 
these, to explore in these each order of the Gods. 

Thus from the Philebus, we may receive the science respecting the one 
goodj and the two first principles of things, together with the triad* 
which is unfolded into light from these. For you will find all these 

* Tfit &of is omitted in die original. 


Digiti ■ -by 


Google 



16 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


distinctly delivered to us by Plato in that dialogue. Bui from the Tia 
maeus, you may obtain the theory about intelligibles, a divine narration 
about the demiurgic monad: and the most full truth about the mundane 
Gods. But from the Phaedrus, [you may acquire a scientific knowledge 
of] all the intelligible and intellectual genera, and of the liberated ordeiis 
of Gods, which are proximately established above the celestial circula¬ 
tions. From the Politicus, you may obtain the theory of the fabrica¬ 
tion in the heavens, of the uneven periods of the universe, and of the 
intellectual causes of those periods. But from the Sophista, the whole 
sublunary generation, and the peculiarity of the Gods who are allotted 
the sublunary region, and preside over its generation^ and corruptions. 
But with respect to each of the Gods, we may obtain many conceptions 
adapted to sacred concerns from the Banquet, many from the Cratylus, 
and many from the Phsedo. For in each of these dialogues, more or 
less mention is made of divine names, from which it is easy for those 
who are exercised in divine concerns to discover by a reasoning process 
the peculiarities of each. 

It is necessary however, to evince that each of the dogmas accords 
with Platonic principles, and the mystic traditions of theologists. For 
all the Grecian theology is the progeny of the mystic tradition of Or¬ 
pheus ; Pythagoras first of all learning from Aglaophemus the orgies of 
the Gods, but Plato in the second place receiving an all-perfect science 
of the divinities from the Pythagoric and Orphic writings. For in the 
Philebus referring the theory about the two species of principles [bound 
and infinity] to the Pythagoreans, he calls them men dwelling with the 
Gods, and truly blessed. Philolaus therefore, the Pythagorean, has left 
us in writing many admirable conceptions about these principles, cele¬ 
brating their common progression into beings, and their separate fabri¬ 
cation of things. But in the Timaeus, Plato endeavouring to teach us 
about the sublunary Gods, and their order, flies to theologists, calls 
them the sons of the Gods, and makes them the fathers of the truth 
about those divinities. And lastly, he delivers the orders of the sublu¬ 
nary Gods proceeding from wholes, according to the progression deli-; 
vered by them of the intellectual kings. Again, in the Cratylus he fql? 


Digitized by v^ooQle 


CHAP. VI. 


OF PLATO. 


17 


tows the traditions of theologists, respecting the ordet of the divine pro^ 
cessions. But in the Gorgias, he adopts the Homeric dogma, respect¬ 
ing the triadic hypostasis of the demiurgi. And in short, he every 
where discourses concerning the Gods agreeably to the principles of 
theologists ; rejecting indeed, the tragical part of mythological fiction* 
but establishing first hypotheses in common with the authors of fables. 


CHAPTER VI, 

Perhaps, however, some one may here object to us, that We do hot in 
a proper manner exhibit the every where dispersed theology of Plato, and' 
that we endeavour to heap together different particulars from different dia¬ 
logues, as if we were studious of collecting together many things into one 
mixture, instead of deriving them all from one and the same fountain: 
For if this were the case, we might refer different dogmas to different 
treatises of Plato, but we shall by no means have a precedaneous doc¬ 
trine concerning the Gods, nor will there be any dialogue which presents 
ns with an all-perfect and entire procession of the divine genera, and their 
co-ordination with each other. But we shall be similar to those who en¬ 
deavour to obtain a whole from parts, through the want of a whole prior 
to parts, and to weave together the perfect from things imperfect; when, 
bn the contrary, the imperfect ought to have the first cause of its genera¬ 
tion in the perfect. For the Timseus, for instance, will teach us the theory 
of the intelligible genera; and the Phaedrus appears to present us 
with a methodical account of the first intellectual orders. But where will 
be the co-ordination of intellectuals to intelligibles ? And what will be the 
generation of second from first natures ? In short, after what manner the 
progression of the divine orders takes place from the one principle of all 
things, and how in the generations of the Gods, the orders between 
the one , and all-perfect number, are filled up, we shall 'be unable to 
evince. 

Farther still, it mayJbe said',* 'Where will be the venerableness of your 
Proc. Voi.1. C 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON TOE THEOLOGY 


BOOK L 


18 

boastedscience about divine natures? For it is absurd to call these dog* 
mas which are collected from many places Platonic; and which,, as you 
acknowledge, are introduced from foreign names to the philosophy of 
Plato; nor are you able to evince one whole entire truth about divine na¬ 
tures. Perhaps, indeed, they will say, certain persons, junior to Plato, 
have' delivered in their w ritings, and left to their disciples, one perfect 
form of theology. You, therefore, are able to produce one entire theory 
about nature from the Timseus; but from the Republic, or Laws, the most 
beautiful dogmas about manners, and which tend to one form of philoso¬ 
phy. Alone, therefore, neglecting the treatise of Plato, which contains 
all the good of the first philosophy, and which may be called the summit 
of the whole theory, you will be deprived of the most perfect knowledge 
ef beings, unless you are so much infatuated, as to boast on account of 
fabulous fictions, though an analysis of things of this kind abounds with 
much of the probable, but not of the demonstrative. Besides, things of 
this kind are only delivered adventitiously in the Platonic dialogues; as 
the fable in the Protagoras, which is inserted for the sake of the politic 
science, and the demonstrations respecting it. In like manner, the fable 
in the Republic is inserted for the sake of justice; but in the Gorges, 
for the sake of temperance. For Plato combines fabulous narrations 
with investigations of ethical dogmas, not for the sake of the fables, but 
for the sake of the leading design, that we may not only exercise the in¬ 
tellectual part of the soul, through contending reasons, but that the divine 
part of the soul may more perfectly receive the knowledge of beings, 
through its sympathy with more mystic concerns. For, from other dis¬ 
courses, we appear similar to those who are compelled to the reception 
of truth; but from fables we suffer in an ineffable manner, and call forth 
our unperverted conceptions, venerating the mystic information which 
they contain. 

Hence, as it appears to me, Timaeus with great propriety thinks it fit 
that we should produce the divine genera, following the inventors of fa¬ 
bles as the sons of the Gods, 1 and subscribe to their always generating 

* t xv hmv, i» emitted id the original. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. Yl. 


OP PLATO. 


1§ 


secondary natures from such as are first, though they should speak with* 
out demonstration. For this kind of discourse is not demonstrative, but 
entheastic, and was invented by the ancients, not through necessity, but 
for the sake of persuasion, not regarding mere discipline, but sympathy 
with things themselves. But if you are willing to speculate not only thq 
causes of fables, but of other theological dogmas, you will fiud that some 
of them are scattered in the Platonic dialogues for the sake of ethical,'and 
others for the sake of physical considerations. For in the Philebus, Plato 
discourses concerning bound and the infinite, for the sake of pleasure and 
a life according to intellect. For I think the latter are species of the for* 
mer. In the Timams, the discourse about the intelligible Gods, is assum- 
ed for the sake of the proposed physiology. On which account it is every 
where necessary that images should be known from paradigms; but 
that the paradigms of material things should be immaterial, of sen* 
sibles, intelligible, and that the paradigms of physical forms should be 
separate. 

But again in the Phsedrus, Plato celebrates the supercelestial placet 
the subcelestial profundity, and every genus under this, for the sake of 
amatory mania: the manner in which the reminiscence of souls takes 
place, and the passage to these from hence. But every where, as I may 
say, the leading end is either physical or political, while the conceptions 
about divine natures take place, either for the sake of invention or per* 
fection. How, therefore, can such a theory as yours be any longer venerable 
and supernatural, and worthy to be studied beyond every thing, when it is 
neither able to evince the whole in itself, nor the perfect, nor that which 
is precedaneous in the writings of Plato, but is destitute of all these, is 
violent and not spontaneous, and does not possess a genuine, but an ad¬ 
ventitious order, as in a drama? And such are the objections which may 
be urged against our design. 


* For pvtoar, it i* neeemry to read, r « pwnfiww. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



m 


ON THE; THEOLOGY 


BOOK L 


CHAPTER VII. 

I, hoveyeb, to an objection of this kind, shall make a just and per* 
spicuous reply. I say then, that Plato every where discourses about the 
Gods agreeably to ancient rumour, and to the nature of things. And 
sometimes indeed, for the sake of the cause of the things proposed, he 
reduces them to the principles of the dogmas; and thence, as from a 
watch tower, contemplates the nature of the thing proposed. But some¬ 
times he establishes the theological science as the leading end. For in the 
Phaedras his subject respects intelligible beauty, and the participation of 
beauty pervading from thence through all things; and in the Banquet it 
respects the amatory order. 

But if it be necessary to survey in one Platonic dialogue, the all-per-, 
ftict, whole, and connected, extending as far as to the com pleat number 
of theology, I shall perhaps assert a paradox, and which will alone be 
apparent to our familiars. We ought however to dare, since we have 
entered on such like arguments, and affirm against our opponents, that, 
the Parmenides, and the mystic conceptions it contains, will accomplish 
all you desire. For in this dialogue all the divine genera proceed in 
order from the first cause, and evince their mutual connexion and de¬ 
pendence on each other. And those which are highest indeed, connate, 
with the one , and of a primary nature, are allotted a unical, occult and 
simple form of hyparxis; but such as are last, are multiplied, are distri-, 
buted into many parts, and are exuberant in number, but inferior in 
power to such as are of a higher order; and such as are middle, accord¬ 
ing to a convenient proportion, are more composite than their causes, 
but more simple than their proper progeny. And in short, all the axioms 
of the theologic science, appear in perfection in this dialogue, and all the 
divine orders are exhibited subsisting in connexion. So that this is no¬ 
thing else than the celebrated generation pf the Gods, and the procession 
of every kind of being from the ineffable and unknown cause of wholes. 
The Parmenides, therefore, enkindles m the lovers of Plato, the whole 
and perfect light of the theological science. But after this, the before men¬ 
tioned dialogues distribute parts of the mystic discipline about the Gods, 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. Till. 


' OP PLATO. 


• / 


21 

and all of them, as I may say, participate of divine wisdom, and excite 
oar spontaneous conceptions respecting a divine nature. And it is ne¬ 
cessary to refer all the parts of this mystic discipline to these dialogues, 
and these again to the one and all-perfect theory of the Parmenides. Fop 
thus, as it appears to me, we shall suspend the more imperfect from the 
perfect, and parts from wholes, and shall exhibit reasons assimila ted to 
things, of which, according to the Platonic Timmus, they are interpreters.' 
Such then is our answer to the objection which may be urged against us j 
and thus we refer the Platonic theory to the Parmenides; just as the 
Timaeus is acknowledged by all who are in the least degree intelligent, to 
contain the whole science about nature. 


CHAPTER VIII. 

I appear, however, by these means, to have excited for myself a two¬ 
fold contest against those who attempt to investigate the writings of 
Plato; and I see two sorts of persons, who will oppose what has been 
said. One of these does not think proper to explore any other design in the 
Parmenides, than exercise through opposite arguments, or to introduced 
this dialogue a croud of arcane and intellectual dogmas, which are foreign 
from its intention. But the other sort, who are more venerable than 
these, and lovers of forms assert, that one of the hypotheses is about the 1 
first God, another about the second God,-and the whole of an intelleo ' 
tual nature, and a third; about the natures posterior to this,*whether 
they are the more excellent genera, or souls, or any other kind of beings. 
For the investigation of these particulars does not pertain to the present- 
discourse. 

These, therefore, distribute three of the hypotheses after this manner. 
But they do not think-proper to busy themselves about the multitude of 
Gods, the intelligible, and the intellectual genera, the-supermundane and 
mundane natures, or to unfold all these by division, or busily explore- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


thfem. For according tothem, though Rato in the second hypothesis, 
treats about'intellectual beings, yet the nature of intellect is one, simple 
and indivisible.' Against both these therefore, must he contend, who 
entertains that opinion of the Parmenides, which we have before men¬ 
tioned. The contest however against these is not equal. But those 
who make the Parmenides a logical exercise, are again attacked by those 
who embrace the divine mode of interpretation. And those who do not 
unfold the multitude of beings, and the orders of divine natures, are in¬ 
deed, as Homer says, in every respect venerable and skilful men, but 
yet for the sake of the Platonic philosophy, we must doubt against them, 
following in this our leader to the most holy and mystic truth. It is 
proper likewise to relate as far as contributes to our purpose, what ap¬ 
pears to us to be the truth respecting the hypotheses of the Parmenides v 
for thus perhaps by a reasoning process, we may embrace the whole the¬ 
ology of Plato. 


CHAPTER IX. 

In the first place then, let us consider those, who draw down the 
design of this dialogue from the truth of things to a logical exercise, and 
see whether they can possibly accord with the writings of Plato. It is 
therefore evident to every one, that Parmenides proposes to himself to 
deliver in reality the dialectic method, and that with this view he curso¬ 
rily assumes it in a similar manner in each of the things which have a 
real being, as, in sameness, difference, similitude, dissimilitude, motion, 
and permanency, &c.; exhorting at the same time, those who desire to 
discover the nature of each of these in an orderly method, to this exercise, 
as to a great contest. He likewise asserts that it was by no means an easy 
undertaking to him who was so much advanced in years, assimilates him¬ 
self to the Ibycean horse, and presents us with every argument to prove 
that this method is a serious undertaking, and not a contest consisting in 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. IX. 


OF: PLATO; 


as 


mere words. How therefore, is it possible, that we can refer to empty 
arguments those conceptions' about which the great Parmenides, evin* 
cing that they require much serious discussion, composed this discourse? 
How likewise is it reasonable to suppose that an aged man would busy 
himself with mere verbal contests, and that he. who loved to speculate 
the truth of things, would bestow so much study on this method,—he 
who. considered every thing else, as having no. real existence, and who 
ascended to the high watch-tower of being itself? Indeed, hewho ad¬ 
mits this must suppose that Parmenides is satirized by Plato in this dia¬ 
logue, by thus representing him drawn down to juvenile contests, from 
the most intellectual visions of the soul. . 

But if yqu are willing, let us consider in addition to the above, what 
Parmenides promises, and on what subject engaging to speak, he entered 
on this,discussion. Was it not then , about being according to his doo 
trine, and the unity of all beings, to which .extending himself, his design 
was concealed from the vulgar, while he exhorts us to collect the multi¬ 
tude of beings into one undivided union ?. If, therefore, this is the one 
being, or that which is the highest, and which is perfectly established 
above the reasons conversant with opinion, is it not absurd to confound 
dogmas about intelligibles with doxastic arguments ? For indeed, such a 
form of discourse is not adapted to the hypothesis about true beings, nor 
does the intellection of unapparent and separate causes harmonize with 
dialectic exercises; but these differ from each other, so far as intellect is 
established above opinion, as Timseus informs us, and not Timteus only, 
but likewise the demoniacal Aristotle, who, discoursing on a power of 
this kind, exhorts us to make our investigations, neither about things 
perfectly unapparent to us, nor about such as are more known. 

It is far therefore from being the case, that Parmenides, who places 
the science of beings above that which appears to be truth to those who 
rank sense before intellect, should introduce doxastic knowledge to an 
intellective nature, since a knowledge of this kind is dubious, various, 
and unstable; or that he should speculate true being with this doxastic 

* For rrw-reAaj, it >9 necessary to read nri|SoAa$. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


S4> 

wisdom, and inane discussion. For a various form of knowledge does 
not harmonize' with that which Is simple, nor the multiform with the 
uniform, nor the doxastic with the intelligible. 

* But still further, nor must this be omitted, that such a mode of dis¬ 
course is perfectly foreign from the discussion of Parmenides. For he 
discourses about all beihgs, and delivers the order of wholes, their pro¬ 
gression beginning from the one, and their conversion ending in the one. 
But the argumentative method is very remote from scientific theory. 
Does it not therefore appear, that Plato must have attributed a discord¬ 
ant hypothesis to Parmenides, if it be said that he merely regards an 
exercise through opposite arguments, and that for the Sake of the power 
employed in this exercise, he excites the whole of this evolution of rea¬ 
sons? Indeed, it will be found that in all the other dialogues, Plato 
attributes hypotheses to each of the philosophers adapted to their pecu¬ 
liar tenets. Thus to Tknafcus, he assigns the doctrine about nature; to 
Socrates, that of a republic; to the Elean guest, that about being; and 
to the priestess Diotima, that respecting love. Afterwards, each of the 
other dialogues confines itself to those arguments which are adapted to 
the writings of the principal person of the dialogue* But Parmenides 
alotae will appear to us wise in his poems, and in his diligent investiga¬ 
tion of true being, but in the Platonic scene, he will be the leader of a 
juvenile muse. This opinion, therefore, accuses Plato of dissimilitude of 
imitation, though he himself condemns the poets, for ascribing to the 
sons of the Gods a love of money, and a life subject to the dominion of 
the passions. How, therefore, can we refer a discussion of doxastic and 
empty arguments to the leader of the truth of beings ? 

But if it be necessary that omitting a multitude of arguments, we 
phould make Plato himself a witness of the proposed discussion, we will 
rite if you please what is written in the Theaetetus and Sophista; for from 
these dialogues what we assert will be apparent. In the Theaetetus then 
Socrates being excited by a young man to a confutation of those who assert 
that being is immoveable, attacks among these an opinion of this kind 

1 For pom apiumov, it i» neceMaty to read lift} xpetppemw. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. IX. 


OF PLATO, .25 

entertained by Parmenides, and at the same time assigns the cause. 
“ I blush," says he, “ for Parmenides, who is one of these, more than 
for all the rest; for I, when very yonng, was conversant With him When 
he was very elderly, and he appeared to me to possess a certain profun¬ 
dity perfectly generous. I am afraid therefore, lest we do not under¬ 
stand what has been asserted, and much more am I fearful that we foil 
short of the meaning of Parmenides." With great propriety therefore do 
we assert, that the proposed discussion does not regard a logical exer¬ 
cise, and make this the end of the whole, but that it pertains to the 
science of the first principles of things. For how could Socrates using a 
power of this kind, and neglecting the knowledge of things, testify that 
the discourse of Parmenides possessed a depth perfectly generous P And 
wbat venerable ness can there be in adopting a method which proceeds 
doxastically through opposite reasons, and in Undertaking such an inven¬ 
tion of arguments ? 

Again, in the Sophista, exciting the Elean guest to a perspicuous evo¬ 
lution of the things proposed by him, and evincing that he was now 
accustomed to more profound discourses: “ Inform me,” says he, “ whe¬ 
ther it is your custom to give a prolix discussion of a subject which you are 
able to demonstrate to any one by interrogations; I mean such discussions 
as Parmenides himself formerly used, accompanied with all-beautiful 
reasons, and of which I was an auditor when I was very young, and he 
was very elderly ?” What reason then can be assigned, why we should 
not believe Socrates, when he asserts that the arguments of Parmenides 
were all-beautiful, and possessed a generous profundity, and why we. 
should degrade the discussion of Parmenides, hurl it from essence and 
being, and transfer it to a vulgar, trifling, and empty contest, neither 
considering that discourses of this kind are alone adapted to youth, nor 
regarding the hypothesis of being characterized by the one, nor any thing 
else which opposes such an opinion ? 

But I likewise think it is proper that the authors of this hypothesis, 
should consider the power of dialectic, such as it is exhibited by Socra¬ 
tes in the Republic;—how, as he says, it surrounds all disciplines like a 
defensive enclosure, and eleyates those that use it, to the good itself \ and 
Proe. Vox. I. D 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK L 


56 

the first unities, purifies the eye of the soul, establishes it in true beings, 
and the one principle of all things, and ends at last in that which is no 
longer hypothetical. For if the power of this dialectic is so great, and 
the end of this path so mighty, it is not proper to confound doxastic 
arguments, with a method of this kind. For the former regards the opi¬ 
nions of men, but the latter is called garrulity by the vulgar. And the one 
is perfectly destitute of disciplinative science, but the other is the defen¬ 
sive enclosure of such sciences, and the passage to it is through these. 
Again, the doxastic method of reasoning has for its end* the apparent, 
but the dialectic method endeavours to arrive at the one itself, always 
employing for this purpose steps of ascent, and at last, beautifully ends- 
in the nature of the good. 

By no means therefore, is it fit that we should draw down to doxastic 
arguments, a method which is established among the most accurate sci¬ 
ences. For the merely logical method which presides over the demon¬ 
strative phantasy, is of a secondary nature, and is alone pleased with 
contentious discussions; but our dialectic, for the most part, employs 
divisions and analyses as primary sciences, and as imitating the progres¬ 
sion of beings from the one t and their conversion to it again. But it 
likewise sometimes uses definitions and demonstrations, and prior to 
these the definitive method, and the dividing method prior to this. On 
the contrary, the doxastic method is deprived of the incontrovertible 
reasonings of demonstration. Is it not, therefore, necessary that these 
powers must be separated from each other, and that the discussion of 
Parmenides, which employs our dialectic, must be free from the empty 
variety of mere argument, and must fabricate its reasonings with a view 
to being itself, and not to that which is apparent ? And thus much may 
suffice in answer to those who reprobate our hypotheses. For if all this 
cannot convince them, we shall in vain endeavour to persuade them, and 
urge them to the speculation of things. 

* tiAo; is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. X. 


OF PLATO. 


97 


CHAPTER X. 

But a greater and more difficult contest remains for me, against those 
lovers of the speculation of beings, who look to the science of first causes, 
as the end proposed in the hypothesis of the Platonic Parmenides; and 
this contest we will accomplish, if you please, by numerous and more 
known arguments. 

And in the first place, we shall define what that is, about which our 
discourse against them will be employed; for this, I think, will render the 
mystic doctrine of Plato concerning divine natures, apparent in the 
highest degree. There are, therefore, nine hypotheses which are dis¬ 
cussed by Parmenides in this dialogue, as we have evinced in our com¬ 
mentaries upon it. And the five precedaneous hypotheses suppose that 
the one has a subsistence, and through this hypothesis, that all beings, 
the mediums of wholes, and the terminations of the progressions of things, 
may be supposed to subsist. But the four hypotheses which follow these, 
introduce the one t not having a subsistence, according to the exhortation 
of the dialectic method, show that by taking away the one , all beings, 
and such things as have an apparent existence, must be entirely subvert¬ 
ed, and propose to themselves the confutation of this hypothesis. And 
some of the hypotheses evidently conclude every thing according to rea¬ 
son, but others (if I may be allowed the expression) perfectly evince 
things more impossible, than impossibilities; which circumstance some 
prior to us perceiving, as it appears to me, necessarily to happen in these 
hypotheses, have considered it as deserving discussion,' in their treatises 
on this dialogue. 

With respect to the first of the hypotheses therefore, almost all agree 
in asserting, that Plato through this celebrates the superessential princi¬ 
ple of wholes, as ineffable, unknown, and above all being. But all do 
not explain the hypothesis posterior to this after the same manner. For 
the ancient Platonists, and those who participated the philosophy of 

1 For SwMTijf, I jread hotrptffys. 




Digitized by v^ooQle 



28 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


Plotinus assert that an intellectual nature presents itself to the view in 
this hypothesis, subsisting from the superessential principle of things, and 
endeavour to harmonize to the one and all-perfect power of intellect, 
such conclusions as are the result of this hypothesis. But that leader of 
Qurs to truth about the Gods, and confabulator of Plato (that I may use 
the language of Homer) who transferred what was indefinite in the theory 
of the more ancient philosophers, to bound, and reduced the confusion 
of the different orders to an intellectual distinction, in the writings which 
he communicated to his associates;—this our leader, in his treatise on 
the present subject, calls upon us to adopt a distinct division of the con¬ 
clusions, to transfer this division to the divine orders,' and to harmonize 
the first and most simple of the things exhibited to the first of beings; 
but to adapt those, in the middle rank to middle natures, according to 
the order which they are allotted among beings; and such as are last and 
lpultiform, to ultimate progressions. For the nature of being is not one, 
simple, and indivisible; but as in sensibles, the mighty heaven is one, 
yet it conjprehends in itself a multitude of bodies; and the monad con- 
nectedly contains multitude, but in the multitude there is an order of 
progressionand of sensibles, some are first, some middle, and some last; 
and prior to these, in souls, from one soul a multitude of souls subsists, 
and of these, some are placed in an order nearer, but others more remote 
from their wholeness, and others again fill up the medium of the ex¬ 
tremes ;—in like manner, it is doubtless necessary that among perfectly 
true beings, such genera as are uniform and occult, should be established 
in the. one and first cause of wholes, but that others should proceed into 
all multitude, and a whole number, and that others should contain the 
bond of these, in a middle situation. It is likewise by no means proper 
to harmonize the peculiarities of first natures with such as are second, nor 
of those that possess a subject order, with such as are more unical, but 
it is requisite that among these, some should have powers different from 
others, and that there should be an order in this progression of true 
beings, and an unfolding of second from first natures. 

In short, being which subsists according to, or is characterized by the 
one , proceeds indeed from the unity prior to beings, but generates the 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. X. 


OF PLATO. 


*9 

whole divine genus* via. the intelligible, intellectual, supen&ondaae, and 
that which proceeds as far as to the mundane order. But our preceptor 
likewise asserts, that each of the conclusions is indicative of a divine pe¬ 
culiarity. And though all the conclusions harmonise to all the progres¬ 
sions of the one being , or of being characterized by the one, yet I am of 
opinion, it is by no means wonderful, that some conclusions should more 
accord with some hypotheses than with others. For such things as ex¬ 
press the peculiarity of certain orders,, do not necessarily belong to all the 
Gods; but such as belong to all, are doubtless by a much greater reason 
present with each. If, therefore, we ascribe to Plato, an adventitious 
division ot the divine orders,' and do not clearly evince that, in other 
dialogues, he celebrates the progressions of the Gods from on high 
to the extremity of things, sometimes in fables respecting the 9oul, and 
at other times, in other theological modes, we shall absurdly attribute to 
him, such a division of being, and together with this, of the progression 
of the one. But if we can evince from other dialogues, that he (as will 
be manifest in the course of this work) has celebrated all the kingdoms 
of the Gods, in a certain respect, is it not impossible, that in the most 
mystic of all his works, he should deliver through the first hypothesis, the 
exempt transcendency of the one with respect to all the genera of beings, 
to being itself, to a psychical essence, to form, and to matter, but that 
he should make no mention of the divine progressions, and their orderly . 
separation ? For if it is proper to contemplate last things only, why do 
we touch on the first principle before other things ? Or if we think fit to 
unfold the multitude of the proper hypotheses, why do we pass by the 
genus of the Gods, and the divisions which it contains ? Or if we un¬ 
fold the natures subsisting between the first and last of things, why do 
we leave unknown the whole orders of those divine beings, which subsist 
between the one , and natures that are in any respect deified ? For all 
these particulars evince, that the whole discourse is defective, with re¬ 
spect to the science of things divine. 

But still farther, Socrates, in the Philebus, calls upon those that love 

1 For npagtm, it u necessary to nod t 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


SO 

the contemplation of beings, to use the dividing method, and always to 
explore the monads of total orders, and the duads, triads, or any other 
numbers proceeding from these. If this then is rightly determined, it is 
doubtless necessary that the Parmenides, which employs the whole dia¬ 
lectic method, and discourses about being which is characterized by 
the one, should neither speculate multitude about the one , nor remain in 
the one monad of beings, nor in short, introduce to the one which is above 
all beings, the whole multitude of first beings immediately, but should 
unfold, as in the first order, such beings as have an occult subsistence, 
and are allied to the one; but as in the middle rank, those genera of the 
Gods which subsist according to progression, and which are more divided 
than the extremely united, but are allotted a union more perfect, than 
such as have proceeded to the utmostj and should unfold as in the last 
rank, such as subsist according to the last division of powers, and together 
with these, such as have a deified essence. If, therefore, the first of the 
hypotheses is about the one which is above all multitude, it is doubtless 
necessary that the hypothesis which follows this, should not unfold being 
itself in an indefinite and indistinct manner, but should deliver all the 
orders of beings. For the dividing method does not admit, that we 
should introduce the whole of multitude at once to the one , as Socrates 
teaches us in the Philebus. 

Besides, we may evince the truth of what we assert from the very method 
of the demonstrations. For the first of the conclusions become immediately 
manifest from the least, most simple, most known, and as it were com¬ 
mon conceptions. But those which are next in order to these, become 
apparent through a greater multitude of conceptions, and such as are 
more various. And the last conclusions are entirely the most composite. 
For he always uses the first conclusions, as subservient to the demonstra¬ 
tion of those that follow, 1 and presents us with an intellectual paradigm 
of the order observed in geometry, or other disciplines, in the connexion 
of these conclusions with each other. If, therefore, discourses bring with 
them an image of the things of which they are interpreters, and if, as arc 


1 For t/wrm, it is necessary to read 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



OP PLATO. 


Chap* Xi. 


SI 


the evolutions from demonstrations, such must the order necessarily 
be of the things exhibited, it appears to me to be necessary, that, such 
things as derive their beginning from the most simple principles, must be 
in every respect of a more primary nature, and must be arranged as con¬ 
joined with the one ; but that such as are always multiplied, and suspend¬ 
ed from various demonstrations, must have proceeded farther from the 
subsistence* of the one. 

For the demonstrations which have two conclusions, must necessarily 
contain the conclusions prior to themselves> but those which contain pri¬ 
mary, spontaneous, and simple conceptions, are not necessarily united 
with such as are more composite, which are exhibited through more 
abundant media, and which are farther distant from the principle of 
beings. It appears therefore, that some of the conclusions are indicative 
of more divine orders, but others, of such as are more subordinate; 
some, of more united, and others, of more multiplied orders; and again, 
some, of more uniform, and others, of more multiform progressions. For 
demonstrations are universally from causes, and things first. If, there¬ 
fore, first are the causes of second conclusions, there is an order of causes, 
and things caused, in the multitude of the conclusions. For, indeed, to 
confound all things, and speculate them indefinitely in one, neither ac¬ 
cords with the nature of things, nor the science of Plato. 


CHAPTER XI* 

Again, therefore, let us discuss this affair in another way, and view 
with the dianoetic power, where any thing futile is delivered. For let it 
be said, if you please, and we will first of all allow it, that the conclusions 
of this second hypothesis are about true being. But as this is multitude, 

and not only one itself, like the one prior to beings; for being is that * 

, \ 

' For axorrcunws, it is necessary to read vtocTemus. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK!. 


32 

which is passive to the one, as the Ele&n guest in theSophisia informs us; 
and as it is universally acknowledged by our opponents, who establish 
that which is first as the one, but intellect, as one many, soul, as one and 
many, and body, as many and one :—as therefore, this has been asserted a 
thousand times, I mean that in true being there is multitude together with 
union, whether will they say that these things harmonize with the whole 
of being, but not with its parts, or both with the whole and its parts ? 
And again, we ask them, whether they attribute all things to each part of 
being, or whether they ascribe different things to different parts ? 

If, therefore, they are of opinion, that each particular should alone 
harmonize with the whole of being, bang will consist of non-beings, that 
which is moved, of things immoveable, that which abides, of things de¬ 
prived of permanency, and universally, all things will consist of their 
opposites, and we shall no longer agree with the discourse of Parmenides, 
who says that the parts of being characterized by the one , are in a certain 
respect wholes, and that each of them is one and being, in a manner 
similar to the whole. But if we attribute all things to each part, and 
there is nothing which we do not make all things, how can the summit of 
being, and that which is most eminently one, contain a wholeness, and 
an incomprehensible multitude of parts ? How can it at one and the same 
time contain the whole of number, figure, motion and permanency, and 
in short all forms and genera ? For these differ from each other, and the 
hypothesis will assert things impossible. For things near to, will be simi¬ 
larly multiplied with things remote from the one , and that which is first, 
will not be a less multitude than that which is last; nor again, will the 
last of things be a less one than the first, and things in the middle will 
have no difference with respect to division from the extremes. 

As therefore, it is not proper to ascribe all this multitude of conclu¬ 
sions to the wbolc alone, nor to consider all things in a similar manner in 
all the parts of being, it remains that different conclusions must harmonize 
with different things. It is necessary, therefore, that either the enumev 
ration of the conclusions should be inordinate, or ordinate. But if they 
say they are inordinate, they neither speak agreeably to the dialectic 
method, nor to the mode of demonstrations, which always generate things 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. I. 


OF PLATO. 


S3 


secondary from such as are first, nor to the science of Plato, which always 
accompanies the order of things. But if they say the conclusions are re¬ 
gular, I think it is entirely necessary, that they should either begin from 
things first according to nature, or from things last. But if from things 
last being characterised by the one will be the last, and that which is moved 
according to time, the first. This, however, is impossible. For that 
which participates of time, must by a much greater priority participate 
of first being. But that which participates of first being, does not neces¬ 
sarily participate of time. First being, therefore, is above time. If then 
Plato begins from first being, but ends in that which participates of time, 
he proceeds supernally from the first to the last parts of true being. 
Hence, the first conclusions are to be referred to the first orders, the 
middle, for the same reason, to the middle orders, and the last, as is evi¬ 
dent* to such as are last. For it is necessary, as our discourse has evinced, 
that different conclusions should be assigned to different things, and that 
a distribution of this kind should commence from such things as are 
highest. 

But likewise, the order of the-hypotheses, as it appears tome, is a suffi¬ 
cient argument of the truth of our assertion. For with us the one which 
is exempt from all multitude, is allotted the first order, and from this the 
evolution of all the arguments commences. But the second order after 
this, is about true beings, and the unity which these participate. And 
the third order in regular succession, is about soul. Whether, therefore, 
is it about every soul or not? In answer to this, we shall observe, that our 
leader Syrianus has beautifully shown, that the discourse about whole 
souls is comprehended in the second hypothesis. If, therefore, the order 
of these three hypotheses proceeds according to the nature of things, it is 
evident that the second is produced from the first, and the last from the 
second. For I would ask those who are not entirely unskilled in discourses 
of this kind, what can be more allied to the one , than being characterized 
by the one , which the first of the conclusions of the second hypothesis un¬ 
folds ? Or what can be more allied to soul, than that which participates 
of time, which subsists divisibly, and which is the last thing exhibited in 
this hypothesis? For the life of partial as well as of total souls is according 
Proc. Vol. I. E 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



84 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


to time. And first being is that which first participates of the one , and 
through its connexion with being, has a redundant hyparxis with respect 
to the imparticipable unity. But if this hypothesis is the middle, and if 
we aptly harmonize the highest conclusions with things highest, we should 
doubtless harmonize middles with middles. For this hypothesis com¬ 
mencing from first being, proceeds through all the genera posterior to it, 
till it ends in a nature participating of time. « 

But, farther, from the common confession of those interpreters of Plato, 
who were skilled in divine concerns, we can demonstrate the same things 
as we have above asserted. For Plotinus, in his book On Numbers , en¬ 
quiring whether beings subsist prior to numbers, or numbers prior to beings, 
clearly asserts that the first being subsists prior to numbers, and that it 
generates the divine number. But if this is rightly determined by him, 
and being is generative of the first number, but number is produced by 
being, it is not proper to confound the order of these genera, nor to collect 
them into one hypostasis, nor, since Plato separately produces first being, 
and separately number, to refer each of the conclusions to the same order. 
For it is by no means lawful, that cause and the thing caused, should 
have either the same power, or the same order: but these are distinct 
from each other; and the science concerning them is likewise distinct, 
and neither the nature, nor the definition of them is one and the same. 

But, after Plotinus, Porphyry in his treatise On Principles , evinces by 
many and beautiful arguments, that intellect is eternal, but that at the 
same time, it contains in itself something prior to the eternal, and through 
which it is conjoined with the one. For the one is above all eternity, but 
the eternal has a second, or rather third order in intellect. For it appears 
to me to be necessary that eternity should be established in the middle of 
that which is prior to the eternal, and the eternal. But of this hereafter. 
At the same time, thus much may be collected from what has been said, 
that intellect contains something in itself better than the eternal. Ad¬ 
mitting this, therefore, we ask the father of this assertion, whether this 
something better than the eternal is not only being characterized by the 
one , but is a whole and parts, and all multitude, number and figure, that 
which is moved, and that which is permanent; or whether we are to 


\ 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XI. 


OF PLATO. 


35 


ascribe some of the conclusions to it, but not others ? For it is impossible 
that all these can accord with a nature prior to eternity, since every in¬ 
tellectual • motion, and likewise permanency, are established in eternity. 
But if we are to ascribe some of the conclusions to it, and not others, it is 
evident that other orders in intellect are to be investigated, and that each 
of the conclusions is to be referred to that order, to which it appears par¬ 
ticularly adapted. For intellect is not one in number, and an atom, as it 
appeared to be to some of the ancients, but it comprehends in itself the 
whole progression of first being. 

But the third who makes for our purpose after these, is the divine Jam- 
blichus, who, in his treatise Concerning the Gods , accuses those who place 
the genera of being in intelligibles, because the number and variety of these 
is more remote from the one. But afterwards he informs us where these 
ought to be placed. For they are produced in the end of the intellectual 
order, by the Gods which there subsist. How the genera of being, how¬ 
ever, both are, and are not in intelligibles, will be hereafter apparent. But 
if, according to bis arrangement of the divine orders, intelligibles are 
exempt from the genera of being, much more are they exempt from 
similitude and dissimilitude, equality and inequality. Each of the con¬ 
clusions, therefore, ought not in a similar manner to be accommodated 
to all things, so as to refer them to the whole breadth of the intelligible, 
or intellectual order. Hence from what the best of the interpreters have 
said, when philosophizing according to their own doctrines, both the 
multitude of the divine orders, and of the Platonic arguments, are to be 
considered as proceeding according to an orderly distinction. 

In addition, likewise, to what has been said, this also may be asserted, 
that we cannot, on any other hypothesis, obtain a rational solution of the 
many doubts which present themselves on this subject, but shall igno¬ 
rantly ascribe what is rash and vain to this treatise of Plato. For in the 
first place, why are there only so many conclusions, and neither more nor 
less ? For there are fourteen conclusions. But as there are so many, we 
cannot assign the reason of this, unless we distribute them in conjunction 
with things themselves. In the second place, neither shall we be able to 
find' the cause of the order of the conclusions with respect to each other. 


» 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK L 


36 

and how some have a prior, and others a posterior establishment, accord¬ 
ing to the reason of science, unless the order of the conclusions proceeds 
in conjunction with the progression of beings. In the third place, why 
do some of the conclusions become known from things proximately der 
monstrated, but others from preceding demonstrations ? For that the one 
is a whole and contains parts, is demonstrated from being, which is cha¬ 
racterized by the one ; but its subsistence in itself and in another, is placed 
in a proximate order, after the possession of figure, but is demonstrated 
from whole and parts. Or why are some things often demonstrated, from 
two of the particulars previously evinced, but others from one of them ? 
For we shall be ignorant of each of these, and shall neither be able scien¬ 
tifically to speculate their number, nor their order, nor their alliance to 
each other, unless following things themselves, we evince that this whole 
hypothesis is a dialectic arrangement, proceeding from on high through 
all the middle genera, as far as to the termination of first being. 

Again, if we should say, that all the conclusions demonstrate syllogisti- 
cally only, in what respect shall we differ from those, who assert that the 
whole of this discussion consists of doxastic arguments, and only regards 
a mere verbal contest? But if it is not only syllogistic, but likewise de¬ 
monstrative, it is doubtless necessary, that the middle should be the cause 
of, and by nature prior to the conclusion. As, therefore, we make the 
conclusions of the preoeding reasons, the media of those that follow, the 
things which the arguments, respect, must doubtless have a similar order 
as to being, and their progeny must be the causes of things subject, and 
generative of such as are secondary. But if this be admitted, how can 
we allow that all of them have the same peculiarity and nature ? For 
cause, and that which is produced from cause, are separated from each 
other. 

But this likewise will happen to those who assert that one nature is to 
be explored in all the arguments, that they will by no means perceive 
how in the three first conclusions, the one remains unseparated from being, 
but is first separated in the fourth conclusion. But in all the following 
conclusions, the one is explored considered as subsisting itself by itselfi 
Is it not therefore necessary, that these orders must differ from each 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XI. 


OF PLATO. 


37 


other? Few that which is without separation, in consequence of teiving 
an occult and undivided subsistence, is more allied to the one, but that 
which is separated, has proceeded farther from the first principle of things. 

Again, if you are willing to consider the multitude of the arguments, 
and the extent of the hypothesis, how much it differs from that which 
follows it,—neither from this will it appear to you to be entirely about one 
and an unseparated nature. For reasonings about divine concerns, are con¬ 
tracted in the more principal causes, because in these the occult is more 
abundant than the perspicuous, and the ineffable than the known. But 
they become multiplied and evolved, by proceeding to divine orders more 
proximate to our nature. For such things as are more allied to that 
which is ineffable, unknown, and exempt in inaccessible places, are allotted 
an hyparxis more foreign from verbal enunciation. But such things as 
have proceeded farther, are both more known to us, and more apparent 
to the phantasy, than such as have a prior subsistence. 

This, therefore, being abundantly proved, it is necessary that the 
second hypothesis, should unfold all the divine orders, and should pro¬ 
ceed on high, from the most simple and unical to the whole multitude, 
and all the number of divine natures, in which the order of true being 
ends, which indeed is spread under the unities of the Gods, and at the 
same time is divided in conjunction with their occult and ineffable pecu¬ 
liarities. If, therefore, we are not deceived in admitting this, it follows, 
that from this hypothesis, the continuity of the divine orders, and the pro¬ 
gression of second from first natures, is to be assumed, together with the 
peculiarity of all the divine genera. And indeed, what their communion 
is with each other, and what their distinction proceeding according to 
measure, likewise, the auxiliaries which may be found in other dialogues 
respecting the truth of real beings, or the unities which they contain, are 
all to be referred to this hypothesis. For, here we may contemplate the 
total progressions of the Gods, and their all-perfect orders, according to 
theological science. For as we have before shown that the whole treatise 
of the Parmenides has reference to the truth of things, and that it was 
-not devised as a vain evolution of words, it is doubtless necessary, that 
the nine hypotheses which it discusses, employing the dialectic method, 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



38 


i 


- ON THE THEOLOGY ' BOOK I. 

but speculating with divine science, should be about things and certain 
natures, which are either middle or last. If, therefore, Parmenides ac¬ 
knowledges that his whole discourse will be about the one, and how it 
subsists with respect to itself, and all other things, it is evident that the 
speculation of the one , must commence from that which is highest, but 
end in that which is the last of all things. For the hyparxis of the one 
proceeds from on high, as far as to the most obscure hypostasis of things. 


CHAPTER XII. 

As the first hypothesis, however, demonstrates by negations the inef¬ 
fable supereminence of the first principle of things, and evinces that he is 
exempt from all essence and knowledge,—it is evident that the hypothesis 
after this, as being proximate to it, must unfold the whole order of the 
Gods. For Parmenides does not alone assume the intellectual and essen¬ 
tial peculiarity of the Gods, but likewise the divine characteristic of their 
hyparxis through the whole of this hypothesis. For what other one can 
that be which is participated by being, than that which is in every being 
divine, and through which all things are conjoined with the im participate* 
one ? For as bodies through their life are conjoined with soul, and as souls 
through their intellective part , are extended to total intellect, and the first 
intelligence, in like manner true beings through the one which they contain 
are reduced to an exempt union, and subsist in unproceeding union with 
this first cause. 

But because this hypothesis commences from that which is one being , 
ox being characterized by the one, and establishes the summit of intelligibles 
as the first after the one, but ends in an essence which participates of time, 
and deduces divine souls to the extremities of the divine orders, it is ne¬ 
cessary that the third hypothesis should demonstrate by various con-* 
elusions, the whole multitude of partial souls, and the diversities which 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XII. 


OF PLATO. 


39 

they contain. And thus far the separate and incorporeal hypostasis 
proceeds. 

After this follows that nature which is divisible about bodies, and in¬ 
separable from matter, which the fourth hypothesis delivers supemally 
suspended from the Gods. And the last hypothesis is the procession of 
matter, whether considered as one, or as various, which the fifth hypo¬ 
thesis demonstrates by negations, according to its dissimilar similitude* 
to the first. But sometimes, indeed, the negations are privations, and 
sometimes the exempt causes of all the productions. And what is the 
most wonderful of all, the highest negations are only enunciative, but 
some in a supereminent manner, and others according to deficiency. But 
each of the negations consequent to these is affirmative; the one para- 
digmatically, but the other iconicaJly, or after the manner of an image. 
But the middle corresponds to the order of soul, for it is composed from 
affirmative and negative conclusions. But it possesses negations co-or¬ 
dinate to affirmations. Nor is it alone multiplied, like material natures/ 
nor does it possess an adventitious one; but the one which it contains, 
though it is still one, yet subsists in motion and multiplication, and in its 
progressions is, as it were, absorbed by essence. And such are the hypo¬ 
theses which unfold all beings, both separable and inseparable, together 
with the causes of wholes, as well exempt, as subsisting in things them¬ 
selves, according to the hyparxis of the one. 

But there are four other hypotheses besides these, which by taking away 
the one , evince that all things must be entirely subverted, both beings and 
things in generation, and that no being can any longer have any subsist¬ 
ence ; and this, in order that he may demonstrate the one to be the cause 
of being and preservation, that through it all things participate of the 
nature of being, and that each has its hyparxis suspended from the onci 
And in short, we syllogistically collect this through all beings, that if the 
one is, all things subsist as far as to the last hypostasis, and if it is not, no 
being has any subsistence. The one , therefore, is both the hypostatic and 


1 For avofMtor^Tot, it is necessary to read o/Aoionjra. 
% Instead of on ra oAa, read oun a>$ ra twAoc. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



40 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK h 


preservative cause of all things; which Parmenides also himself collects 
at the end of the dialogue. With respect, however, to the hypothesis of 
the Parmenides, its division, and the speculation of its several parts, we 
have sufficiently treated in our commentaries on that dialogue; so that it 
would be superfluous to enter into a prolix discussion of these particulars 
at present. But as from what has been said, it appears whence we may 
assume the whole of theology, and from what dialogues we may collect 
into one the theology distributed according to parts, we shall in the next 
place treat about the common dogmas of Plato, which are adapted to 
sacred concerns, and which extend to all the divine orders, and shall 
evince that each of these is defined by him according to the most perfect 
science. For things common are prior to such as are peculiar, and are 
more known according to nature. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


In the first place, therefore, we shall assume the things which are de¬ 
monstrated in the Laws, and contemplate how they take the lead, with 
respect to the truth about the Gods, and are the most ancient of all the 
other mystic conceptions about a divine nature. Three things, therefore, 
are asserted by Plato in these writings ; that there are Gods; that their 
providence extends to all things; and that they administer all things ac¬ 
cording to justice, and suffer no perversion from worse natures. 

That these then obtain the first rank' among all theological dogmas, is 
perfectly evident. For what can be of a more leading nature, than the 
hyparxis of the Gods, or than boniform providence, or immutable and 
undeviating power ? Through which they produce secondary natures uni¬ 
formly, preserve themselves in an undefiled manner, and convert them to 
themselves. But the Gods indeed govern other things, but suffer nothing 

\ 


* For apxj) 8 wrip», it is necessary to read apx*unp». 


\ 

\ 


\ 


\ 

\ 



Digitized 


/Google 



oiap. xiu. 


OF PLATO. 


41 


from subordinate natures, nor are changed with the variety of the things 
to which their providence extends. We shall learn, however, how these 
things are defined according to nature, if we endeavour to embrace by a 
reasoning process the scientific method of Plato about each of them; and 
prior to these, survey by what irrefragable arguments he proves that there 
are Gods; and thus afterwards consider such problems as are conjoined 
with this dogma. 

Of all beings, therefore, it is necessary that some should move only, 
but that others should be moved only, and that the natures situated be¬ 
tween these, should both move and be moved. And with respect to these 
last it is necessary, either that they should move others being themselves 
moved by others, or that they should be self-motive. These four hypo¬ 
stases likewise, are necessarily placed in an orderly series, one after another; 
that which is moved only and suffers, depending on other primary causes; 
that which moves others, and is at the same time moved, being prior to 
this; that which is self-motive, and which is beyond that which both 
moves and is moved, beginning from itself, and through its own motion 
imparting the representation of being moved, to other things; and that 
which is immoveable, preceding whatever participates either producing 
or passive motion. For every thing self-motive, in consequence of pos¬ 
sessing its perfection in a transition and interval of life, depends on an¬ 
other more ancient cause, which always subsists according to sameness, 
and in a similar manner, and whose life is not in time, but in eternity. 
For time is an image of eternity. 

If, therefore, all things which are moved by themselves, are moved ac¬ 
cording to time, but the eternal form of motion is above that which is 
carried in time, the self-motive nature will be second in order, and not the 
first of beings. But that which moves others, and is moved by others, 
must necessarily be suspended from a self-motive nature: and not this 
alone, but likewise every alter-motive fabrication, as the Athenian guest 
demonstrates. For if all things, says he, should stand still, unless self- 
motive natures had a subsistence among things, there would be no such 
thing as that which is first moved. For that which is immoveable, is by 
no means naturally adapted to be moved, nor will there then be that 
Proc. Vol. I. F 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



42 


ON THE THEDLOG? 


BOOK L 


which is first moved; but the alter-motive nature is indigent of another 
moving power. The self-motive nature, therefore, alone, as beginning 
firom its own energy, will move both itself and others in a secondary 
manner. For a thing of this kind imparts the power of being moved to 
alter-motive natures, in the same manner as an immoveable nature im¬ 
parts a motive power to all beings. In the third place, that which is 
moved only, must first of all be suspended from things moved by another, 
but moving others. For it is necessary, both that other things, and the 
series of things moved, which extends in an orderly manner from on high 
to the last of things, should be filled with their proper media. 

All bodies, therefore, belong to those things which are natuFaUy moved 
eoly, and are.passive. For they are productive of nothing, on account 
of possessing an hypostasis endued with interval, and participating of 
magnitude and bulk; since every thing productive and motive of others, 
naturally produces and moves, by employing an incorporeal power. 

But of incorporeal natures, some are divisible about bodies,, but 
others are exempt from such a division about the last of things. 
Those incorporeals, therefore, which are divisible about the bulks oF 
bodies, -whether they subsist in qualities, or in material forms, belong to 
the number of things moved by another, but at the same time moving 
others. For these, because they possess an incorporeal allotment, parti¬ 
cipate of a motive power; but because they are divided about bodies, are 
deprived of the power of verging to themselves, are divided together with 
their subjects, and are full of sluggishness from these, they are indigent 
of a motive nature which is not borne along in a foreign seat, but possesses 
an hypostasis in itself. Where, therefore, shall we obtain that which 
moves itself? For things extended into natures possessing bulk and interval, 
or which are divided in these, and subsist inseparably about them, must 
necessarily either be moved only, or be motive through others. But it is 
necessary, as we have before observed, that a self-motive nature should 
be prior to these, which is perfectly established in itself, and not in others, 
and which fixes its energies in itself, and not in things different from 
itself. There is, therefore, another certain nature exempt from bodies, 
both in the heavens and in these very mutable elements, from which bo¬ 
dies primarily derive the power of being moved. Hence, if it be requisite 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XIII. 


OF PLATO. 


4 a 


to discover what such an essence as this is, (rightly following Socrates, 
and considering what the end of things is,) which by being present to alter- 
inotive natures, imparts to them a representation of self-motion, to which 
of the above mentioned natures shall we ascribe the power of things being 
moved from themselves? For all inanimate natures are alone alter-motive, 
and whatever they suffer, they are adapted to suffer, through a certain power 
externally moving and compelling. It remains, therefore, that animated 
natures must possess this representation, and that they are self-motive m 
a secondary degree, but that the soul which is in them, primarily moves 
itself, and is moved by itself, and that through a power derived from itself 
as it imparts life to bodies, so likewise it extends to them from itself a re¬ 
presentation of being moved by themselves. 

If, therefore, the self-motive essence is more ancient than alter-motive 
natures, but soul is primarily self-motive, from which the image of selft- 
motion is imparted to bodies, soul will be beyond bodies, and the motion 
of every body, will be the progeny of soul, and of the motion it contains. 
Hence it is necessary that the whole heaven and all the bodies it contains 
possessing various motions, and being moved with these different motions; 
according to nature (for a circulation is natural to every body of this kind) 
should have ruling souls, which are essentially more ancient than bodies^ 
and which are moved in themselves, and supernally illuminate these with, 
the power of being moved. It is necessary, therefore, that these souls 
which dispose in an orderly manner the whole world and the parts it con¬ 
tains, and who impart to every thing corporeal which is of itself destitute 
of life, the power of being moved, inspiring it, for this purpose, with the 
cause of motion, should either move all things conformably to reason, or 
after a contrary manner, which it is not lawful to assert. But if indeed, 
this world and every thing in it which is disposed in an orderly manner* 
and is moved equally and perpetually according to nature, as is demon¬ 
strated, partly in the mathematical disciplines, and partly in physical dis¬ 
cussions, is suspended from an irrational soul, which moving itself moves 
also other things, neither the order of the periods, nor the motion which is 
bounded by one reason, nor the position of bodies, nor any other of those 
things which are generated according to nature, will have a stable cause. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



44 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


and which is able to distribute every tiling in an orderly manner, and accord- 
ing to an invariable sameness of subsistence. For every thing irrational is. 
naturally adapted to be adorned by something different from itself, and is 
indefinite and unadorned in its own nature. But to commit all heaven to 
a tiling of this kind, and a circulation revolving according to reason,, and 
with an invariable sameness, is by no means adapted, either to the nature of 
things, or to our undisciplined conceptions. If however, an intellectual soul, 
and which employs reason, governs all things, and if every thing which is 
moved with a perpetual lation, is governed by a soul of this kind, and. there 
is no one of the wholes in the universe destitute of soul (for no body is 
honorable if deprived of such a power as this, as Theophrastus somewhere 
says) if this be the case, whether does it possess this intellectual, perfect, 
and beneficent power* according to participation, or according to essence? 
For if, according to essence, it is necessary that every soul should 
be of this kind, since each according to its own nature is self-motive. 
But if, according to participation, there will be another intellect subsisting 
in energy, more ancient than soul, which essentially possesses intellection* 
and by its very being pre-assumes in itself the uniform knowledge of 
wholes ; since it is also necessary that the soul which is essentialized ac¬ 
cording to reason, should possess that which pertains to intellect through 
participation, and that the intellectual nature should be twofold; the 
one subsisting primarily in a divine intellect itself; but the other, ^hich 
proceeds from this, subsisting secondarily in soul. To which, you may 
add, if you please, the presence of intellectual illumination in body. For 
whence is the whole of this heaven either spherical or moved in a circle, 
and whence does it revolve with a sameness of circulation according to 
one definite order? For how could it always be allotted the same idea and 
power immutably according to nature, if it did not participate of specific 
formation according to intellect? For soul, indeed, is the supplier of 
motion; but the cause of a firm establishment, and that which reduces 
the unstable mutation of things that are moved, into sameness, and also 
a life which is bounded by one reason, and a circulation which subsists 
with invariable sameness, will evidently be superior to soul. 

Body, therefore, and the whole of this sensible nature belong to things 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XIII. 


OF PLATO: 


45 


which are aker-motive. But soul is self-motive, binding in itself all cor¬ 
poreal motions ; and prior to this is intellect which is immoveable. Let 
no one, however, suppose that I assert this immobility of intellect to re¬ 
semble that which is sluggish, destitute of life/ and without respiration, 
but that it is the leading cause of all motion, and the fountain, if you are 
willing so to denominate it, of all life, both of that which is converted to 
itself, and of that which has its hypostasis in other things. Through these 
causes also, the world is denominated by Timaeus, an animal endued with 
soul and intellect; being called by him an animal according to its own 
nature, and the life pervading to k from soul, and which is distributed 
about it, but animated or endued with soul, according to the presence of 
a divine soul in it, and endued with intellect, according to intellectual 
domination. Eor the supply of life, the government of soul, and the par¬ 
ticipation of intellect connect and contain the whole of heaven. 

If, however, this intellect is essentially intellect, since Timaeus indi¬ 
cating that the essence of intellect is the same with its intellection, deno¬ 
minates it divine; for he says, that soul receiving a divine intellect led an 
upright and wise life; if, therefore, this be the case, it is necessary that the 
whole world should be suspended from its divinity, and that motion in¬ 
deed should be present to this universe from soul, but that its perpetual 
permanency and sameness of subsistence should be derived from intellect, 
and that its one union, the conspiration in it and sympathy, and its all¬ 
perfect measure should originate from that unity/ from which intellect is 
uniform, soul is one/ every being is whole and perfect according to its 
own nature, and every thing secondary together with perfection, in its 
own proper nature, participates of another more excellent peculiarity, 
from an order which is always established above it. For that which is 
corporeal being alter-motive, derives from soul the representation of self¬ 
motive power, and is through it an animal. But soul being self-motive 
participates of a life according to intellect, and energizing according to 
time, possesses a never-ceasing energy, and an even-vigilant life from its 

1 For ofcov read 

x For xoei t w Bvatiog, read, xai onto nj$ tvahog* 

3 For xai . o yov, eyostfy fiia xai ij ready xai o vov$ evoeifys, xai ff <4*4* 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



46 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


proximity to intellect. And intellect possessing its life in eternity, always 
subsisting essentially in energy,* and fixing all its stable intellection at 
once in intellect, is entirely deific through the cause prior to itself. For 
it has two-fold energies as Plotinus says, some as intellect, but others 
as being inebriated with nectar. And elsewhere he observes, that this in¬ 
tellect, by that which is prior to itself and is not intellect, is a god; in the 
same manner as soul, by its summit which is above soul, is intellect; and 
as body, by the power which is prior to body, is soul. 

All things therefore, as we have said, are suspended from the one through 
intellect and soul as media. And intellect indeed has the form of unity; 
but soul has the form of intellect; and the body of the world is vital. 
But every thing is conjoined with that which is prior to itself. And of 
the natures posterior to these, one in a more proximate* but the other in 
a more remote degree, enjoys that which is divine. And divinity, indeed* 
is prior to intellect, being primarily carried in an intellectual nature; but 
intellect is most divine, as being deified prior to other things; and soul is 
divine, so far as it requires an intellectual medium. But the body which 
participates of a soul of this kind, so far as body indeed, is also itself 
divine; for the illumination of divine* light pervades supernally as far as 
tb the last dependencies; yet it is not simply divine; but soul, by looking 
to intellect, and living from itself, is primarily divine. 

My reasoning is also the same about each of the whole spheres, and 
about the bodies they contain. For all these imitate the whole heaven, 
since these likewise have a perpetual allotment; and with respect to the 
sublunary elements, they have not entirely an essential mutation, but they 
abide in the universe according to their wholenesses, and contain in them¬ 
selves partial animals. For every wholeness has posterior to itself more 
partial essences. As, therefore, in the heavens, the number of the stars 
proceeds together with the whole spheres, and as in the earth the multi¬ 
tude of partial terrestrial animals subsists together with their wholeness, 
thus also it appears to me to be necessary that in the wholes which have 

* For caxv evejyeread, ctet oov evegysia. 

% The sense requires that isiov should be here supplied. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



chap. xnr. 


Of PLATO: 


n 

an intermediate subsistence, each element should be filled up with appro? 
priate numbers. For how in the extremes can wholes which subsist prior 
to parts, be arranged together with parts, unless there is the same analogy 
of them in the intermediate natures? 

But if each of the spheres is an animal, and is always established after 
the same manner, and gives completion to the universe, as possessing life* 
indeed, it will always primarily participate of soul, but as preserving its 
own order immutable in. the world, it will be comprehended by intellect, 
and as one and a whole, and the leader and ruler of its proper parts, it 
will be illuminated by divine union. Not only the universe, therefore, 
but each also of its perpetual parts is animated and endued with in¬ 
tellect, and as much as possible is similar to the universe.' For each 
of these parts is a universe with respect to its kindred multitude. In 
short, there is indeed one corporeal-formed wholeness of the universe, 
but there are many others under this, depending on this one; there is one 
soul of the universe, and after this, other souls, together with this dispos¬ 
ing in an orderly manner the whole parts of the universe with undefiled 
purity ; one intellect, and an intellectual number under, this, participated 
by these souls; and one god who connectedly contains at once all mun¬ 
dane and supermundane 1 natures, and a multitude of other gods, who 
distribute intellectual essences, and the souls suspended from these, and 
all the parts of the world. For it is not to be supposed that each of the 
productions of nature is generative of things similar to itself, but that 
wholes and the first of mundane beings should not in a much greater 
degree extend in themselves the paradigm of a generation of this kind. 
For the similar is more allied, and more naturally adapted to the reason 
of cause than the dissimilar, in the same manner as the same than the 
different, and bound than the infinite. These things, however, we shall 
accurately survey in what follows. But we shall now direct our attention 
to the second of the things demonstrated in the Laws, viz. that the Gods 
providentially attend at once to wholes and parts, and shall summarily 

1 1nstead of oftoiou fit} xetret Suva/iiv, it is necessary to read xsu xotxct twotfuv rep Team opjiov, as both* 
the sense of the whole sentence and the version of Portus require. 

* It-seems requisite to supply here the word urf^xoer^t»> as in the translation.. 


Digitized by v^ooQie 



48 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK i. 


tHfcuss the irreprehensible conception of Plato about the providence of 
the Gods. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

From what has been said, therefore, it is evident to everyone, that the 
Gods being the causes of all motion, some of them are essential and 
vivific, according to a self-motive, self-vital, and self-energetic power. But 
others of them are intellectual, and excite by their very being all secon¬ 
dary* natures to the perfection of life, according to the fountain and 
principle of all second and third progressions of motion. And others are 
unical, or characterized by unity, deifying by participation all the whole 
genera of themselves, according to a primary, all-perfect, and unknown 
power of energy, and who are the leaders of one kind of motion, but 
are not the principle of another. But again others supply to secondary 
natures motion according to place or quality, but are essentially the 
causes of motion to themselves. For every thing which is the cause of 
essence to other things is much prior to this the cause to itself of its own 
proper energies and perfection. Farther still, that which is self-motive is 
again the principle of motion, and being and life are imparted by soul to 
every thing in the world, and not local motion only and the other kinds 
of motion, but the progression into being is from soul, and by a much 
greater priority from an intellectual essence, which binds to itself the life 
of self-motive natures and precedes according to cause all temporal energy. 
And in a still greater degree do motion, being, and life proceed from a 
unical hyparxis, which connectedly contains intellect and soul, is the 
source of total good, and proceeds as far as to the last of things. For of 
life indeed, not all the parts of the world are capable of participating, nor 
of intellect and a gnostic power; but of the one all things participate, as far 


* For Sevrtgov read Siurige i. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


49 


as to matter itself, both wholes and parts, things which subsist according to 
nature, and the contraries to these; and there is not any thing which is de¬ 
prived of a cause of this kind, nor can any thing ever participate of being, 
if it is deprived of the one. If, therefore, the Gods produce all things, and 
contain all things, in the unknown comprehensions of themselves, how is 
it possible there should not be a providence of all things in these compre¬ 
hensions, pervading supernally as far as to the most partial natures ? For 
it is every where fit that offspring should enjoy the providential care of 
their causes. But all alter-motive are the progeny of self-motive natures. 
And things which subsist in time, either in the whole of time, or in a part 
of it, are the effects of eternal natures; because that which always is, is the 
cause of that which sometimes exists. And divine and unical genera, as they 
give subsistence to all multiplied natures, precede them in existence. In 
short, there is no essence, or multitude of powers, which is not allotted its 
generation from the one. It is necessary, therefore, that all these should be 
partakers of the providence of preceding causes, being vivified indeed from 
the psychical gods, and circulating according to temporal periods; and 
participating of sameness and at the same time a stable condition of forms 
from the intellectual gods ;* but receiving into themselves the presence of 
anion, of measure, and of the distribution of good from the first Gods. 
It is necessary, therefore, either that the Gods should know that a provi¬ 
dential care of their own offspring is natural to them, and should not only 
give subsistence to secondary beings, and supply them with life, essence 
and union, but also previously comprehend in themselves the primary 
cause of the goods they contain, or, which it is not lawful to assert, that 
being Gods, they are ignorant of what is proper and fit. 

For what ignorance can there be of beautiful things, with those who 
are the causes of beauty, or of things good, with those who are allotted 
an hyparxis defined by the nature of the goodf But if they are 
ignorant, neither do souls govern the universe according to intellect, 
nor are intellects carried in souls as in a vehicle, nor prior to these do the 
unities of the Gods contractedly comprehend in themselves all know- 


Proc. 


1 It it necessary here to supply the words* tx tow vo«g«v Uow. 


VOL. I. 


G 


Digitized by vjOOQlC 



50 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK i: 


ledge, which we have acknowledged they do through the former demonstra¬ 
tions. If, therefore, they are not deprived of knowledge, being the fathers, 
leaders and governors of every thing in the world, and 1 to them as being 
such a providential care of the things governed by, and following them, 
and generated by them, pertains, whether shall we say that they knowing* 
the law which is according to nature, accomplish this law, or that through 
imbecility they are depri\ ed pf a providential attention to their possessions 
or progeny, for it is of no consequence as to the present discussion which, 
of these two appellations you are willing to adopt P For if through want 
of power they neglect the superintendence of wholes, what is the cause of 
this want of power? For they do not move things externally, nor are other 
things indeed the causes of essence, but they assume the government of 
the things they have produced, but they rule over all things as if from the 
stern of a ship, themselves supplying being, themselves containing the 
measures of life, and themselves distributing to tilings their respective 
energies. 

Whether also, are they unable to provide at once tor all things, or they 
do not leave each of the parts destitute of their providential care ? And. 
if they are not curators of every thing in the world, whether do they pro¬ 
videntially superintend greater things, but neglect such as are less ? Or 
do they pay attention to the less, but neglect to take care of the greater ? 
For if we deprive them of a providential attention to all things similarly, 
through the want of power, how, while we attribute to them a greater 
thing, vi z. the production of all things, can we refuse to grant that which, 
is naturally consequent to this, a providential attention to their produc¬ 
tions ? For it is the province of the power which produces a greater thing, 
to dispose in a becoming manner that which is less. But if they are 
curators of less things, and neglect such as are greater, how can .this mode 
of providence be right ? For that which is more allied, and more similar 
to any thing, is more appropriately and fitly disposed by nature to the 
participation of the good which that thing confers on it. If, however, 
the Gods think that the first of mundane natures deserve their providen¬ 
tial care, and that perfection of which they are the sources, but are unable 

' xcu is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 




CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


Si 

to extend their regard to the last of things, what is it which can restrain 
the presence of the Gods from pervading to all things ? What is it which 
can impede their unenvying and exuberant energy ? How can those who 
are capable of effecting greater things, be unable to govern such as are less? 
Or how can those who produce the essence even of the smallest things, not 
be the lords of the perfection of them, through a privation of power ? For 
all these things are hostile to our natural conceptions. It remains, there¬ 
fore, that the Gods must know what is fit and appropriate, and that they 
must possess a power adapted to the perfection of their own nature, and 
to the government of the whole of things. But if they know that which 
is according to nature, and this to those who are the generating causes of 
all things is to take care of all things, and an exuberance of power,—if 
this be the case, they are not deprived of a providential attention of this 
kind. Whether, also, together with what has been said, is there a will of 
providence in them ? Or is this alone wanting both to their knowledge 
and power? And on this account are things deprived* of their providential 
care? For if indeed knowing what is fit for themselves, and being able to 
accomplish what they know, they are unwilling to provide for their own 
offspring, they will be indigent of goodness, their unenvying exuberance 
will perish, and we shall do nothing else than abolish the hyparxis ac¬ 
cording to which they are essentialized. For the very being of the Gods 
is defined by the good, and in this they have their subsistence. But to 
provide for things of a subject nature, is to confer on them a certain 
good. How, therefore, can we deprive the Gods of providence, without 
at the same time depriving them of goodness ? And how if we subvert 
their goodness is it possible, that we should not also ignorantly subvert 
their hyparxis which we established by the former demonstrations ? Hence 
it is necessary to admit as a thing consequent to the very being of the 
Gods that they are good according to every virtue. And again, it is con¬ 
sequent to this that they do not withdraw themselves from a providential 
attention to secondary natures, either through indolence, or imbecility, 
or ignorance. But to this I think it is also consequent that there is with 


' For it is requisite to read, KugrigrjVTui. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



5% 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


them the most excellent knowledge, unpolluted power, and unenvying 
and exuberant will. From which it appears that they provide for the 
whole of things, and omit nothing which is requisite to the supply of 
good. 

Let, however, no one think that the Gods extend such a providence 
about secondary things, as is either of a busy or laborious nature, or that 
this is the case with their exempt transcendency, which is established re¬ 
mote from mortal difficulty. For their blessedness is not willing to be de¬ 
filed with the difficulty of administration, since even the life of good men 
is accompanied with facility, and is void of molestation and pain. But 
all labours and molestation arise from the impediments of matter. If, 
however, it be requisite to define the mode of the providence of the Gods, 
it must be admitted that it is spontaneous, unpolluted, immaterial, and 
ineffable. For the Gods do not govern all things either by investigating 
what is fit, or exploring the good of every thing by ambiguous reasonings, 
or by looking externally, and following their effects as men do in the pro¬ 
vidence which they exert on their own affairs; but pre-assuming in them¬ 
selves the measures of the whole of things, and producing the essence of 
every thing from themselves, and also looking to themselves, they lead 
and perfect all things in a silent path, by their very being, and fill them 
with good. Neither, likewise, do they produce in a manner similar to 
nature, energizing only by their very being, unaccompanied with deli¬ 
berate choice, nor energizing in a manner similar to partial souls in con¬ 
junction with will, are they deprived of production according to essence; 
but they contract both these into one union, and they will indeed such 
things as they are able to effect by their very being, but by their very 
essence being capable of and producing all things, they contain the cause 
of production in their unenvying and exuberant will. By what busy 
energy, therefore, with what difficulty, or with the punishment of what 
Ixion, is the providence either of whole souls, or of intellectual essences, 
or of the Gods themselves accomplished, unless it should be said, that to 
impart good in any respect is laborious to the Gods ? But that which is 
according to nature is not laborious to any thing. For neither is it labo¬ 
rious to fire to impart heat, nor to snow to refrigerate, nor in short to 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


53 


bodies to energize according to their own proper powers. And prior to 
bodies, neither is it laborious to natures to. nourish, or generate, or increase. 
For these are the works of natures. Nor again, prior to these, is it labo¬ 
rious to souls. For these indeed produce many energies from deliberate 
choice, many from their very being, and are the causes of many motions 
by alone being present. So that if indeed the communication of good is 
according to nature to the Gods, providence also is according to nature. 
And these things we must say are accomplished by the Gods with facility, 
and by their very being alone. But if these things are not according to 
nature* neither will the Gods be naturally good. For the good is the sup¬ 
plier of good ; just as life is the source of another life, and intellect is die 
source of intellectual illumination. And every thing which has a primary 
subsistence iu each nature is generative of that which has a secondary 
subsistence. 

That however, which is especially the illustrious prerogative of the 
Platonic theology, I should say is this, that according to it, neither is the 
exempt essence of the Gods converted to secondary natures, through a pro¬ 
vidential care for things subordinate, nor is their providential presence with 
all things diminished through their transcending the whole of things with 
undefiled purity, but at the same time it assigns to them a separate subsist¬ 
ence, and the being unmingled with every subordinate nature, and also 
the being extended toall things, and the taking care of and adorning their 
own progeny. For the manner in which they pervade through all things is 
not corporeal, as that of light is through the air, nor is it divisible about 
bodies, in the same manner as in nature, nor converted to subordinate 
natures, in the same manner as that of a partial soul, but it is separate 
from body, and without conversion to it, is immaterial, unmingled, unre¬ 
strained, uniform; primary and exempt. In short, such a mode of the 
providence of the Gods as this, must at present be conceived. For it is 
evident that it will be appropriate according to each order of the Gods. 
For soul indeed, is said to provide for secondary natures in one way, and 
intellect in another. But the providence of divinity who is prior to intel¬ 
lect is exerted according to a transcendency both of intellect and soul. 
And of the Gods themselves* the providence of the sublunary is different 
from that of the celestial divinities. Of the Gods also who are beyond the 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



54 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


world, there are many orders, and the mode of providence is different 
according to each. 


CHAPTER XV. 


The third problem after these we shall connect with the former, and 
survey how we are to assume the unpervertible in the Gods, who perform 
all things according to justice, and who do not in the smallest degree 
•subvert its boundary, or its undeviating rectitude, in their providential 
attention to all other things, and in the mutations of human affairs. I 
think therefore, that this is apparent to every one, that every where that 
which governs according to nature, and pays all possible attention to the 
felicity of the governed, after this manner becomes the leader of that which 
it governs, and directs it to that which is best. For neither has the pilot 
who rules over the sailors and the ship any other precedaneous end than 
the safety of those that sail in the ship, and of die ship itself, nor does 
the physician who is the curator of the diseased, endeavour to do all things 
for the sake of any thing else than the health of the subjects of his care, 
whether it be requisite to cut them, or administer to them a purgative 
medicine. Nor would the general of an army or a guardian say that they 
look to any other end, than the one to the liberty of those that are guarded, 
and the other to the liberty of the soldiers. Nor will any other to whom 
it belongs to be the leader or curator of certain persons, endeavour to 
subvert the good of those that follow him, which it is his business to pro¬ 
cure, and with a view to which he disposes in a becoming manner every 
thing belonging to those whom he governs. If therefore we grant that the 
4jods are the leaders of the whole of things, and that their providence ex¬ 
tends to all things, since they are good, and possess every virtue, bow is 
it possible they should neglect the felicity of the objects of their provi¬ 
dential care ? Or how can they be inferior to other leaders in the provi- 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XV. 


OF PLATO* 


55 

dence of subordinate natures ? Since the Gods indeed always look to- 
that which is better, and establish this as the end of all their government, 
but other leaders overlook the good of men, and embrace vice rather than 
virtue, in consequence of being perverted by the gifts of the depraved. 

And universally, whether you are willing to call the Gods leaders, or 
rulers, or guardians, or fathers, a divine nature will appear to be in want 
of no one of such names. For all things that are venerable and honor¬ 
able subsist in them primarily. And on this account indeed, here also 
some things are naturally more venerable and honorable than others, 
because they exhibit an ultimate resemblance of the Gods. But what 
occasion is there to speak further on this subject ? For I think that we 
hear from those who are wise in divine concerns paternal, guardian, ruling 
and pseonian powers celebrated. How is it possible therefore that the 
images of the Gods which subsist according, to nature, regarding the end 
which is adapted to them, should providentially attend to the order of 
tiie things which they govern, but that the Gods themselves with whom 
there is the whole of good, true and real virtue, and a blameless life, should 
not direct their government to the virtue and vice of men ? And how 
can it be admitted, on this supposition, that they exhibit virtue victorious^ 
in the universe, and vice vanquished ? Will they not also thus corrupt 
the measures of justice by the worship paid to them by the depraved, 
subvert the boundary of undeviating science, and cause the gifts of vice to 
appear more honorable than the pursuits of* virtue ? For this mode of 
providence is neither advantageous to these leaders, nor to those that 
follow them. For to those who have become wicked, there will be no 
liberation from guilt, since they will always endeavour to anticipate justice, 
and pervert the measures of desert. But it will be necessary, which it is 
not lawful to assert, that the Gods should regard as their final end the - 
vice of the subjects of their providence, neglect their true salvation, and 
consequently be alone the causes of adumbrant good. This universe also - 
and the whole world will be filled with disorder and incurable perturbation,. 
depravity remaining in it, and being replete with that discord which exists • 
in badly governed cities. Though is it not perfectly impossible that parts 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



56 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


should be governed according to nature in a greater degree than wholes, 
human than divine concerns, and images than primary causes ? 

Hence if men properly attend to the welfare of men in governing them, 
honoring some, but disgracing others, and every where giving a proper 
direction to the works of vice by the measures of virtue, it is much more 
necessary that the Gods should be the immutable governors of the whole 
of things. For men are allotted this virtue through similitude to the Gods. 
But if we acknowledge that men who corrupt the safety and well-being 
of those whom they govern, imitate in a greater degree the providence of 
the Gods, we shall ignorantly at one and the same time entirely subvert 
the truth concerning the Gods, and the transcendency of virtue. For this 
I think is evident to every one, that what is more similar to the Gods is 
more happy than those things that are deprived of them ' through dissimi- 
litudeand diversity. So that if among men indeed, the uncorrupted and 
undeviating form of providence is honorable, it must undoubtedly be in ft 
much greater degree honorable with the Gods. But if with them, mortal 
gifts are more venerable than the divine measures of justice, with men 
also earth-born gifts will be more honorable than Olympian goods, and the 
blandishments of vice than the works of virtue. With a view therefore to 
the most perfect felicity, Plato in the Laws delivers to, us through these 
demonstrations, the hjtparxis of the Gods, their providential care extend¬ 
ing to all things, and their immutable energy ; which things, indeed, are 
common to all the Gods, but are most principal and first according to 
nature in the doctrine pertaining to them. For this triad appears to per¬ 
vade as far as to the most partial natures in the divine orders, originating 
supemally from the occult genera of Gods. For a uniform hyparxis, a 
power which providentially takes care of all secondary natures, and an 
undeviating and immutable intellect, are in all the Gpds that are prior to 
and in the world. 

- 1 For avTov it is necessary to read mrrm 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XVI. 


OF PLATO. 


57 


CHAPTER XVI. 

Again, from another principle we may be able to apprehend the theo¬ 
logical demonstrations in the Republic. For these are common to all the 
divine orders, similarly extend to all the discussion about the Gods, and 
unfold to us truth in uninterrupted connexion with what has been before 
said. In the second book of the Republic therefore, Socrates describes 
certain theological types for mythological poets, and exhorts his pupils to 
purify themselves from those tragic disciplines, which some do not refuse 
to introduce to a divine nature, concealing in these as in veils the arcane 
mysteries concerning the Gods. Socrates therefore, as I have said, nar¬ 
rating the types and laws of divine fables, which afford this apparent 
meaning, and the inward concealed scope, which regards as its end the 
beautiful and the natural in the fictions about the Gods,—in the first 
place indeed, thinks fit to evince, according to our unperverted concep- 
* tion about the Gods and their goodness, that they are the suppliers of all 
good, but the causes of no evil to any being at any time. In the second 
place, he says that they are essentially immutable, and that they neither 
have various forms, deceiving and fascinating, nor are the authors of the 
greatest evil lying, in deeds or in words, or of error and folly. These 
therefore being two laws, the former has two conclusions, viz. that the 
Gods are not the causes of evils, and that they are the causes of all good* 
Hie second law also in a similar manner has two other conclusions; and 
these are, that every divine nature is immutable, and is established pure 
from falsehood and artificial variety. All the things demonstrated there¬ 
fore, depend on these three common conceptions about a divine nature, 
viz. on the conceptions about its goodness, immutability and truth. For 
the first and ineffable fountain of good is with the Gods; together with 
eternity, which is the cause of a power that has an invariable sameness of 
subsistenceand the first intellect which is beings themselves, and the 
truth which is in real beings. 

Proc. * Vol. I. H 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



58 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


CHAPTER XVII. 

That therefore, which has the hyparxis of itself, and the whole of its 
essence defined in the good, and which by its very being produces all things, 
most necessarily be productive of every good, but of no evil. For if there 
was any thing primarily good, which is not God, perhaps some one might 
say that divinity is indeed a cause of good, but that he does not impart to 
beings every good. If, however, not only every God is good, but that 
which is primarily boniform and beneficent is God, (for that which is pri¬ 
marily good will not be the second after the Gods, because every where r 
things which have a secondary subsistence, receive the peculiarity of their 
hyparxis from those that subsist primarily)—this being the case, it is per¬ 
fectly necessary that divinity should be the cause of good, and of all such 
goods as proceed into secondary descents, as far as to the last of things. 
For as the power which is the cause of life, gives subsistence lo all life, as 
the power which is the cause of knowledge, produces all knowledge, as the 
power which is the cause of beauty, produces every thing beautiful, as well 
the beauty which is in words, as that which is in the phenomena, and thus 
every primary cause produces all similars from itself and binds to itself the 
one hypostasis of things which subsist according to one form,-—after the same 
manner I think the first and most principal good, and uniform hyparxis, es¬ 
tablishes in and about itself, the causes and comprehensions of all goods at 
once. Nor is there any thing good which does not possess this power from 
it, nor beneficent which being converted to it, does not participate of tj>is 
cause. For all goods are from thence produced, perfected and preserved'; 
a nd the one series and order of universal good, depends on that fountain. 
Through the same cause of hyparxis therefore, the Gods are the suppliers 
of all good, and of no evil. For that which is primarily good, gives subsist¬ 
ence to every good from itself, and is not the cause of an allotment con¬ 
trary to itself; since that which is productive of life, is not the cause of 
the privation of life, and that which is the source of beauty is exempt 
from the nature of that which is void of beauty and is deformed, and from 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XVII. 


Of PLATO. 


59 


# 


the causes of this. Hence, of that which primarily constitutes good, it is 
not lawful to assert that it is the cause of contrary progeny; but the na¬ 
ture of goods proceeds from thence undefiled, unmingled and uniform. 

And the divine cause indeed of goods is established eternally in itself, - 
extending to all secondary natures, an unenvying and exuberant partici¬ 
pation of good. Of its participants, however, some preserve the partici¬ 
pation with incorruptible purity, receiving their proper good in undefiled 
bosoms, and thus through an abundance of power possess inevitably an al¬ 
lotment of goods adapted to them. But those natures which are arranged 
in the last of the whole of things, entirely indeed enjoy according to their 
nature the goodness of the Gods; for it is not possible that things perfectly 
destitute of good should either have a being, or subsist at first; but re¬ 
ceiving an efflux of this kind, they neither preserve the gift which pervades 
to them, pure and unmingled, nor do they retain their proper good stably, 
and with invariable sameness, but becoming imbecil, partial and material, 
and filled with the privation of vitality of their subject, they exhibit to 
order indeed, the privation of order, to reason irrationality, and to virtue, 
the contrary to it, vice. And with respect indeed to the natures which 
rank as wholes,* each of these is exempt from a perversion of this kind, 
things more perfect in them always having dominion according to nature. 
But partial natures through a diminution of power always diverging * into 
multitude, division and interval, obscure indeed the participation of good, 
but substitute the contrary in the mixture with good, and which is van¬ 
quished by the combination. For neither here is it lawful for evil to subsist 
unmingled, and perfectly destitute of good; but though some particular 
thing ma} T be evil to a part, yet it is entirely good to the whole and to the 
universe. For the universe is always happy, and always consists of perfect 
parts, and which subsist according to nature. But that which is preter¬ 
natural is always evil to partial natures, and deformity, privation of sym¬ 
metry, perversion, and a resemblance of subsistence are in these. For 
that which is corrupted, is indeed corrupted to itself, and departs from 
its proper perfection, but to the universe it is incorruptible and inde¬ 
structible. 

1 For aXAaw it is necessary to read o\mv, 

* For epfiaivovT* read ex/S cuvovrot. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



60 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 




And every tiling which is deprived of good, so far indeed as pertains 
to itself, and its own subsistence, is deprived of it through imbecility of na¬ 
ture ; but it is good to the whole, and so far as it is a part of the universe* 
For it is not possible that either a privation of life, or deformity and im¬ 
moderation, or in short privation can be inserted in the universe ; but its 
whole number is always perfect, being held together by the goodness of 
wholes. And life is every where present, together with existence, and the 
being perfect, so far as each thing gives completion to the whole. Di¬ 
vinity therefore, as we have said, is the cause 1 of good ; but the shadowy 
subsistence of evil does not subsist from power, but from the imbecility 
of the natures which receive the illuminations of the Gods. Nor is evil 
in wholes, but in partial natures, nor yet in all these. For the first of 
partial natures and partial intellectual genera are eternally boniform. 
But the media among these, and which energize according to time, con¬ 
necting the participation of the good with temporal mutation and motion, 
are incapable of preserving the gift of the Gods immoveable, uniform and 
simple; by their variety obscuring* the simplicity of this gift, by their 
multiform its unifonn nature, and by their commixture its purity and 
incorruptibility. For they do not consist of incorruptible first genera,, 
nor have they a simple essence, nor uniform powers, but such as are 
composed of the contraries to these, as Socrates somewhere says in the 
Phttdrus. And the last of partial natures and which are also material, in 
a much greater degree pervert their proper good. For they are mingled 
with a privation of life, and have a subsistence resembling that of an 
image, since it is replete with much of non-entity, consists of things hostile 
to each other, and of circumstances which are mutable and dispersed 
through the whole of time, so that they never cease to evince in every thing 
that they are given up to corruption, privation of symmetry, deformity, 
and all-various mutations, being not only extended in.their energies, like the 
natures prior to them, but being replete both in their powers and energies 
with that which is preternatural, and with material imbecility. For things 
which become situated in a foreign place, by co-introducing whole together 

1 Il ls necessary here to supply the word amov. 

* For irapxrxevetZovra it is requisite to read weptrxia%ovr*. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XVII. 


OF PLATO. 


61 


with form, rule over the subject nature; but again receding to that which 
is partial, from their proper wholeness, and participating of partibility, im¬ 
becility, war and the division which is the source of generation, they 
are necessarily all-variously changed. Neither, therefore, is every being 
perfectly good ; for there would not be the corruption and generation of 
bodies, nor the purification and punishment of souls. Nor is there any 
evil in wholes : for the world would not be a blessed god, if the most 
principal parts of which it consists were imperfect. Nor are the Gods 
the causes of evils, in the same manner as they are of goods; but evil 
originates from the imbecility of the recipients of good, and a subsistence 
in the last of things. Nor is the evil which has a shadowy subsistence in 
partial natures unmingled with good. But this participates of it in a 
certain respect, by its very existence being detained by good. Nor in 
short, is it possible for evil which is perfectly destitute of all good to have 
a subsistence. For evil itself is even beyond that which in no respect 
whatever has an existence, just as the good itself is beyond that which is 
perfectly being. Nor is the evil which is in partial natures left in a dis¬ 
ordered state, but even this is made subservient to good purposes by the 
Gods, and on this account justice purifies souls from depravity. But 
another order of gods purifies from the depravity which is in bodies. 
All things however are converted as much as possible to the goodness of 
the Gods. And wholes indeed remain in their proper boundaries, and 
also the perfect and beneficent genera of beings. But more partial and 
imperfect natures are adorned and arranged in a becoming manner, 
become subservient to the completion of wholes, are called upward to the 
beautiful, are changed, and in every way enjoy the participation of the 
good, so far as this can be accomplished by them. 

For there cannot be a greater good to each of these, than hat the Gods 
impart according to measures to their progeny : but all things, each sepa¬ 
rately, and all in common, receive such a portion of good, as it is pos¬ 
sible for them to participate. But if some things are filled with greater, 
and others with less goods, the power of the recipients, and the measures 
of the distribution must be assigned as the cause of this. For different 
things are adapted to different beings according to their nature. But the 


Digitized by vjOOQle 



62 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


Gods always extend good, in the same manner as the sun always emits 
light. For a different thing receives this light differently according to its 
order, and receives the greatest portion of light it is capable of receiving. 
For all things are led according to justice, and good is not absent from any 
thing, but is present to every thing, according to an appropriate boundary 
of participation. And as the Athenian guest says, all things are in a 
good condition, and are arranged by the Gods. Let no one therefore say, 
that there are precedaneous productive principles of evil in nature, or in¬ 
tellectual paradigms of evils, in. the same manner as there are of goods, 
or that there is a malific soul, or an evil-producing cause m the Gods, nor 
let him introduce sedition and eternal war against the first good. For all 
these are foreign from the science of Plato, and being more remote from 
the truth wander into barbaric folly, and gigantic mythology. Nor if 
certain persons speaking obscurely in arcane narrations, devise things of 
this kind, shall we make any alteration in the apparent apparatus of what 
they indicate. But the truth indeed of those things is to be investigated, 
and in the mean time, the science of Plato must be genuinely received in 
the pure bosoms of the soul, and must be preserved undefiled and un- 
mingled with contrary opinions. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

In the next place, let us survey the immutability and simplicity of the 
Gods, what the nature of each of them is, and how both these appear to 
be adapted to the hyparxis of the Gods, according to the narration of 
Plato. The-Gods, therefore, are exempt from the whole of things. But 
filling these, as we have said, with good, they are themselves perfectly good; 
each of them according to his proper order possesses that which is most 
excellent; and he whole genus of the Gods is at once allotted predomi¬ 
nance according to an exuberance of good. But here again, we must 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XVIII- 


OF PLATO. 


63 


oppose those who interpret in a divisible manner that which is most excel¬ 
lent in the Gods, and who say, that if the first cause is most excellent, 
that which is posterior to the first is not so. For it is necessary, say 
they, that what is ^produced should be inferior to that by which it is pro¬ 
duced. And this indeed is rightly asserted by them. For it is necessary 
in the Gods, to preserve the order of causes unconfused, and to define 
separately their second and third progressions. But together with a pro¬ 
gression of this kind, and with * the unfolding into light of things secon¬ 
dary from those that are first, that which is most excellent must also be 
surveyed in each of the Gods. For each of the Gods in his own charac¬ 
teristic peculiarity is allotted a transcendency which is primary and per¬ 
fectly good. One of them indeed, that we may speak of something 
known, is allotted this transcendency, and is most excellent as possessing 
a prophetic power, another as demiurgic, but another as a perfector of 
works. And Timaeus indicating this to us, continually calls the first de- 
miurgus the best of causes. For the world, says he, is the most beautiful 
of generated natures, and its artificer is the best of causes ; though the 
intelligible paradigm, and which is the most beautiful of intelligiblfes is prior 
to the demiurgus. But this is most beautiful and at the same time most 
excellent, as the demiurgic paradigm; and the maker and at the same 
time father of the universe is most excellent, as a demiurgic God. In the 
Republic also, Socrates speaking of the Gods, very properly observes, 
that each of them being as much as possible most beautiful and most 
excellent, remains always with a simplicity of subsistence in his own form. 
For each of them being allotted that which is first and the summit in his 
own series, does not depart from his own order, but contains the blessed¬ 
ness and felicity of his own proper power. And neither does he exchange 
his present for a worse order; for it is not lawful for that which possesses 
all virtue to be changed into a worse condition ; nor does he pass into a 
better order. For where can there be any thing better than that which is 
most excellent ? But this is present with each of the divinities according 
to his own order, as we have said, and also with every genus of the Gods. 


‘ For to it is necessary to read rrj. 


n 


Digitized by 



64 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


It is necessary therefore that every divine nature should be established 
immutably, abiding in its own accustomed manner. Hence from these 
things the self-sufficiency, undefiled purity, and invariable sameness of sub¬ 
sistence of the Gods is apparent. For if they are not changed to a more 
excellent condition of being, as possessing that which is best in their own 
nature, they are sufficient to themselves, and are not in want of any good. 
And if they are not £t any time changed to a worse condition, they re¬ 
main undefiled, established in their own transcendencies. If also they 
guard the perfection of themselves immutably, they subsist always with 
invariable sameness. What the self-sufficiency therefore of the Gods is, 
what their immutability, and what their sameness of subsistence, we shall 
in the next place consider. 

The world then is said to be self-sufficient, because its subsistence is per¬ 
fect from things perfect, and a whole from wholes; and because it is filled 
with all appropriate goods from its generating father. But a perfection 
and self-sufficiency of this kind is partible, and is said to consist of many 
things coalescing in one, and is filled from separate causes according to 
participation. The order of divine souls also, is said to be self-sufficient, 
as being full of appropriate virtues, and always preserving the measure of 
its own blessedness without indigence. But here likewise the self-suffi¬ 
ciency is in want of powers. For these souls have not their intellections 
directed to the same intelligibles; but they energize according to time, 
and obtain the complete perfection of their contemplation in whole periods 
of time. The self-sufficiency therefore of divine souls, and the whole 
perfection of their life is not at once present. Again, the intellectual 
world is said to be self-sufficient, as having its whole good established irj 
eternity, comprehending at once its whole blessedness, and being indigent 
of nothing, because all life and all intelligence are present with it, and 
nothing is deficient, nor does it desire any thing as absent. But this, in¬ 
deed, is sufficient to itself in its own order, yet it falls short of the self- 
sufficiency of the Gods. For every intellect is boniform, yet is not good¬ 
ness itself, nor primarily good; but each of the Gods is a unity, hy- 
parxis and goodness. The peculiarity however of hyparxis changes the 
progression of the goodness of each. For one divinity is a perfective 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XVIII. 


OP PLATO. 


65 


goodness, another is a goodness connective of the whole of things, and 
another is a collective goodness. But each is simply a goodness sufficient 
to itself. Or it may be said, that each is a goodness possessing the self- 
sufficient and the all-perfect, neither according to participation, nor illumi¬ 
nation, but by being that very thing which it is. For intellect is sufficient 
to itself by 'participation, and soul by illumination, but this universe* ac¬ 
cording to a similitude to a divine nature. The Gods themselves, however, 
are self-sufficient through and by themselves, filling themselves, or rather 
subsisting as the plenitudes of all good. • 

But with respect to the immutability of the Gods, of what kind shall 
we say it is ? Is it such as that of a [naturally] circulating body ? For 
neither is this adapted to receive any thing from inferior natures, nor is 
it filled with the mutation arising from generation, and the disorder which 
occurs in the sublunary regions. For the nature of the celestial bodies is 
immaterial and immutable. But this indeed is great and venerable, as in 
corporeal hypostases, yet it is inferior to the nature of the Gods. For 
every body possesses both its being, and its perpetual immutability from 
other precedaneous causes. But neither is the impassive and the immu¬ 
table in the Gods such as the immutability of souls. For these commu¬ 
nicate in a certain respect with bodies, and are the media of an impartible 
essence, and of an essence divided about bodies. Nor again is the im¬ 
mutability of intellectual essences equivalent to that of the Gods. For 
intellect is immutable, impassive, and umningled with secondary natures, 
on account of its union with the Gods. And so far indeed as it is uniform, 
it is a thing of this kind; but so far as it is manifold, it has something 
which is more excellent, and something which is subordinate, in itself. 
But the Gods alone having established their unions according to this trans¬ 
cendency of beings,are immutable dominations, are primary and impassive. 
For there is nothing in them which is not one and hyparxis. But as fire 
abolishes every thing which is foreign to it and of a contrary power, as 
light expels all darkness, and as lightning proceeds through all things with¬ 
out defilement, thus also the unities of the Gods unite all multitude, and 
abolish every thing which tends to dispersion and all-perfect division. But 
they deify every thing which participates of them, receiving nothing from 

Proc. Vol. I. I 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



.66 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK f. 


their participants, and do not' diminish their own proper union by the 
participation. 

Hence also the Gods being present every where, are similarly exempt 
from all things, and containing all things are vanquished by no one of the 
things they contain ; but they are unmingled with all things and unde- 
filed. In the third place, this world indeed is said to subsist with inva* 
riable sameness, so far as it is allotted an order in itself which is always 
preserved indissoluble. At the same time however, since it possesses a 
corporeal form, it is not destitute of mutation, as the Elean guest observes. 
The psychical order likewise is said to obtain an essence always established 
in sameness ; and this is rightly said. For it is entirely impassive accord¬ 
ing to essence; but it has energies extended into time, and as Socrates 
says in the Phaedrus, at different times it understands different intelligibles, 
and in its progressions about intellect comes into contact with different 
forms. Besides these also, much-honored intellect is said both to subsist 
and to understand with invariable and perpetual sameness, establishing at 
once in eternity its essence, powers, and energies. Through the multitude 
however of its intellections, and through the variety of intelligible species 
and genera, there is not only an invariable sameness, but also a difference 
of subsistence in intellect. For difference there is consubsistent with 
sameness. And there is not only a wandering of corporeal motions, and 
of the psychical periods, but likewise of intellect itself, so far as it pro¬ 
duces the intelligence of itself into multitude; and evolves the intelligible. 
For soul indeed evolves intellect, but intellect the intelligible, as Plotinus 
somewhere rightly observes, when speaking of the intelligible subjections. 
For such are the wanderings of intellect and which it is lawful for it to make. 
If therefore we should say that a perpetual sameness of subsistence is pri¬ 
marily in the Gods alone, and is especially inherent in them, we shall not 
deviate from the truth, and we shall accord with Plato, who says in the 
Politicus, that an eternally invariable sameness of subsistence alone per¬ 
tains to the most divine of all things. The Gods, therefore, bind to them¬ 
selves the causes of a sameness of this kind, and guard with immutable 

* tu% is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XIX. 


OF PLATO. 


07 


sameness their proper hvparxis established according to the unknown union 
of themselves. And Such is the immutability of the Gods, which is con¬ 
tained in self-sufficiency, impassivity and sameness. 


CHAPTER XIX. 

In the next place, let us consider what power the simplicity of the 
Gods possesses; for this Socrates adds in his discourse concerning a divine 
nature, not admitting that which is various, and multiform, and which 
appears different at different times, but referring to divinity the uniform 
and the simple. Each of the divinities therefore, as he says, remains 
simply in his own form. What then shall we conclude respecting this 
simplicity? That it is not such as that which is defined to be one in 
number. For a thing of this kind is composed of many tilings, and abun¬ 
dantly mingled. But it appears to be simple so far as it has distinctly a 
common form. Nor is it such as the simplicity which is in many things 
according to an arranged species or genus. For these are indeed more 
simple than the individuals in which they are inherent, but are replete with 
variety, communicate with matter, and receive the diversities of material 
natures. Nor is it such as the form of nature. For nature is divided 
about bodies, verges to corporeal masses, emits many powers about the 
composition subject to it, and is indeed more simple than bodies, but has 
an essence mingled with their variety. Nor is it such as the psychical sim¬ 
plicity. For soul subsisting as a medium between an impartible essence, 
and an essence which is divided about bodies, communicates with both 
the extremes. And by that which is multiform indeed in its nature it is 
conjoined with things subordinate, but its head is established on high, and 
according to this it is especially divine, and allied to intellect. 

Nor again is the simplicity of the Gods such as that of intellect. For 
every intellect is impartible and uniform, but at the same time it possesses 
multitude and progression ; by which it is evident that it has a habitude 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



68 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


to secondary natures, to itself, and about itself. It is also in itself, and is 
not only uniform, but also multiform, and as it is said, is one many. It 
is therefore allotted an essence subordinate to the first simplicity. But 
the Gods have their hyparxis defined in one simplicity alone, being exempt 
indeed from all multitude so far as they are gods, and transcending all di¬ 
vision and interval, or habitude to secondary natures, and all composition. 
And they indeed are in inaccessible places, expanded above the whole of 
things, and eternally ride on beings. But the illuminations proceeding 
from them to secondary natures, being mingled in many places with their 
participants which are composite and various, are filled with a peculiarity 
similar to them. Let no one therefore wonder, if the Gods being essenti- 
alized in one simplicity according to transcendency, various phantasms are 
hurled forth before the presence of them; nor, if they being uniform 
the appearances are multiform, as we have learnt in the most perfect of 
the mysteries. For nature, and the demiurgic intellect extend corpo- 
real-formed images of things incorporeal, sensible images of intelligible, 
and of things without interval, images endued with interval. For So¬ 
crates also in the Phaedrus indicating things of this kind, and evincing 
that the mysteries into which souls without bodies are initiated are most 
blessed, and truly perfect, says, that they are initiated into entire, simple 
and immoveable visions, such souls becoming situated there, and united 
with the Gods themselves, but not meeting with the resemblances which 
are emitted from the Gods into these sublunary realms. For these are 
more partial and composite, and present themselves to the view attended 
with motion. But illuminated, uniform, simple, and, as Socrates says, 
immoveable spectacles exhibit themselves to the attendants of the Gods, 
and to souls that abandon the abundant tumult of generation, and who 
ascend to divinity pure and divested of the garments of mortality. And 
thus much is concluded by us respecting the simplicity of the Gods. For 
it is necessary that the nature which generates things multiform should be 
simple, 1 and should precede what is generated, in the same manner as the 
uniform precedes the multiplied. If, therefore, the Gods are the causes of 

* After mtXoi/v in the original, it is requisite to insert mai 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XX. 


OF PLATO. 


69 


all composition) and produce from themselves the variety of beings, it is 
certainly necessary that the one of their nature which is generative of the 
whole of things, should have its subsistence in simplicity. For as incor¬ 
poreal causes precede bodies, immoveable causes things that are moved, 
and impartible causes all partible natures, after the same manner uniform 
intellectual powers precede multiform natures, unmingled powers, things 
that are mingled together, and simple powers, things of a variegated na¬ 
ture. 


CHAPTER XX. 


Iv the next place, let us speak concerning the truth which is in the 
Gods ; for this in addition to what has been said is concluded by Socrates, 
because a divine nature is without falsehood, and is neither the cause of 
deception or ignorance to us, or to any other beings. We must under¬ 
stand therefore, that divine truth is exempt from the truth which consists 
in words, so far as this truth is composite, and in a certain respect is mingled 
with its contrary, and because its subsistence consists of things that are 
not true. For the first parts do not admit of a truth of this kind, unless 
some one being persuaded by what Socrates asserts in the Cratylus, should 
say that these also are after another manner true. Divine truth also is ex¬ 
empt from psychical truth, whether it is surveyed in opinions or in scien¬ 
ces, so far as it is inacertain respect divisible, and is not beings themselves, 
but is assimilated to and co-harmonized with beings, and as being perfected 
in motion and mutation falls short of the truth which is always firm, stable 
and of a principal nature. Divine truth is likewise again exempt from 
intellectual truth, because though this subsists according to essence, and 
is said to be and is, beings themselves, through the power of sameness, 
yet again, through difference, it is separated from the essence of them, and 
preserves its peculiar hypostasis unconfused with respect to them. The 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



70 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I 


truth therefore of the Gods alone, is the undivided union and all-perfect 
communion of them. And through this the ineffable knowledge of the 
Gods, surpasses all knowledge, and all secondary forms of knowledge 
participate of an appropriate perfection. But this knowledge alone of 
the Gods contractedly comprehends these secondary forms of knowledge, 
and all beings according to an ineffable union. And through this the 
Gods know all things at once, wholes and parts, beings and non-beings, 
things eternal and things temporal, not in the same manner as intellect by 
the universal knows a part, and by being, non-being, but they know every 
thing immediately, such things as are common, and such as are particulars, 
though you should speak of the most absurd of all things, though you 
should speak of the infinity of contingencies, or even of matter itself. 

If, however, you investigate the mode of the knowledge and truth of 
the Gods, concerning all things that have a subsistence'in any respect 
whatever, it is ineffable and incomprehensible by the projecting energies of 
the human intellect; but is alone known to the Gods themselves. And I 
indeed admire those Platonists that attribute to intellect the knowledge of 
all things, of individuals, of things preternatural, and in short, of evils, 
and on this account establish intellectual paradigms of these. But I 
much more admire those who separate the intellectual peculiarity from 
divine union. For intellect is the first fabrication and progeny of the 
Gods. These therefore assign to intellect whole and first causes, and such 
a3 are according to nature, and to the Gods a power which is capable of 
adorning and generating all things. For the one is every where, but whole 
is not every where. And of the one indeed matter participates and every 
being; but of intellect and intellectual species and genera, all things do 
not participate. All things therefore are alone from the Gods, and real 
truth is with tliem who know all things unically. For on this account 
also, in oracles the Gods similarly teach all things, wholes and parts, things 
eternal, and such as are generated through the whole of time. For being 
exempt from eternal beings, and from those that exist in time, they con¬ 
tract in themselves the knowledge of each and of all things, according to 
one united truth. If therefore any falsehood occurs in the oracles of the 
Gods, we must not say that a thing of this kind originates from the Gods, 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XX. 


OF PLATO. 


71 


but from the recipients, or the instruments, or the places, or the times. 
For all these contribute to the participation of divine knowledge, and 
when they are appropriately co-adapted to the Gods, they receive a pure 
illumination of the truth which is established in them. But when they 
are separated from the Gods through inaptitude, and become discordant 
with them, then they obscure the truth which proceeds from them. What 
kind of falsehood therefore can be said to be derived from the Gods, who 
produce all the species of knowledge? What deception can there be with 
those who establish in themselves the whole of truth ? In the same man* 
ner, as it appears to me, the Gods extend good to all things, but always 
that which is willing and able receives the extended good, as Socrates 
says in the Phaedrus. And a divine nature indeed is causeless of evil, 
but that which departs from it, and gravitates downward, is elongated 
through itself; thus also, the Gods indeed are always the suppliers of 
truth, but those natures are illuminated by them, who are lawfully their 
participants. For the Elean wise plan says, that the eye of the soul in 
the multitude, is not strong enough to look to the truth. 

The Athenian guest also celebrates this truth which subsists primarily in 
the Gods; for he says that truth is the leader to the Gods of every 
good, and likewise of every good to men. For as the truth which is in 
souls conjoins them with intellect, and as intellectual truth conducts all 
the intellectual orders to the one , thus also the truth of the Gods unites 
the divine unities to the fountain of all good, with which being conjoined, 
they are filled with all boniform power. For every where the hyparxis of 
truth has a cause which is collective of multitude into one ; since in the 
Republic also, the light proceeding from the good , and which conjoins 
intellect with the intelligible, is denominated by Plato truth. This cha¬ 
racteristic property therefore, which unites and binds together the natures 
that fill and the natures that are filled, according to all the orders of the 
Gods, must be arranged as originating supernally and proceeding as far 
as to the last of things. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



72 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


CHAPTER XXI. 

To us however discussing what pertains to every divine nature, what 
we assert will be known from those commonly received truths adduced in 
the Phaedrus, and which we have before mentioned. Socrates therefore 
says that every thing divine is beautiful, wise, and good, 1 and he indicates 
that this triad pervades to all the progressions of the Gods. What there¬ 
fore is the goodness, what the wisdom, and what the beauty of the Gods ? 
With respect to the goodness of the Gods therefore, we have before ob¬ 
served, that it preserves and gives subsistence to the whole of things, that 
it every where exists as the summit, as that which fills subordinate natures, 
and as pre-existing in every order analogous to the first principle of the 
divine orders. For according to this all the Gods are conjoined with the 
one cause of all things, and on account of this primarily derive their 
subsistence as Gods. For in all beings there is not any thing more perfect 
than the good, and the Gods. To the most excellent of beings therefore, 
and which are in every respect perfect, the best and most perfect of 
things is adapted. 


CHAPTER XXII. 

But in the PhilebuS, Plato delivers to us the three most principal ele¬ 
ments of the good, viz. the desirable, the sufficient, and the perfect. For 
it is necessary that it should convert all things to itself, and fill all things, 
and that it should be in no respect deficient, and should not diminish its 
exuberance. Let no one therefore conceive the desirable to be such as 
that which is frequently extended in sensibles as the object of appetite. 

* twHTov is erroneously printed instead of ayaSov. 

i 


I 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. xxn. 


OF PLATO. 


73 


For such is apparent beauty. Nor let him suppose it to be such as is in¬ 
deed able to energize upon and excite to itself the natures which are able 
to participate it, but which at the same time may be apprehended by in¬ 
telligence, and is educed by us according to a projecting energy, and an 
adhesion of the dianoetic power. For it is ineffable, and prior to all 
knowledge extends to all beings. For all things desire the goody and are 
converted to it. But if it be requisite summarily to unfold the characte¬ 
ristic peculiarity of the desirable, as the supplier of light proceeds by his 
rays into secondary natures, converts the eye to himself, causes it to be 
solar-form, and to resemble hifiiself, and through a different similitude 
conjoins it with his own fulgid splendour, thus also I think the desirable 
of the Gods allures and draws upward all things to the Gods in an ineff¬ 
able manner by its own proper illuminations, being every where present 
to all things, and not deserting any order whatever of beings. Since even 
matter itself is said to be extended to this desirable, and through this 
desire is filled with as many goods as it is able to participate. It is there¬ 
fore the centre of all beings, and all beings, and all the Gods have their 
essences, powers and energies about this. And the extension and desire 
of things towards this is inextinguishable. For all beings aspire after this 
desirable which is unknown and incomprehensible. Not being able there¬ 
fore either to know or receive that which they desire, they dance round 
it, and are parturient and as it were prophetic with respect to it. But 
they have an unceasing and never-ending desire of its unknown and in¬ 
effable nature, at the same time that they are unable to embrace and 
embosom it. For being at once exempt from all things, it is similarly 
present to and moves all things about itself, and is at the same time by all 
of them incomprehensible. By this motion also and this desire it 
preserves all things. But by its unknown transcendency through which 
it surpasses the whole of things, it preserves its proper union unmingled 
with secondary natures. Such therefore is the desirable. 

But the sufficient is full of boniform power, proceeds to all things, and 
extends to all beings the gifts of the Gods. For we conceive such a 
sufficiency as this to be a power pervading and protending to the last 
of things, extending the unenvying and exuberant will of the Gods, and 

Proc. Vol. I. K 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



74 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK L 


not abiding in itself, but unically comprehending the super-plenitude, the 
never-failing, the infinite, and that which is generative of good in the 
divine hyparxis. For the desirable being firmly established, and surpas¬ 
sing the whole of things, and arranging all beings about itself, the suffi- 
cient'begins the progression and multiplication of all good, calls forth that 
which is primary in the uniform hyparxis of the desirable, by its own pro¬ 
lific 1 exuberance, and by the beneficent replenishings which pervade to 
all things, and copiously produces and imparts it to every being. It is 
owing to the sufficient therefore, that the stability of divine natures, and 
that which proceeds from its proper causes is full of goodness, and that, 
in short, all beings are benefited, abiding in, proceeding from, and being 
united to their principles, and essentially separated from them. Through 
this power therefore, the intellectual genera give subsistence to natures 
similar to themselves, souls desire to generate, and imitate the beings prior 
to souls, natures deliver their productive principles into another place, 
and all things possess, in short, the love of generation. For the sufficiency 
of the goodness of the Gods, proceeding from this goodness, is dissemi¬ 
nated in all beings, and moves all things to the unenvying communication 
of good; intellect indeed to the communication of intellectual, but soul 
of psychical, and nature of natural good. 

All things therefore abide through the desirable of goodness, and gene¬ 
rate and proceed into second and third generations through the sufficient. 
But the third thing, the perfect, is convertivc of the whole of things, and 
circularly collects them to their causes; and this is accomplished by divine, 
intellectual, psychical and physical perfection. For all things participate 
of conversion, since the infinity of progression is through this again re¬ 
called to its principles ; and the perfect is mingled from the desirable and 
sufficient. For every thing of this kind is the object of desire, and is 
generative of things similar to itself. Or in the works of nature also, are 
not perfect things every where lovely and prolific through the acme of 
their beauty ? The desirable therefore establishes, all things, and com¬ 
prehends them in itself. The sufficient excites them into progressions 

• Instead of it is necessary to read yo 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. xxm. 


OF PLATO. 


7 * 

arid generations. And the perfect consummately leads progressions to 
conversions and convolutions. But through these three causes, the good* 
ness of the Gods fixing the unical power and authority of its proper hy¬ 
postasis in this triad, is the primary and most principal fountain and 
vestal seat of things which have any kind of subsistence whatever. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


After this, wisdom v is allotted the second order, being the intelligence 
of the Gods, or rather the hyparxis of their intelligence. For intelligence 
indeed, is intellectual knowledge; but the wisdom of the Gods is ineffa¬ 
ble knowledge, which is united to the object of knowledge and the intel¬ 
ligible union of the Gods. But it appears to me that Plato especially 
surveyed this in the triad [of the beautiful, the wise and the good,] as 
may be,inferred from the conceptions scattered about it in many places. 
I say then that Diotima in the Banquet is of opinion that wisdom is full 
of that which is known, and that it neither seeks, nor investigates, but 
possesses the intelligible. Hence, she says, that no one of the Gods phi¬ 
losophizes, nor desires to become wise; for a God is wise. Hence that 
which is philosophic is imperfect, and indigent of truth ; but that which 
is wise is full and unindigent, and has every thing present which it wishes 
and desires nothing. But the desirable and the appetible are proposed 
to the philosopher. Socrates, however, in the Republic considers that 
which is generative of truth and intellect, as affording an indication of 
wisdom, to our souls indeed the ascent to divine plenitude being accom¬ 
plished through knowledge, 1 but to the Gods intellect being present from 
the fulness of knowledge/ For the progression in them is not from an 


1 For yerni<rtecg it is requisite to read ynnoo’eaog. 

7 The same emendation is necessary here as above. 



Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



7<S 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


imperfect habit to the perfect; but from a self-perfect hyparxis a power 
prolific of inferior natures proceeds. But in the Theaetetus he indicates 
that the perfective of things imperfect, and that which calls forth con¬ 
cealed intelligence in souls, pertain to wisdom. For he says, it compels 
me to obstetrication, but prevents me from generating. It is evident 
therefore, from these things, that the genus of wisdom is triadic. Heqce 
it is full of being and truth, is generative of intellectual truth, and is 
perfective of intellectual natures that are in energy, and itself possesses a 
stable power. We must admit therefore, that these things pertain to the 
wisdom of the Gods. For this wisdom is full indeed of divine goodness, 
generates divine truth, and perfects all things posterior to itself. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

1st the next place let us consider the beautiful, what it is, and how 
it primarily subsists in the Gods. It is said therefore to be boniform 
beauty, and intelligible beauty, to be more ancient than intellectual 
beauty, and to be beauty itself, and the cause of beauty to all beings; 
and all such like epithets. And it is rightly said. But it is separate not 
only from the beauty which is apparent in corporeal masses, from the 
symmetry which is in these from psychical elegance, and intellectual 
splendour, but also from the second and third progressions in the Gods; 
and subsisting in the intelligible place of survey, it proceeds from this to 
all the genera of the Gods, and illuminates their superessential unities, 
and all the essences suspended from these unities, as far as to the appa¬ 
rent vehicles of the Gods. As therefore through the first goodness all 
the Gods are boniform, and through intelligible wisdom they have a 
knowledge ineffable, and established above intellect, thus also, I think, 
through the summit of beauty, every thing divine is lovely. For from 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


77 


thence all the Gods derive beauty, and being filled with it, fill the 
natures posterior to themselves, exciting all things, agitating them with 
Bacchic fury about the love of themselves, and pouring supernally on all 
things the divine effluxion of beauty. 

Such therefore, in short, is divine beauty, the supplier of divine hilarity, 
familiarity and friendship. For through this the Gods are united to and 
rejoice in each other, admire, and are delighted in communicating with 
each other, and in their mutual replenishings, and do not desert the order 
which they are always allotted in the distributions of themselves. Plato 
also delivers three indications of this beauty, in the Banquet indeed, 
denominating it the delicate; for the perfect and that which is most 
blessed, accedes to the beautiful through the participation of goodness. 
But he thus speaks of it in that dialogue: “ That which is truly beauti¬ 
ful, is delicate, perfect and most blessed.” One of the indications there¬ 
fore of the beautiful, is a thing of this kind, viz. the delicate. But we 
may assume another indication of it from the Phaedrus, viz. the splendid. 
For Plato attributing this to the beautiful says : “ It was then that we 
were permitted to see splendid beauty shining upon us &c.” And after¬ 
wards he adds: “ And arriving hither we apprehended it shining most 
manifestly through the clearest of the senses.” And at last he says: 
“ But now beauty alone has this allotment to be most splendid and most 
lovely.” These two things therefore are to be assumed,as indications of 
beauty. Another indication of beauty is this, that it is the object of love, 
which now also Plato appears to me to have called most lovely. And 
in many other places he shows that the amatory fury is conversant with 
the beautiful, defining, and in short, suspending love from the monad of 
beauty. “ For love, says he, is conversant with the beautiful.” 

Because, therefore, beauty converts and moves all things to itself, 
causes them to* energize enthusiastically, and recalls them through love, 
it is the object of love, being the leader of the whole amatory series* 
walking on the extremities of its feet, and exciting all things to itselr 
through desire and astonishment. But again because it extends to 
secondary natures plenitudes from itself, in conjunction with hilarity and 
divine facility, alluring, enflaming, and elevating all things, and pouring on 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



78 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK 1. 


them illuminations from on high, it is delicate, and is said to be so' by 
Plato. And because it bounds this triad, and covers as with a veil the 
ineffable union of the Gods, swims as it were on the light of forms, 
causes intelligible light to shine forth, and announces the occult nature 
of goodness, it is denominated splendid, lucid and manifest. For 
the goodness of the Gods is supreme and most united; their wisdom is 
in a certain respect now parturient with intelligible light, and the first 
forms; but their beauty is established in the highest forms, is the lumin¬ 
ous precursor of divine light, and is the first thing that is apparent to 
ascending souls, being more splendid and more lovely to the view and to 
embrace than every luciferous essence, and when it appears is received 
with astonishment. This triad therefore filling all things, and proceeding 
through all things, it is certainly necessary that the natures which are 
filled should be converted to and conjoined with each of the three through 
kindred, and not through the same media. For of different things that 
are filled by this triad there is a different medium; and different powers 
are converted to a different perfection of the Gods. I think therefore, 
it is manifest to every one, and it is frequently asserted by Plato, that 
the cause which congregates all secondary natures to divine beauty, 
which familiarizes them to it and is the source of their being filled with 
it, and of their derivation from thence, is nothing else than love, which 
always conjoins according to the beautiful, secondary to the first * Gods, 
and the more excellent genera, and the best of souls. But again, truth is 
certainly the leader to, and establishes beings in, divine wisdom, with 
which intellect being filled, possesses a knowledge of beings, and souls 
participating of this energize intellectually. 'For the full participation 
of true wisdom is effected through truth, since this every where illumi¬ 
nates intellective natures, and conjoins them with the objects of 
intellection, just as truth also is the first thing that congregates intellect 
and the intelligible. To those however who hasten to be conjoined with 
the good, knowledge and co-operation are no longer requisite, but collo¬ 
cation, a firm establishment and quiet are necessary. 


1 Instead of rpo; avrov it is requisite to read xparimis. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXV. 


OF PLATO. 


79 


CHAPTER XXV. 


What therefore is it which unites us to the good? What is it which causes 
in us a cessation of energy and motion ? What is it which establishes all 
divine natures in the first and ineffable unity of goodness ? And how does 
it come to pass that every thing being established in that which is prior 
to itself according to the good which is in itself, again establishes things 
posterior to itself according to cause ? It is, in short, the faith of the Gods* 
which ineffably unites all the genera of the Gods, of daemons, and of 
happy souls to the good. For it is necessary to investigate the good neither 
gnostically, nor imperfectly, but giving ourselves up to the divine light, 
and closing the eyes of the soul, after this manner to become established 
in the unknown and occult unity of beings. For such a kind of faith as 
this is more ancient than the gnostic energy, not in us only, but with the 
Gods themselves, and according to this all the Gods are united, and 
about one centre uniformly collect the whole of their powers and pro¬ 
gressions. 

If however it be requisite to give a particular definition of this faith, 
let no one suppose that it is such a kind of faith as that which is conver¬ 
sant with the wandering about sensibles. For this falls short of science, 
and much more of the truth of beings. But the faith of the Gods sur¬ 
passes all knowledge, and according to the highest union conjoins secon¬ 
dary with first natures. Nor again, let him conceive a faith of a similar 
species with the celebrated belief in common conceptions; for we believe 
in common conceptions prior to all reasoning. But the knowledge of 
these is divisible,' and is by no means equivalent to divine union ; and the 
science of these is not only posterior to faith, but also to intellectual 
simplicity. For intellect is established beyond all science, both the first 
science, and that which is posterior to it. Neither, therefore, must we 
say that the energy according to intellect is similar to such a faith as 
this. For intellectual energy is multiform, and is separated from the 



Digitized by LjOOQie 



80 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I: 


objects of intellection through difference; and in short, it is intellectual 
motion about the intelligible. But it is necessary that divine faith should 
be uniform and quiet, being perfectly established in the port of goodness. 
For neither is the beautiful, nor wisdom, nor any thing else among beings, 
so credible and stable to all things, and so exempt from all ambiguity, 
divisible apprehension and motion, as the good. For through this 
intellect also embraces another union more ancient than intellectual 
energy, and prior to energy. And soul considers the variety of intellect 
and the splendour of forms as nothing with respect to that transcendency 
of the good by which it surpasses the whole of things. And it dismisses 
indeed intellectual perception, running back to its own hyparxis ; but it 
always pursues, investigates, and aspires after the good , hastens as it were 
to embosom it, and gives itself to this alone among all things without 
hesitation. But why is it necessary to speak of the soul ? For these 
mortal animals, as Diotima somewhere says, despise all other things, and 
even life itself and being, through a desire of the nature of the good ; and 
all things have this one immoveable and ineffable tendency to the good ; 
but they overlook, consider as secondary, and despise the order of every 
thing else. This, therefore, is the one secure port of all beings. 

This also is especially the object of belief to all beings. And through 
this the conjunction and union with it is denominated faith by theologists, 
and not by them only, but by Plato likewise, (if I may speak what 
appears to me to be the case) the alliance of this faith with truth and 
love is proclaimed in the Laws. The multitude therefore are ignorant, 
that he who has a conception of these things, when discoursing about 
their contraries, infers the same thing with respect to the deviations from 
this triad. Plato then clearly asserts in the Laws that the lover of false¬ 
hood is not to be believed, and that he who is not to be believed is void 
of friendship. Hence it is necessary that the lover of truth should be 
worthy of belief, and that he who is worthy of belief should be well adapted 
to friendship. From these things therefore, we may survey divine truth, 
faith and love, and comprehend by a reasoning process their stable com¬ 
munion with each other. If, however, you are willing, prior to these 
things we will recall to our memory that Plato denominates that virtue 


Digitized by 


Google 



I 


CHAP. XXVI. OF PLATO. 81 

fidelity which conciliates those that disagree, and subverts the greatest of 
■wars, I mean seditions in cities. For from these things faith appears 
tp be the cause of union, communion and quiet. And if there is such a 
power as this in us, it is by a much greater priority in the Gods them¬ 
selves. For as Plato speaks of a certain divine temperance, justice and 
science, how is it possible that faith which connectedly comprehends the 
whole order of the virtues should not subsist with the Gods ? In short, 
there are these three things which replenish divine natures, and which 
are the sources of plenitude to all the superior genera of beings, viz. good¬ 
ness, wisdom and beauty. And again, there are three things which 
collect together the natures that are filled, being secondary indeed to the 
former, but pervading to all the divine orders, and these are faith, truth 
and love. But all things are saved through these, and are conjoined to 
their primary causes; some things indeed, through the amatory mania, 
others through divine philosophy, and others through theurgic power, 
which is more excellent than all human wisdom, and which comprehends 
prophetic good, the purifying powers of perfective good, and in short, all 
such things as are the effects of divine possession. Concerning these 
things therefore, we may perhaps again speak more opportunely. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


Again, let us, if you are willing, from other dialogues investigate the 
common dogmas of Plato about divine natures. Whence therefore, and 
what dogmas shall we assume, while we proceed in our search according 
to nature? Are you willing that we should in the next place recall to 
our memory what is written in the Phaedo ? Socrates therefore says in 
the demonstrations of the immortality of the soul which are derived from 
its similitude to divinity, that the essence which is superior to the soul, 
Proc. Vol. I. L 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



82 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


(and to which the soul is naturally similar, and being similar participates 
of an immortal allotment) is divine and immortal, intelligible and uniform, 
indissoluble and possesses an invariable sameness of subsistence; but that 
the essence which is inferior to the soul, is entirely the contrary, to which 
also it pertains to be corrupted and to be passive. For a thing of this 
kind is sensible and multiform, and is dissoluble because it is a composite; 
and he predicates among these all such things as pertain to a corporeal 
subsistence. Let us therefore direct our attention to these common dog¬ 
mas, and examine after what manner each of them pertains to the Gods. 

In the first place then what is that which we look to when we speak 
of that which is said to be divine? From what has been said therefore, it 
is evident that every God subsists according to the highest union of 
beings. For to us ascending from bodies, the Gods have appeared to be 
superessential unities, the generators, perfectors and measurers of essences, 
and who bind all first essences to themselves. But that which is divine, 
is not only hyparxis and the one in each order of being, but at the same 
time is that which participates and that which is participated; of which 
the latter is a God, but the former is diviue. Whether however, prior to 
the participated unities, there is something which is separate and partici¬ 
pated will be evident in what follows. But at present we shall define 
that which is divine to be a thing of this kind, viz. being which partici¬ 
pates of the one , or the one subsisting contractedly together with being. 
For we assume all things in the Gods except the one, as suspended from 
them and secondary, viz. essence, life and intellect. For the Gods do 
not subsist in, but prior to these, and they produce and contain these in 
themselves, but are not defined in them. But it is necessary not to be 
ignorant that these are in reality thus distinguished from each other. In 
many places, however, Plato magnificently celebrates the participants of 
the Gods by the same names, and denominates them Gods. For not only 
the Athenian guest in the Laws calls a divine soul a God, but also Socrates 
in the Pheedrus. For he says “ that all the horses and charioteers of the 
Gods are good and consist of things goodand afterwards still more 
clearly, “ and this is the life of the Gods.” But this is not yet wonderful. 
For is it not admirable that he should denominate those beings Gods who 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXVI. 


OF PLATO. 


85 


are always conjoined with tlie Gods, and who together with them give 
completion to one series ? For in many places be calls daemons Gods, 
though they are essentially posterior to, and subsist about the Gods. For 
in the Phaedrus and Timseus, and in other dialogues, you will find him ex¬ 
tending the appellation of the Gods even as far as to daemons. But what 
is still more paradoxical than these things, he does not refuse to call cer¬ 
tain men Gods ; for in the Sophista he thus denominates the Elean 
guest. 

From all that has been said therefore, this must be assumed, that with 
respect to a God, one thing is simply a God, another according to union, 
another according to participation, another according to contact, and an¬ 
other according to similitude. For of super-essential natures indeed, each 
is primarily a God; of intellectual natures, each is a God according to 
union; and of divine souls, each is a God according to participation. But 
divine daemons are Gods according to contact with the Gods; and the 
souls of men are allotted this appellation through similitude. Each of 
these however is, as we have said, rather divine than a God. Since the 
Athenian guest calls intellect itself divine; but that which is divine is 
posterior to the first deity, in the same manner as that which is united is 
posterior to the one , that which is intellectual, to intellect, and that which 
is animated, to soul. And always those natures that are more uniform 
and simple have the precedency ; but the series of beings ends in the one 
itself. Let this, therefore, be the definition and distinction of that which 
is divine. 

In the next place, let us survey the immortal. For with Plato there are 
many orders of immortality, pervading from on high as far as to the last 
of things; and the last echo, as it were, of immortality, is in those visible 
natures that are perpetual; which the Elean guest, in his discourse about 
the circulation of the universe, says, are allotted from the father a reno¬ 
vated immortality. For every body is allotted a being and a life depen¬ 
dent on another cause; but is not itself naturally adapted to connect, or 
adorn, or preserve itself. The immortality of partial souls is, I think, 
more mauifest and more perfect than this; which Plato evinces by many 
demonstrations in the Phaedo, and in the 10th book of the Republic. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



84 


GN THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


But I mean by the immortality of partial souls, that which has a more 
principal subsistence, as containing in itself the cause of eternal perma¬ 
nency. We shall not, however, err if prior to both these we establish the 
immortality of daemons. For the genera of these through which they 
subsist aie incorruptible, and they neither verge to mortality, nor are 
filled with the nature of things which are generated and corrupted. But 
I infer that the immortality of divine souls is still more venerable and es¬ 
sentially more transcendent than that of daemons; which divine souls we 
say are primarily self-motive, and are the fountains and principles of the 
life divided about bodies, and through which bodies obtain a renovated 
immortality. If, however, prior to these you conceive the Gods them¬ 
selves, and the immortality in them, and how in the Banquet Diotima 
does not attribute an immortality of this kind even to daemons, but defines 
it to subsist in the Gods alone, such an immortality as this will appear to 
you to be separate, and exempt from the whole of things. For there eter¬ 
nity subsists, which is the fountain of all immortalityj and through it all 
things live and possess life, some things indeed a perpetual life, but others 
a life dispersed into non-being. In short, therefore, that which is divine 
is immortal so far as it generates and comprehends in itself a perpetual 
life. For it is immortal, not as participating of life, but as the supplier 
of a divine life, and as deifying life itself, whether you are willing to call 
such a life intelligible, or by any other name. 

In the next place let us direct our attention to the intelligible. It is 
denominated, therefore, in opposition to that which is sensible and which 
is apprehended by opinion in conjunction with sense. For the intelligible 
is first unfolded into light in the most principal causes. For soul is in¬ 
deed intelligible, is of this allotment, is exempt from sensibles, and obtains 
an essence separated from them. Prior to soul also intellect is intelli¬ 
gible; for we rather think jt fit to arrange soul in the middle, than to con- 
numerate it with the first essences. That likewise is denominated intelli¬ 
gible, which is more ancient than intellect, which replenishes intelligence, 
and is itself by itself perfective of it, and which Timaeus arranges prior to 
the demiurgic intellect and intellectual energy, in the order of a paradigm. 
But beyond these is the divine intelligible, which is defined according to 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXVII. 


OF PLATO. 


85 


t 


union itself, and a divine hyparxis. For this is intelligible as the object 
of desire to intellect, as perfecting and comprehending intellect, and as 
the plenitude of being. In one way, therefore, we must denominate the 
intelligible as the hyparxis of the Gods; in another way as true being 
and the first essence; in another way as intellect and all intellectual life; 
and in another way as soul and the psychical order. It is likewise neces¬ 
sary not to fashion the different natures of things conformably to names. • 
Such, therefore, is the order of this triad; so that what is divine indeed is 
unmingled and ranks as the first; that which is immortal is the second; 
and that which is intelligible the third. For the first of these is deified 
being; the second is life subsisting according to the immortality of the 
Gods; and the third'is intellect, which is denominated intelligible in con¬ 
sequence of being replete with union. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

After this, it follows in the next place, that we should consider the 
uniform, the indissoluble, and that which has an invariable sameness of 
subsistence, from the same causes, and these as the precursors of, and 
pervading through all the divine orders. For the uniform, indeed, has the 
highest subsistence, is present with the divine monad, and appears to be 
especially adapted to that which is primarily being,' and in which also 
every participate genus of unities ends. For the one is prior to these, as 
wilt be evident as we proceed. But the indissoluble is the second. For 
it comprehends and binds the extremes according to divine union ; since 
the dissoluble is such as it is through the want of connexion and of a 
power which collects multitude into one. And that which has an invari¬ 
able sameness of subsistence is eternal, and is full of the perpetuity of the 

’ For to or it is necessary to read t<o ovrt. 


Digiti .?d by V^sOOQLe 



86 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK 1. 


Gods; from which also the participation of immortality and eternal same¬ 
ness is derived to other things. The uniform, therefore, pertains to the 
same thing as the divine; but the indissoluble to the same thing as the 
immortal; and that which has an invariable sameness of subsistence we 
must refer to the intelligible. 

And do you not see how these are severally after a manner co-adapted 
to each other ? For the first of tliese, through the first unity which is par¬ 
ticipated by being is, as it is fit it should be, uniform. For if a God sub¬ 
sists according to the one , that which is divine will doubtless be uniform. 
But that which through one cause of life is immortal, is also similarly in¬ 
dissoluble. For life is the bond of dissoluble natures; which also Timaeus 
indicating to us, opposes the dissoluble to the immortal: “ for you are not 
immortal, says the demiurgus, yet you shall never be dissolved, nor be 
subject' to the fatality of death." Every thing mortal, therefore, is dis¬ 
soluble ; but the immortal is indissoluble. That, however, which has a 
renovated immortality is for the same reason neither indissoluble, nor 
mortal. For being in the middle of both it is neither of the extremes, ac¬ 
cording to each opposition. But the third of these being established ac¬ 
cording to the plenitude of whole intelligibles subsists at once and is in¬ 
variably th6 same. For the intelligible is the cause of sameness and of 
eternal permanency; and intellect through this is entirely eternal. These 
triads, therefore, proceed from the first and most principal causes, in the 
same manner as we demonstrated of the before-mentioned triads. But 
these things, indeed, we shall consider hereafter. 

These things, therefore, being discussed, let us direct our attention to 
the unbegotten in divine natures, and unfold what we assert it to be. For 
we say that all [true] being is without generation, and Socrates demon¬ 
strates in the Phaedrus, that souls are unbegotten. Prior to these, also, 
the Gods themselves are established above generations and a subsistence 
according to time. How, therefore, shall we define the unbegotten when 
applied to a divine nature, and according to what reason ? Is it because 
divinity is exempt from all generation, not only from that which subsists 


* For ytiKrtf&c read tw£wJ«. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXVII. 


OF PLATO. 


87 


in the parts of time, soch as we assert the generation of material, natures 
to be, nor from that onlj which is extended into the whole of time, such 
as Timaeus demonstrates the generation of the celestial bodies to be, hut 
also from the psychical generation ? Since Timaeus denominates this to 
be unbegotten according to time, but to be the best of generated natures. 
And in short, a divine nature is exempt from all division and essential 
separation. For the progression of the Gods is always according to a 
union of secondary natures, which are uniformly established in the natures 
prior to them, the things producing containing in themselves the things 
produced. The indivisible, therefore, the unseparated and the united are 
in reality unbegotten. So that if certain generations of the Gods are 
spoken of by Plato in fabulous figments, as in the fable of Diotima, the 
generation of Venus is celebrated, and of Love at the birth of Venus, it is 
necessary not to be ignorant after what manner things of this kind are as¬ 
serted, and that they are composed for the sake of symbolical indicationj 
and that fables tor the sake of concealment call the inedible unfolding into 
light through causes, generation. For in the Orphic writings, indeed, the 
first cause is on this account denominated Time; since again, for another 
reason, it is thus denominated, in order that a subsistence according to 
cause may be the same as a subsistence according to time. And the pro¬ 
gression of the Gods from the best of causes is properly denominated ge¬ 
neration according to time. To Plato, therefore, mythologising, it is 
adapted to devise things of this kind conformably to theologists; but 
when he is discoursing dialectically, and investigating and unfolding 
divine natures intellectually and not mystically, it is then adapted to him 
to celebrate the unbegotten essence of the Gods. For the Gods primarily 
establish in themselves the paradigm of non-generation. But an intellec- 
tual nature is in a secondary degree unbegotten, and after this the psy¬ 
chical essence. And in bodies there is an ultimate resemblance of unbe¬ 
gotten power; which some posterior to Plato perceiving, have indefinitely 
shown that the whole heaven is unbegolten. The Gods, therefore, are 
unbegotten. But there is an order in them of first, middle, and last pro¬ 
gressions, and a transcendency and subjection of powers. There are also 
in them uniform comprehensions of causes; but multiform progenies of 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



88 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I. 


things caused. And all things, indeed, are consubsistent in each other; 
but the mode of subsistence is various. For some things as replenishing 
subsist prior to secondary natures; but others, as being filled aspire after 
more perfect natures, and participating of their power become generative 
of things posterior to themselves, and perfective of their hyparxis. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Looking to these things, therefore, we may unfold what is said of pa¬ 
ternal causes, and of the prolific powers of mothers in fables. For every 
where, we may suppose that the cause of a more excellent and more uni¬ 
form nature is paternal; * but we may say that the cause of a more sub¬ 
ordinate and partial nature pre-exists in the order of a mother. For with 
the Gods a father is analogous to the monad, and the cause of bound ; 
but a mother, to the duad, and to the infinite power which is generative 
of beings. The paternal cause, however, is with Plato uniform, and is es¬ 
tablished in a more elevated order than the natures which proceed from 
it, and subsists prior to its progeny in the allotment of the desirable. 
Again, the maternal cause has the form of the duad; and at one time 
presents itself to the view in fables as more excellent than its progeny, 
but at another time as essentially subordinate to it; as in the Banquet, 
Plato calls Poverty the mother of L6ve. And this is not only the case in 
fabulous figments, but also in the philosophic theory of beings, as is evi¬ 
dent in the Timaeus. For there Plato calls being the father, but matter 
the mother and nurse of generation. The powers, therefore, which are 
prolific and perfective of secondary natures, and the suppliers of life and 
causes of separation are mothers, being established above the natures 
produced by them. But the powers which receive the natures that pro- 

1 tr«rpiM> is omitted in the original. . 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


89 


ceed into light, which multiply their energies, and extend even the subor¬ 
dinate allotment of the progeny, are also themselves called*mothers. 
Again, however, thiQprogeny of such like causes, at one time indeed, pro¬ 
ceed according to union from their proper principles, and are filled from 
both the paternal and maternal cause; but at another time they contain 
the bond of them, being arranged in the middle, conveying the gifts of 
the fathers to the maternal bosoms, and converting the receptacles of them 
to the completions of primary causes. But of the natures which subsist 
from twofold preexisting principles, some are assimilated to the paternal 
cause ; and such like genera of Gods are productive, defensive, and com¬ 
prehensive. For to produce, to contain, and to defend, pertain to the 
cause of bound. But others are assimilated to the maternal cause, and 
are prolific, and vivific, and the suppliers of motion, of the multiplication 
of powers, of variety and progressions. For all these are the progeny of ‘ 
infinity and the first ipultitude. 


CHAPTER XXIX.’ 

Thus much therefore may suffice concerning the unbegotten hyparxis 
of the Gods. It now remains, I think, to speak of divine names. For 
Socrates in the Cratylus thinks fit to unfold in a remarkable degree the 
rectitude of names in divine natures. And Parmenides indeed, in the 
first hypothesis, as he denies of the one every thing else that is known, 
and all knowledge, so likewise he denies of it name and language. Bu^ 
in the second hypothesis, besides all other things he shows that this one 
may be spoken of and' that it has a name. In short therefore, it must 
be admitted that the first, most principal and truly divine names are es¬ 
tablished in the Gods themselves. But it must be said that the second 
names, which are the imitations of the first, and which subsist intellecfu- 

1 **« is omitted in the original. 

Proc. Vol. I. M 


Digitized by LjOOQle 



90 


ON THE THEOLOGY OF PLATO. 


Book i. 


ally, are of a daemoniacal allotment. And again, we may say that those 
names wlflch are the third from the truth, which are logically devised, and 
which receive the ultimate resemblance of divine nAures, are unfolded 
by scientific men, at one time energizing divinely, and at another intel¬ 
lectually, and generating moving images of their inward spectacles. For 
as the demiurgic intellect establishes resemblances about matter of the 
first forms contained in himself, and produces temporal images of things 
eternal, divisible images of things indivisible, and adumbrated images as 
it were of true beings,—after the same manner I think the science that is 
with us representing intellectual production, fabricates resemblances of 
other things, and also of the Gods themselves, representing that which is 
void of composition in them, through composition ; that which is simple, 
through variety ; and that which is united, through multitude; and thus 
fhshioqing names, ultimately exhibits images of divine natures. For it 
generates every name as if it were a statue of the Gods. And as the 
theurgic art through certain symbols calls forth the exuberant and unenvy¬ 
ing goodness of the Gods into the illumination of artificial statues, thus 
also the intellectual science of divine concerns, by the compositions and 
divisions of sounds, unfolds the occult essence of the Gods. Very pro¬ 
perly therefore, does Socrates in the Philebus say, that on account of his 
reverence of the Gods, he is agitated with the greatest fear respecting 
their names. For it is necessary to venerate even the ultimate echos of 
the Gods, and venerating these to become established in the first para¬ 
digms of them. And thus much concerning divine names, which at pre¬ 
sent may be sufficient for the purpose of understanding the theology of 
Plato. For we shall accurately discuss them when we speak of partial 
powers. 



Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



BOOK II. 


CHAPTER I. 


The most proper beginning however of the theory proposed by us is 
that from which we may be able to discover the first cause 1 of all beings. 
For being impelled from this in a becoming manner, and having our con¬ 
ceptions purified respecting it, we shall with greater facility be able to dis¬ 
tinguish other things. About these things therefore we must speak from 
the beginning as follows : It is necessary that all beings, and all the 
natures of beings should either be many only, there being no one in them, 
neither in each, nor in all of them ; or that they should be one only, there 
being no multitude, but all things being compelled into one and the same 
power of existence; or it is necessary that they should be both one and 
many, and that being should be one in order that neither multitude itself 
by itself may vanquish beings, nor that we may be forced to bring together 
into the same thing all things and their contraries at once. These things 
therefore being three, which of them shall we chuse ? And to which of 
the above mentioned assertions shall we give our suffrage. It is necessary 
therefore severally to discuss the absurdities which attend these positions, 
and thus to survey after what manner the truth subsists. 

* For owmw it it necessary to read 




Digitized by v^ooQle 



92 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


If then beings are many, and in such a manner many, as we have men¬ 
tioned from the beginning, so that the one is not any where to be found, 
many absurdities will happen to be the result, or rather all the nature of 
beings will at once from the first be destroyed, as there will immediately 
be nothing which is capable of participating the one. For it must be 
admitted that every being is either one certain thing,, or nothing. And 
that indeed which is a certain being, is also one ; but that which is not 
even one being, has not any existence whatever. Hence, if many things 
have a subsistence, each of the many is something or a certain one.. But 
if each of them is nothing, or not even one thing, neither is it possible for 
the many to exist ; for the many are many so far as each indi vidual of the 
multitude exists. If, therefore, the many alone have a subsistence, and 
the one in no respect is, rieither will the many exist. For things which 
are in no respect one have not any existence whatever. But if the one is 
not, by a much greater priority neither have the many an existence. 
For it necessarily follows that none of the things from which the many 
consist will have a subsistence. 

Farther still, if the many alone have a subsistence (as has been said) all 
things will be infinitely infinite ; and if you receive any one of the in¬ 
finites whatever, this also will be immediately infinite. And with respect 
to the things from which this consists and which are infinite, each of these 
likewise will be infinite. For let something of the many be assumed, 
which we say is not one, this therefore will be multitude according to its 
own nature, since it belongs to beings, but is not nothing. If however it 
is multitude, this also will consist of many things, and will be many. 
And if you assume something of these manys, this will immediately appear 
to you not to be one, but many. There will likewise be immediately the 
same reasoning in these, and in a similar manner each, (because we falsely 
speak of each) will be multitude in energy. And each, as I may say, 
will be infinite, or rather will be infinitely infinite. For there is nothing 
which will not be something of this kind ; since a part is many, and in a 
similar manner the part of a part; and this to infinity. For multitude 
proceeding will never stop, nor infinity, in consequence of being deprived 
of the nature o (the one. To make beings however, to be infinitely infinite, 
is impossible both with respect to truth, and to the thing proposed by us. 



Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. I. 


OF PLATO. 


93 


For if being is infinitely infinite, being can neither be known, nor disco¬ 
vered ; since the infinite is entirely incomprehensible and unknown. If 
also-being is infinitely infinite, there will be something more infinite than 
the infinite. But if that something is more infinite, this will be less infinite. 
That, however, which is less infinite, since it is not perfectly infinite, will 
evidently be finite, so far as it falls short of the nature of the infinite. If, 
therefore, there is something which is itself according to multitude more 
infinite than that which is infinite in multitude there will be something 
more than the infinite, and the infinite will be less, yet not according to 
multitude. This however is impossible. Hence there is not the infinitely 
kifinite; 

Again therefore, according to this hypothesis, the same things will be 
according to the same, similar and disimilar. For if all the manys are 
notone; and each thing according to all things is not one, that which is 
not one will evidently suffer the same passion in consequence of the pri¬ 
vation of the one. All things therefore being deprived of the one, after 
the same manner, they will on this account subsist similarly with respect 
to each other. But things which subsist similarly, so far as they thus sub¬ 
sist, are evidently similar to each other. Hence the many will be similar 
to each other, so far as they are deprived of the one. They will likewise 
according to this privation of the one be perfectly dissimilar. For it is 
necessary that things which are similar should suffer the same passion ; 
so that things which do not suffer any thing that is the same, will not be 
similar. But things which suffer any thing that is the same, suffer also 
one thing. Hence things which are deprived of every one, will not suffer 
any thing that is the same. The many therefore will be similar and dis¬ 
similar according to the same. But this is impossible; Hence it is im¬ 
possible for the many to exist which are in no respect one. 

Moreover, the many will be the same with and different from each other 
according to the same. For if all things are similarly deprived of the 
one , so far indeed as all of them are similarly deprived they will be the 
same according to this privation; since things which subsist after the 
same manner according to habit are the same, and also things which are 
after the same manner deprived according to privation.Bu t so far in 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



94 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


short, as each of them is deprived of every one, so far the many will be 
different from each other. For if the one in the many is the same, that 
which is in no respect one, will in no respect be the same. The many 
therefore will be the same and not the same with each other. But if they 
are the same and not the same it is evident that they are different from 
each other. For that which is the same and not the same, so far as it is 
not the same, is not the same, by nothing else than the different. Farther 
still therefore, these many will be moveable and immoveable, if the one 
is not. For if each of them is not one, they will be immoveable accord¬ 
ing to the privation of the one. For if that which is not one should be 
changed, each of them would have the one; since privations being changed, 
entirely lead into habits the things that are changed. It is necessary 
however that what is not one should remain immoveable according to 
the privation of the one , though this very thing is itself impossible, viz. 
that the many should stand still. For every thing which stands still is in 
something which is the same, viz. it is either in the same form, or in the 
9ame place. But every thing which is in the same, is in one thing which 
is the same. For the same in which it is, is one thing. Every thing 
therefore which stands still is in one thing. The many, however, do 
not participate of the one. But it is perfectly impossible that things 
which do not participate of the one , should be in one certain thing. And 
things which are not in one thing cannot stand still, since things which 
stand still are entirely in one and the same thing. It is impossible there¬ 
fore, that the many should stand still, and remain immoveable. It has 
been demonstrated however, that the many must necessarily stand im¬ 
moveable. The same things therefore, and the same passion, (I mean 
the privation of the habit of the on£,) are moveable and immoveable. 
For things immoveable, and things which stand still, so far as they are 
unstable, so far they must necessarily appear to be moveable. 

Moreover, there is no number of beings if the one in no respect is; but 
all things and each thing will be not one. iW the particle of number, 
the monad, is one, and every number itself is one. For if there are five 
monads, there is also the pentad ; and if three monads, the triad. But 
the triad itself is a certain unity, and so is the pentad. So that if there 
is no one, there will neither be any part, nor the whole of numbers. For 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. 1. 


OF PLATO. 


95 


how can there be any number the one not existing? For the one is the 
principle of numbers. But the principle not existing, neither is it pos¬ 
sible that the things which proceed from this principle should exist. 
Hence the one not existing, neither will there be any number. 

Again, therefore, neither will there be any knowledge of beings if the 
one is not. For it will not be possible either to speak or think of any 
being. For each thing itself, and every thing of which we can speak, and 
in which we impress the nature of the one , will have no existence, because 
neither does the one exist. Hence neither will there be any discourse nor 
any knowledge. For discourse is one thing consisting of many things, 
if it is perfect. And knowledge then exists, when that which knows be¬ 
comes one with that which is known. But union not existing, there will 
at the same time be no knowledge of things, and it will be impossible to 
speak about things which we know. To which we may add, that the in¬ 
explicable in the several infinites, will necessarily always fly from the 
bound of knowledge. For immediately each apparent infinite which he 
who possesses knowledge desires to understand, will escape the gnostic 
power hastening to come into contact with, and adhere to it, since it is 
incapable either of contact or adhesion. If, therefore, the many alone 
have an existence, the one having no subsistence whatever, so many ab¬ 
surdities, and a still greater number must necessarily happen to those who 
adopt such an hypothesis. 

But if the one which is the one itself alone has a subsistence, and there 
is nothing else (for if there were there would not only be one but many 
things ; since one and another thing are more than one, and are not one 
thing only) if this be the case, there will neither be among all things either 
whole, or that which has parts. For every thing which has parts is many, 
and every whole has parts. But the one is in no respect many. Neither 
therefore will there be a whole, nor that which has parts. Farther still, 
neither is it possible that there should be a beginning,Lor end of any thing. 
For that which has a beginning, a middle, and an end, is divisible. But the 
one is not divisible, because neither has it any parts. Hence, neither has it a 
beginning, nor a middle,noran end. Again, if the one alone has a subsist¬ 
ence, no being will have figure. For every thing which has figure is either 
rectilinear or circular, or mixt from these. But if indeed it is rectilinear, 



i 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



t 


96 ON THE THEOLOGY BOOK IL 

it will have for its parts, the middle, and the extremes. If it is circular, 
there will he one thing in it as a middle, but other things as extremes, to 
which the middle extends. And if it is mixed from the right and circular 
line, it will consist of many things, and will not be one. 

Moreover, neither will any being be in itself, nor in another thing. For 
that which is in another thing is different from that in which it is. But 
the one alone existing and nothing else (for it will by no means be in 
another thing) there will be no being which is in another thing. But 
that which is in itself will at the same time comprehend and be compre¬ 
hended ; and in this, to comprehend will not be the same thing as to be 
comprehended ; nor will there be the same * definition of both. There 
will therefore be two things, and no longer the one alone. Again, neither 
will any being be moved. For being moved indeed, it must necessarily 
Be changed. But being changed it must be in another thing. If the one 
however alone has an existence, it is not possible for any thing to appear 
to be in something else. Hence it is not possible for any. being to be 
changed. But every thing which stands still is necessarily in the same 
thing. And that which is in the same is in a certain same thing. The 
one however is in no same thing. For that which is in a certain thing, 
is either in itself, or in something else. But it has been demonstrated, 
that it is neither in itself nor in another. Hence neither is it in a certain 
same thing. Neither therefore does any being stand still. 

Moreover, it is impossible for any thing to be the same with, or different 
from any thing. For if there is nothing hesides the one itself, there is not 
any thing which will be either the same with, or different from another 
thing. For there will not be auy other being. And the one itself will 
not be different from itself; for it would be many and not one. Nor will 
it be the same with itself. For this thing which is same is in another, 
and same is not the one itself. For the one is simply one, because it is , 
not many. But that which is same is the same with another thing. 
Again, neither is it possible for any thirtg to be similar or dissimilar to any 
thing. For every thing similar suffers a certain same passion; but every 


‘ For out os it is necessary to read auro;. 


Digitized by LjC 3Qle 



CHAP. I. 


OP PLATO. 


97 


thing dissimilar a certain different passion. The one, however,"cannot puf¬ 
fer any thing, nor can this be the case with any thing else besides the one ; 
since nothing else.has any existence whatever, if the one alone has a sub¬ 
sistence. 

Farther still, in addition to these things we say that neither is it possible 
for any thing to be touched, nor to be separate, if there is nothing else 
besides the one. For how can things which have no existence be separate, 
or come into contact with any thing? But neither can the one either be 
separate from itself or touch itself. For it would thus be passive to the 
being touched, and the being separate. But the one suffers no other thing 
besides itself. It is likewise requisite that no one thing should either be 
equal or unequal to any thing. For that which is equal to another thing, 
is said to be so with reference to another thing. And the like may be 
said of that which is unequal. Another thing, however, has no existence, 
if the one alone has a subsistence. But neither can the one be equal or 
unequal to' itself. For if unequal, there will be one thing in it as greater, 
but another as less; so that it will be two things and not one. And if 
the one is equal to itself, the one will measure itself. This however is im¬ 
possible. For the one will measure and be measured by itself, so that it 
will not be the one itself. Neither therefore will there be any equality 
or inequality in beings. If however these things are impossible, neither 
can any being come into contact with another, and be separate, nor be 
similar or dissimilar, nor be same or different, nor again, stand still, or be 
moved, or in short be in any ttyng, or have figure, or be a whole, or have 
parts, if the one alone has a subsistence which is void of multitude, and 
is without all these things. Neither however, is it possible for the many 
alone to have a subsistence, as was before demonstrated. And hence it 
is necessary that every being should be both many and one. 

If this however is the case, either the many must participate of the one , 
or the one of the many, or both must participate of each other, or neither . 
of each other; but the many indeed must be separate, and the one must 
also be separate, in order that the many and the one may subsist, as reason 
evinces. If, therefore, neither the one participates of the many , nor the 
many of the one, the same absurdities will ensue as we brought together in 

Proc. Vol. I. N 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



98 


ON THE THEOLOGY BOOK II. 

the hypothesis of the many alone having a subsistence. For again there 
will be the many separate from the one. For if the one subsists by itself, 
and the many do not in any respect participate of the one , the manyyt\\\ be 
infinitely infinite, they will be similar and dissimilar, same and different, 
moved and stable, and there will neither be any number nor any know¬ 
ledge of the many. For the absence of the one compels all these conse¬ 
quences to be apparent in the many. It is impossible therefore, that 
neither the many should participate of the one , nor the one of the many. 

If however, the one participates of the many , and the many of the one , 
and both these are in each other, it is necessary that there should be another 
nature besides these, which is neither one nor many. For both these being 
mingled in each other, it is necessary that there should be a cause of their 
mixture which conjoins multitude to the one t and the one to multitude. 
For it is necessary that every thing that is mingled, should have a cause of 
the mixture. For in short, if the one and multitude participate of each 
other, neither the one is the cause of essence to multitude , nor multitude to 
the one , but a certain third thing is the cause of essence to both, and 
which is prior to these. For what will that be which makes this to be 
multitude, and that to be one ? And what is the cause of this communica¬ 
tion and association with each other, the one so far as it is one never having 
any communication with the many ? For the many so far as many, and 
the one so far as one are different from each other. And so far as neither 
is from neither, they have no sympathy with each other. What therefore 
is it which collects these into one, since they fly from and are unmingled 
with each other ? For being thus discordant with each other, they cannot 
desire each other, or if they did their congress must be fortuitous. For 
if this should happen to be the case, there was a time when these were 
separate from each other, since now also they subsist together casually. 

. It is however impossible for the many to subsist separate from the one. 

• The mixture therefore is not casual. But neither is the mixture from the 
many , if neither the one is the cause of the many , nor the many of the one. 
What therefore is this more excellent thing [which is the cause of the 
mixture ?] For it is either one, or not one. But if indeed, it is the one 
itself , we must again inquire concerning this, whether it participates of 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. I. 


OF PLATO. 


99 


multitude or of nothing. For if this participates, it is evident that some 
other thing prior to this, will for the same reason present itself to the view, 
and this will be the case to infinity. But if a thing of this kind is entirely 
void of multitude, again that which was asserted at first will not be true, 
viz. that the many do not participate of the one , nor the one of the many. 
I mean however that which is the most principal and primarily one. But 
there is indeed a certain one in the many, and there is also the imparticipa- 
ble one, and whfch is simply one, and nothing else. If however that which 
is prior to both, is not * one , it is necessary that this not one should be 
more excellent than the one. All things however are, and are gene¬ 
rated what they are, through the one. And together with the one indeed 
' every being is preserved ; but separate from the one proceeds to the cor¬ 
ruption of itself. The mixture also of the one and multitude , which the 
non-one affords to beings, is communion and union. The one * therefore, 
and that which is not one , * are the cause of nothing else to beings than 
of their being one. If however the one is the cause of a thing of this kind, 
that which is not one will not be the cause of that which is more excellent 
{than union.] But it is every where necessary that what is more excel¬ 
lent should be the cause to beings of another more excellent thing, accor¬ 
ding to its own power. For thus it will be more excellent as being more 
good, and as the cause from its own nature of a greater and more excel¬ 
lent good to those things to which a less good is the cause of less good¬ 
ness. From these things therefore it is necessary, that the many should 
participate of the one, that the one should be unmingled with multitude , 
and that nothing should be better than the one, but that this should also be 
the cause of being to the many. For every thing which is deprived of 
the one , flies immediately into nothing, and to its own corruption. But that 
which is not many, is not at one and the same time not many and nothing. 
For to the one that which is nothing, or not one, is opposed, and to the 
many that which is not many is opposed. If, therefore, one and the 

1 Ovx lB omitted in the original. 

* Instead of to ov it is necessary to read to tv. 

3 The ffv in the original which immediately precedes ou% tv seems to be superfluous, and 
p therefore omitted in the translation. 



Digitized by L.OOQ le 






100 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


many are not the same, the not being many wilt not be the same with 
nothing. From thus considering the affair therefore, it appears that the 
one is beyond multitude, and is the cause of being to the mafiy. 



CHAPTER II. 


It is necessary however, that discussing the same subject after another 
manner, we should again see if we can in a certain respect follow what 
has been said, and refer it to the same end. It is necessary therefore, that 
there should either be one principle, or many principles ; or rather, we 
should begin from hence. And if there are many principles, they must 
either possess sympathy with each other, or they must be divulsed from 
each other, and they .must be either finite or infinite. But if there is one 
principle, this must either be not essence, or essence. And if it is essence, 
this must either be corporeal or incorporeal. And if incorporeal, it must 
either be separate from, or inseparable from bodies. And if separate, it 
must either be moveable or immoveable. But if it is not essence, it must 
either be inferior to all essence, or participated by essence, orimpartieipable. 
If therefore there are many principles, and which have no sympathy with 
each other, no being will originate from them [conjointly,] nor will they be 
common to all things, but each will produce by itself. For what commu¬ 
nication can there be between things which are naturally foreign, or what 
co-operation between things which are entirely of a different kind? In 
addition also to these things, there will be the many which do not partici- 
' pate of the one. For if there is a certain one common in all of them, they 
will not be perfectly separated essentially from each other. If therefore 
they are different, and there is nothing which is the same ahout them, they 
are alone many and by no means one. But if there are many principles, 
and which possess sympathy with each other, they will have something 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. H. 


OF PLATO; 


101' 


common, which leads all of them to sympathy, and similarly unfolds all 
of them to the view. For we call those things sympathetic, which happen 
to be passive to the same thing. But similars are entirely similar from 
participating one form and one nature. If however this be the case, it 
is necessary that that all Qor universal] which is every where, and in all 
the principles, should be. of a more principal nature than the many. This 
therefore gives them the power to generate sympathy with each other, and 
affords them communion, according to nature. 

Again, if there are indeed infinite principles* either the things whictv 
proceed from them are infinite,, and there will thus be the infinite twice, 
or they are finite, and. thus all the principles will not be principles. For 
things finite in number, will entirely proceed from finite principles. The 
principles therefore are in vain infinite.. To which may be added, that in¬ 
finity makes both the principles to be unknown, and the things which 
proceed from them. For the principles being unknown, it is necessary 
that the tilings which proceed from them should be unknown; since we 
then think that we know any thing when we know the causes and the first 
principles of it. But if the principles are finite, it is evident that there 
will be a certain, number of them : for we say that number is a definite 
multitude. If however, there is a number of the principles, it is necessary 
that there should be a cause of the whole number of them. For every 
number is from one ; and this, via. the one is the principle of numbers* 
This therefore will be the principle of principles, and-the cause of finite 
multitude, since number itself is one, and the end in the many is one, and 
it bounds the many by that which is one. But the principle being one, 
and this being essence, it is necessary if this is admitted to be either cor¬ 
poreal or incorporeal, that it must be acknowledged to. be the principle of 
other things. 

If therefore, body is the cause of the generation of beings, it is neces¬ 
sary indeed., that it should be divisible and have parts. For every body 
is in its own nature divisible; since every magnitude i§ a certain whole 
and that which is a whole consists of parts. These parts therefore, (but 
I mean each of- them) must either severally participate a certain one, or 
not participate it. 1£ therefore they do not: participate it, they will be.* 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



102 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


many alone, and by no means one. Hence, neither will that which con¬ 
sists from them be a whole. For there being no one, that which consists 
of all of them will not be one. But if each of the parts participates of 
something of this kind, and there is something which is the same in all 
of them, a thing of this kind must necessarily be incorporeal, and impar¬ 
tible according to its own nature. For if this also is itself corporeal, it is 
either wholly in each of the parts, or not wholly. If therefore, it is in¬ 
deed wholly in each, it will itself be separated from itself. For the parts 
in which it is are separate from each other. But if it is not wholly in 
each of 'the parts, this also will be divisible, and will have parts after the 
same manner as the*above mentioned parts ; and there will again be the 
same inquiry concerning these, viz. whether in these also there is something 
common, or nothing; since if there is nothing common, we shall place 
the many separate from the one. 

Let us however consider the whole; for every body is a whole, and has 
" parts. What therefore will that be which is connective of the parts, since 
they are many ? For it is necessary to say either that the whole is 
tinific of the parts, or the parts of the whole, or that some third thing 
prior to both, which is neither a whole, nor has any part, connects and 
unites the whole with its parts, and the parts with the whole. But if the 
whole indeed is connective of the parts, the whole will be incorporeal and 
impartible. For if it is a body, this also will be partible, and will be in¬ 
digent of a nature which is capable of connecting the parts; and this 
will be the case to infinity. But if the parts are connective of the whole, 
how can the many be connective of the one; and things divided, of that 
which consists from them P For on the contrary, it is necessary lhat the 
one should have the power of uniting the many , and not the many of unir 
ting the one. And if that which connects both, is neither a whole nor 
has parts, it will be perfectly impartible. But being impartible, itis also 
necessarily without interval. For every thing which has interval has 
parts, and is divisible. But being without interval it is incorporeal; 
for every body possesses interval. . 

Farther'still, it is necessary that the principle should be perpetual; for 
every being is perpetual or corruptible. Hence it must be admitted that the 
principlet-of bejipgs is perpetual or corruptible. But if we should grant that 


Digitized by v^ooQle 




OF PLATO. 


103 


CHAP. II. 

this may be corrupted, there will be no being-incorruptible. For the princi¬ 
ple being destroyed, it will neither be itself generated from any thing, nor 
will another thing be generated from it. For it can neither be able to ge¬ 
nerate itself (since it is not, if it is not perpetual) nor can another 
thing be able to generate it, if it is the principle of all things. But if it 
is incorruptible, it will have the power of not being corrupted, and this 
power will be infinite, in order that it may exist to infinity through the 
whole of time. For every finite power of existence pertains naturally to 
that which is Corruptible. But an infinite power pertains to perpetual 
natures, the existence of which continues to infinity. This infinite there¬ 
fore, I mean the infinite according to power, is either impartible or partible. 
But if it is partible indeed, there will be the infinite in a finite body. For 
the principle is finite; since if it Were infinite, there will be nothing else 
besides itself. But if it is impartible, the power of infinitely existing 
will be incorporeal. And the principle of beings is incorporeal,* so far 
as it is this power through which the subject of it always is. That it is 
impossible therefore, the principle of beings can be corporeal is from these 
things evident. 

If however it is incorporeal, it must either be separate, or inseparable 
from bodies. But if inseparable indeed, it will have all its energies in 
bodies, and subsisting about them. For that is inseparable from body 
which is not any where naturally adapted to energize except in and with 
bodies. But if the principle is a thing of this kind, it is evidently ne¬ 
cessary that none of the things which subsist according to it should be 
more powerful, or possess greater authority than the principle of all beings. 
If however, nothing is more excellent in bodies than the power which 
subsists in and energizes about bodies, and a corporeal essence, there will 
not any where be intellect and the power which energizes according to in¬ 
tellect. For every such like motion [i> e. energy] proceeds from a power, 
which is entirely in its energies independent of body. But it neither was, 
nor is lawful for generated natures to surpass the power of their causes. 
For every thing which is in the things begotten is from primary natures, 

* The word* «raptn; m are omitted in the original. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



104 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IL 


and the latter are the lords of the essence of the former. If therefore, 
the principle of beings is able to generate intellect and wisdom, how is it 
possible it should not generate it, oh account of and in itself ? For 
one of two things is necessary, either that intellectual perception per* 
tains in no respect to beings, or that it is inferior to them; and that if 
it exists it acts in bodies only. These things however, it is impossible 
to assert. But if that which is the first of beings, and which is the prin¬ 
ciple of all things is separate from bodies, it is perfectly neoessary to ad* 
xnit that it is either immoveable or moved. And if indeed it is moved, 
there will be something else prior to it, about which it is moved. For 
every thing which is moved, is naturally adapted to be moved about some¬ 
thing else which is permanent. And farther still, besides this, it is moved 
through desire of another thing. For it is necessary indeed that it should 
be moved in consequence of desiring a certain thing; because motion 
itself by itself is indefinite. But the end of it is that for the sake of which 
it subsists. It desires however, either something else, or itself. But every 
thing which desires itself is immoveable. For why should any thing that 
is present with itself want to be in another thing? For of things which 
are moved, the motion of that is less to which the good is nearer, but the 
motion is greater of that to which the good is more remote. But that 
which possesses good in itselfj and for the sake of which it subsists, will 
be immoveable and stable; since being always in itself, it is in good. 
That however which is in itself is in same; for each thing is the same 
with itself. But of that which is in itself we say indeed that it stands 
still and is immoveable; while that which is not immoveable, is not in 
itself but in another, is moved towards another thing, and is perfectly in* 
digeni of good. If therefore the principle of beings is moved, but every 
thing which is moved is moved through the want of good, and towards 
another thing which is the object of desire to it, there will be something 
else which is desirable to the principle of beings besides itself, and about 
which possessing a sameness of subsistence, we must say it is moved. 
This however is impossible. For the principle is that for the sake of which 
all things subsist, which all things desire, and which is indigent of nothing. 
For if it were in want of something, it would be entirely subordinate to 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. II. 


OF PLATO. 


105 


that of which it is in want, and to which its energy is directed as the ob¬ 
ject of desire. But if the principle is immoveable (for this is what re¬ 
mains,) it is necessary that it should be one incorporeal essence, possessing 
an eternal sameness of subsistence. After what manner, however, does it 
possess the one ? And how is it one essence £ For if essence and the one 
are the same, it must be admitted that the principle of beings is essence. 
But if essence is different from the one , it must be granted that to be the 
one is not the same thing as to be essence. And if, indeed, essence is 
better than the one, according to this it must be said to be with the prin¬ 
ciple. But if the one is better than essence and beyond it, the one is also 
the principle of essence. And if they are co-ordinate to each other, the 
many will be prior to the one This, however, is impossible as we have 
before demonstrated. It is evident, indeed, that essence is not the same 
as the one. For it is not one and the same thing to say one, and that es¬ 
sence is one; but the former is not yet a sentence, and the latter is. To 
which may be added, that if essence and the one are the same, multitude 
will be the same as that which has no existence, and which is not essence. 
This, however, is impossible. For in essence the many are contained, 
and in that which is not essence is the one. But if essence and the one 
are not the same, they will not be co-ordinate to each other ; for if they 
were co-ordinate there will be some other thing prior to them, if it is ne¬ 
cessary that all things should subsist from one principle. And if one of 
these is better than the other, either the one is prior to essence, or essence 
is prior to the one. But if the one indeed is prior to essence, this and not 
essence is the principle of all things. For it is necessary that nothing 
should be better than the principle. And if essence is prior to the one , 
the one will be passive to essence, and not essence to the one. But if the 
one is passive to essence, it is necessary that the one and essence should be 
every thing, and that all such things as are one should be essence, but not 
that all such things as are essence should be one. There will, therefore, 
be a certain essence deprived of the one. If, however, this be the case, it 

* For essence and the one being two things will participate of the many, i. e. of the first many, 
or two. 

Proc. Vol. I. 0 




Digitized by v^ooQle 



106 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


will be nothing. For that which!s deprived of the one is nothing. Hence 
the one is prior to essence. 

But if that which is first is something which is not essence, it is absurd 
to assert that it is subordinate to essence. For the principle is that which 
has the greatest power and the most absolute authority, and is most suffi¬ 
cient to itself, and is not that which is most ignoble, and indigent of the 
many. And, in short, it is necessary that no secondary nature should be 
better than the principle; for it is requisite that beings should not be 
governed badly. But if, indeed, the principle has an order subordinate to 
the things which proceed from it, and the things proceeding from it are 
better than it, all things will be badly confounded, nor will the principle 
according to nature be any thing else than something which is not the 
most excellent of things, nor will things which proceed from the principle 
possess from it a power of ruling over their principle. The principle of 
beings, therefore, will indeed be fortuitous, and also the beings which are 
its progeny. But this is impossible. For things which are fortuitous (if 
to have a fortuitous subsistence is this, not to exist according to intellect, 
nor with a view to a definite end) are disorderly, infinite, and indefinite, 
and are all of them things which have a less frequency of subsistence. But 
the principle is invariably principle, and other things proceed from it. If 
however, that which is not essence is better than all essence, it will either 
be participated by it, or it will be entirely imparticipable. If, however, 
essence participates of the principle, of what will it be the principle ? And 
how will it be the principle of all beings ? For it is necessary that the 
principle of beings should be no one of beings; since if it were any one 
of them, it is necessarily not the principle of all beings. But every thing 
which is participated by another thing is said to be that by which it is 
participated, and in which it primarily is. The principle, however, is se¬ 
parate, and belongs in a greater degree to itself than to other things. Be¬ 
sides, every thing which is participated proceeds from another more ex¬ 
cellent cause; since that which is imparticipable is better than that which 
is participable. It is not, however, possible to conceive any thing better 
than that which is most excellent, and which we call the principle. For 
it is not lawful to assort that things secondary to the principle, and which 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. III. 


OF PLATO. 


107 

proceed from it, are in any respect better than tlreir principle. The cause 
therefore of all beings is above all essence, is separate from every essence, 
and‘is neither essence, nor has essence as an addition to its nature. For 
such an addition as this is a diminution of simplicity, and of that which is 
one. 


CHAPTER III. 


See, therefore, the third argument after these, leading us to the same 
conclusion with the former arguments. For it is necessary that the cause 
of all beings should be that of which all beings participate, to which they 
refer the subsistence of themselves, and which separates itself from nothing 
that in any respect whatever is said to have an existence. For this alone 
is the object of desire to beings, which primarily, or in some other way, is 
itself the cause of their subsistence. And it is necessary that every thing 
which is produced with reference to, and on account of it, should have a 
certain habitude with relation to it, and through this also, a similitude to 
it. For every habitude of one thing towards another, is predicated in a 
two-fold respect, either from both participating of one thing, which affords 
to the participants a communion with each other; or from one of them 
participating of the other; of which, indeed, the one as being more excel¬ 
lent, imparts something to that which is subordinate to itself; but the 
other, as being inferior, is assimilated to the more excellent nature, so far 
as it participates of it. Hence it is necessary, if all sensible natures pos¬ 
sess a habitude to that which is first, aspire after, and subsist about it, 
either that there should be a certain third thing the cause of the habitude, 
or that the principle should impart to the natures posterior to itself, a 
tendency to itself, and that desire, through which every thing is preserved, 
and exists. Nothing else, however, is more excellent than that which is 
first Hence, the habitude of beings, their existence, and their tendency 


Digitized by' v^ooQle 



108 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


book n. 


to the first, are derived from thence. And all things participate of the 
principle of themselves, if it is necessary that this which is participated, 
should from thence become apparent in all beings, since it is the principle 
of all things, and deserts no being whatever. What, therefore, will this 
nature be, which is every where, and in all beings ? Is it life and motion? 
But there are indeed many things which are deprived of these. Is, there¬ 
fore, permanency every where, and in all things ? But neither is this true. 
For motion, so far as it is motion, will not participate of permanency. Is 
much-honoured intellect, therefore, so far as it is intellect, participated by 
all beings? But this also is impossible. For all beings would have intel¬ 
lectual perception, and no being would be deprived of intellect. 

Shall we say, therefore, that being itself and essence are participated by 
all things that in any respect whatever have a subsistence ? But how is 
this possible? For that which is in generation, or passing into existence, 
is said to be, and is destitute of essence. Nor must we wonder, if it also, 
since it ranks among beings, should now participate of essence. For so 
far as it is in generation, it is not; but it ends in existence and essence When 
it is now actually generated, and is no longer rising into existence. All 
things, therefore, that have in any respect whatever a subsistence, do not 
participate of essence. What then will that be which is every where and 
by all things participated? Let us consider every being, and see what 
that is to which all beings are passive, apd what it is which is common in 
all of them, as in essence, sameness, difference, permanency, and motion. 
Can we say, therefore, that each of these is any thing else than one thing, 
and not only separately, but this is also the case with the things which 
subsist from them ; and in short, it is not possible in a certain respect to 
speak otherwise of all things, than this, that all things, and each thing is 
one. For if any thing should be deprived of the one , though you should 
speak of parts, or of beings, immediately, that which becomes destitute of 
the one, will be altogether nothing. Or with what intention do we say 
that a thing which is not is perfectly nothing, [or not even one thing] un¬ 
less the one is the last thing which deserts beings ? This it is, therefore, 
to become that which in no respect is, and to be perfectly deprived of the 
one. For it is possible for that which is not moved to be, and for that 


* 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



/ 


CHAP. m. OF PLATO. 109 

■which has no being to have an hyparxis; but that which is not even one 
thing, and which is destitute of the one itself, will be entirely nothing. 
Hence the one is present with all beings; and though you should speak of 
multitude itself, it is necessary that this also should participate of the one; 
for if it does not become one thing, it is not possible for it to subsist. 
And if even you divide the whole to infinity, immediately nothing else 
than one occurs. For either that which is divided does not subsist, or be¬ 
coming to be, or subsisting something else, it will be immediately one.* 
The one , therefore, which is every'where apparent, and is in all beings, 
and which deserts no being whatever, is either derived from the one which 
is simply one, or from that which is more excellent than the one. For it 
is not possible for the one to be otherwise passive, [i. e. to be consubsistent 
with something else] than from the first one, to which the one is no longer 
present, but which is the one itself \ or nothing else than one. 

Again, therefore, from another principle we may arrive at the same con¬ 
clusion, by speaking as follows : It is necessary either that the causes of 
beings and things caused should proceed to infinity, and that there should 
be nothing first or last in beings ; or that there should be no first, but that 
there should be the last of things, infinity existing in one part only. Or 
on the contrary, it is necessary that beings should proceed to infinity from 
a definite principle, or that there should be a certain first and last, and a 
boundary of beings each way. And if there are boundaries of beings, 
things either proceed from each other, and the generation of beings is in a 
circle; or if they are not from each other, either one of them is from an¬ 
other, or the first indeed is one, but the last not one, or the contrary, or 
both are one, or each is not one. If, therefore, first things, and the causes 
of beings are infinite, each thing will consist of infinites. For that which 
proceeds from a certain principle, must necessarily participate of that 
principle from which it proceeds. But that which derives its subsistence 
from many causes, will be in its own nature multiform, as participating of 
many powers. And that which is produced from infinites prior to itself, 
will have infinite peculiarities derived from the principles, and adapted to 

1 For «v it is necessary to read tv. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



110 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


itself. Every being, therefore, being infinite, and consisting of infinites, 
will render all things infinitely infinite, and there will neither be a know¬ 
ledge of any being, uor any evolution of powers. For the power of the 
infinite is perfectly unknown, and incomprehensible, by those natures to 
whom it is infinite. 

But if things are infinite in a descending progression, whether is each 
of them infinite always proceeding most downward, in the same manner 
as we say all things do, or is each whole indeed finite, but the beings 
which are produced from these are infinite ? For if every being according 
to the beginning of itself is definite, but according to its end is infinite, 
there will neither be in parts nor in wholes, a conversion of beings to their 
proper principle, nor will that which is second in order ever have a sub¬ 
sistence so as to be assimilated to the extremity of a pre-existent order; 
though as we frequently say, the summits of inferiors are conjoined with 
the boundaries of superiors. For where there is no last, by what contriv¬ 
ance can such a similitude of progression as this, and such a mutual cohe¬ 
rence of beings be left, according to which secondary things are always 
conjoined to the natures prior to them ? But if all things alone have an 
infinity of this kind, each being bounded by that which is posterior to it¬ 
self, wholes will be subordinate to parts, and the parts of beings will be 
naturally more perfect [than wholes.] For wholes, indeed, will be without 
conversion to the principle prior to themselves; but parts will be con¬ 
verted to it after their progression. By how much the more, however, 
every being hastens to conjunction with that which is more perfect than 
itself, by so much the more must it necessarily excel, as it appears to me. 
And if this whole proceeding to infinity is not convolved to the summit of 
itself, and circularly converted and perfected according to such a conver¬ 
sion [it will not desire its proper good.] If, however, we admit that there 
is an infinity both ways these things must necessarily happen. 

In addition to these things, also, there will be no common object of 
desire to all beings,.nor any union nor sympathy of them. For things 
which are perfectly infinite have not that which is first in them ; but not 
having a first, we shall not be able to say what is the common end of 
beings, and why some things are more excellent, but others are allotted a 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. 111. 


OF PLATO. 


Ill 


subordinate nature. For we call one thing better and another less excel¬ 
lent, from proximity to that which is best, just as we define the more and 
the less hot from communion with that which is hot in the first degree. 
And in short, we form a judgment of the more and the less from a refer¬ 
ence to that which is a maximum. It is necessary, therefore, that the 
boundary in beings should be that which is first and that which is last. 

But if, indeed, these are from each other, the same thing will be older 
and younger, cause and at the same time the thing caused, and each thing 
will be first and last. For it makes no difference, whether these are from 
each other, or the things which subsist between these. For the extremes 
being indifferent, how is it possible that a mutation according to essence 
should intervene ? But if the one is from the other, whether is the first 
derived from the last, as some say, who generate things more excellent 
from things subordinate, and things more perfect from such as are more 
imperfect? In this case, however, must not that which is allotted the 
power of generating and producing the perfect, by a much greater priority 
perfect and adorn itself by its present power ? And how is it possible 
that leaving itself to be of an inferior allotment it should definitely assign 
a more excellent order to another thing? For every thing aspires after its 
proper perfection, and simply desires good; though not every thing is 
able to participate of a thing of this kind. If, therefore, it has the power 
of producing this most perfect thing, that which is last will energize on 
account of itself prior to other things, and the whole of good, and all per¬ 
fection, will be first established in itself. 

But if that which is last is produced from that which is first, and the 
most imperfect from that which is most perfect, whether, is each of them 
one, or is this one, but that not one ? If, however, that which is first, or 
that which is last, is not one, neither of them will be first or last. For, as 
there will be multitude in each, each of them will have the better and the 
worse; and neither will that which is best be unmingled with that which 
is inferior to it, nor that which is the most obscure of all things according 
to being, have so great a subjection entirely deprived of a more perfect 
nature; but there will be something more extreme than that which is last, 
and something more perfect than that which is first. For every where. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



112 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK 11. 


that which is best if it receives another addition through that -which is in¬ 
ferior will be more perfect than that which does not abide in the best, 
[through not receiving this very addition.] If, therefore, we rightly assert 
these things, the one is the principle of all things, and the last of beings is 
one. For it is necessary, I think, that the end of the progression of beings 
should be assimilated to the principle, and that as far as to this, the power 
of the first should proceed. 

Summarily, therefore, recapitulating what we have said, it is necessary 
either that the first principle should be one, or that there should be alone 
many * first principles, or one containing multitude in itself, or many par¬ 
ticipating of one. But if there are many first principles only, there will 
not be one thing from them. For what will make one and a whole, if 
there are many principles, and there is nothing which produces one ? For 
it is certainly necessary that things posterior to the principles should be 
assimilated to them. Either, therefore, there will not be the one in any 
being, or it will not be from these principles; so that each of the things 
which in any respect whatever have a subsistence will be divided multi¬ 
tude alone. And again each of the parts of any being will be a thing of 
this kind, and we shall in no way whatever stop, dividing into minute 
parts essence and existence. For all things will be many, and the one 
>vill be no where in the universality of things, nor will either wholes or 
parts be apparent. 

'But if it is necessary, indeed, that there should be many principles, and 
that they should participate of the o?ie t the one will be co-ordinated in the 
many. Again, however, it is necessary, that the unco-ordinated should 
every where be more ancient than the co-ordinated, and the exempt than 
the participated. For how is the one in each of the many except from 
one principle which co-arranges the multitude, and converts it to itself ac¬ 
cording to the communion of the one f Again, if the first one were multi¬ 
plied, the one will be passive; for at the same time it will be one and not 
one, and will not be that which is one [only.] It is necessary, however, 
in each genus of things, that there should be that which is unmingled with 

’ viz. which are multitude only without any participation of the one. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. IV. 


OF PLATO. 


113 


an inferior nature, in order that there may be that which is mingled, in 
the feame manner as we say respecting forms. For from the equal itself, 
things which are equal in these sublunary realms, appear indeed as equal, 
though they are filled with a contrary nature ; and from that which is 
primarily being, that which is mingled with non-being is derived, and 
which presents itself to the view as being. And in short every where the 
simple unmingled subsistence of each thing precedes those things which 
through remission are mingled with the privations of themselves. The one 
therefore is by itself exempt from all multitude; and that which is one, 
and at the same time not one, is not the first one, but is suspended 1 from 
that which is primarily one; through the principle, indeed, participating 
of the one , but through the diminution arising from multitude, now mani¬ 
festly exhibiting in itself the cause of separation. 


CHAPTER IV. 

That the one therefore is the principle of all things, and the first cause, 
and that all other things are posterior to the one , is I think evident from 
what has been said. I am astonished however at all the other interpre¬ 
ters of Plato, who admit the existence of the intellectual kingdom, but do 
pot venerate the ineffable transcendency of the one y and its hyparxis 
which surpasses the. whole of things. I particularly, however, wonder 
that this should have been the case with Origen, who was a partaker of 
the same erudition with Plotinus. For Origen ends in intellect and 
the first being, but omits the one which is beyond every intellect and every 
being. And if indeed he omits it, as something which is better than all 
knowledge, language and intellectual perception, we must say that he is 
neither discordant with Plato, nor with the nature of things. But if he 

* For t^jiptfreu it is necessary to read t^pnirw. The punctuation also of the text in this place, 
fnuat be altered agreeably to the translation. 

Proc. Vol. I, P 


Digitized by v^.ooQie 



114 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IL 


omits it because the one is perfectly unhyparctic, and without any sub* 
sistence, and because intellect is the best of things, and that which is 
primarily being is the same as that which is primarily one, we cannot as* 
sent to him in asserting these things, nor will Plato admit him, and con* 
numerate him with his familiars. For I think that a dogma of this kind 
is remote from the philosophy of Plato, and is full of Peripatetic innova* 
tion. If you are willing, however, we will adduce some arguments against 
this dogma, and against all others who are the patrons of this opinion, and 
we will strenuously contend for the doctrine of Plato, and show that ac* 
cording to him the first cause is beyond intellect, and is exempt from all 
beings, as Plotinus and Porphyry, and all those who have received the 
philosophy of these men, conceive him to assert. 

We shall begin, therefore, from the Republic; for here Socrates clearly 
shows that the good is established above being, and the whole intellectual 
order, following the analogy of the first goodness to the sun. For if, as 
the sovereign sun is to generation, to every thing visible, and to all visive 
natures according to the power generative of light, so it is necessary the 
good should be with reference to intellect and intelligibles, according to a 
cause productive of truth,—if this be the case, we must say that the sun is 
exempt at one and the same time from visive and visible natures, and 
must admit that the good transcends the natures which are always intel* 
lective, and also those which are eternally intelligible. It is better, how¬ 
ever, to hear the Platonic words themselves: “ You may say that the sun 
not only imparts the power of being seen to visible natures, but also that 
he is the cause of their generation, increase, and nutriment, not being him¬ 
self generation. Certainly. We may say, therefore, that things which are 
known, have not only this from the good that they are known, but like¬ 
wise that their being and essence are thence derived, whilst the good itself 
is not essence, but beyond essence, transcending it both in dignity and in 
power.” Through all these things, therefore, it is evident how the good 
and the first principle are defined by Plato to be expanded above not only 
the intellectual, but also the intelligible extent, and essence itself, accord¬ 
ing to union, in the same manner as it is inferred the sun surpasses all 
Visible natures, and perfects and generates all things by his light. How, 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. IV. 


OF PLATO. 


115 


therefore, following Plato, can we admit that intellect is the best of things, 
and the cause of all things? How can we assert that being itself’ and 
essence are the same with the principle which is the leader of all the di- 
vine progressions ? For essence and intellect are said to subsist primarily 
from the good , to have their hyparxis about the goody to be filled with the 
light of truth proceeding from thence, and to obtain the participation 
which is adapted to them from the union of this light, which is more di¬ 
vine than intellect itself and essence, as being primarily suspended from 
the goody and affording in beings a similitude to that which is first. For 
the light which is emitted from the sun causes every thing visible to be 
solar-form. And the participation of the light of truth renders that which 
is intelligible boniform and divine. Intellect, therefore, is a god through 
a light which is more ancient than intellectual light and intellect itself, 
and that which is intelligible and at the same time intellectual participates 
of a divine hyparxis through a plenitude of this light being appropriately 
imparted to it.* And in short, every divine nature is that which it is said 
to be, on account of this light, and is through it united to the cause of all 
beings. By no means, therefore, is the first good to be considered as the 
same with intellect, nor must it be admitted that the intelligible is more 
ancient than all the hyparxis of the whole of things, since it is even sub¬ 
ordinate to the light proceeding from the goody and being perfected by 
this light, is conjoined according to its own order with the good itself. For 
we must not say that the intelligible is united to the first after the same 
manner as the light [of truth;] but the latter through continuity with the 
good is established in it without a medium; while the former, through this 
light, participates of a vicinity to the good; since in sensibles also, the 
solar light is primarily connascent with the circulation of the sun, ascends 
as tar as to the centre of the whole sphere, and subsists on all sides about 
it. But all sensible natures through this obtain a similitude to the sun, 
each of them according to its own nature being filled with solar-form illu¬ 
mination. These things, therefore, will be sufficient to recall into the 

* For eat ro to ov it is necessary to read auno to ov. 

* Tins sentence is very erroneous in the original, as will be evujent from comparing it with tho 
a^oye translation. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



116 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


memory of those who love the contemplation of truth, the conceptions of 
Plato on this subject, and to evince that the order of intellect is secondary 
to the exempt transcendency of the one . 

If, however, it is requisite to evince the same thing through many testi¬ 
monies, let us survey what the Elean guest in the Sophista determines 
concerning these things. He says, therefore, it is necessary that the mul¬ 
titude of all beings, whether they are contraries or not, should be sus¬ 
pended from the one being, [i. e. from being characterized by the one;] 
but that the one being itself should be suspended from the one. For when 
we call the hot or the cold, or permanency or motion, being, we do not 
denominate each of these as the same with being itself. For if perma¬ 
nency were being itself, motion would not be being; or, if motion were 
such like being, permanency would not participate of the appellation of 
being. But it is evident that being accedes to permanency, to motion, 
and to every multitude of beings from one thing which is primarily being.. 
This very thing, therefore, which is the cause of essence to all things, and 
which is participated by all other things, is a participant of this one, and 
on this account, as it is being alone, so also it is primarily being. 1 It is, 
however, being itself indeed, and is not allotted to be , from participation; 
but it is one according to participation, and on this account it is passive to 
the one. But it is being 1 primarily. If, therefore, Plato gives to the one 
a subsistence beyond being, in the same manner as that which is first in 
wholes is supposed by him to transcend beings, how is it possible that 
being should not be posterior to the one, since it participates of it, and on 
this account is denominated one ? 

Moreover, Socrates in the Philebus clearly demonstrates the same thing 
to those who are able to know wholes from parts, viz. that intellect has 
not the same order as the first cause of all. Investigating, therefore, the 
good of the human soul and its end, of which participating in every re¬ 
spect sufficiently it will reap the fruits of a felicity adapted to its nature, 
he in the first place removes pleasure from an end of this kind, and after 
this intellect, because neither is this replete with all the elements of the 

1 For ev it is necessary to read o>. 

a Here also ov must be substituted for «*• 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



CHAP. IV. 


OF PLATO. 


117 


good. If, therefore, the intellect which is in us is an image of the first in¬ 
tellect, and the good of the whole of our life is not to be defined accord¬ 
ing to this alone, is it not necessary that in wholes also, the cause of good 
must be established above intellectual perfection ? For if that which is 
primarily good subsisted according to total intellect, in us also and all 
other [intellectual natures,] self-sufficiency and appropriate good would 
be present through the participation of intellect. Our intellect, indeed, is 
disjoined from the good, and is indigent, and on this account requires 
pleasure in order to the attainment of human perfection. But a divine 
intellect always participates of the good, and on this account is divine. 
For it is boniform through the participation of good; but divine, as 
being suspended from the first deity. It is the same reasoning, therefore, 
which infers that the good is exempt from the first intellect, and which 
defines felicity to consist not in intelligence only, but in the all-perfect 
presence of the good. For the intellectual form of energy is itself by it¬ 
self defective with respect to blessedness. And why is it requisite to be 
prolix ? For Parmenides teaches us most clearly the difference of the one 
from essence and being, and shows that the one is exempt from all other 
things and from essence; for this he evinces of the one at the end of the 
first hypothesis. But how is it possible that the cause of essence, and 
which is exempt from it through supreme transcendency, should not also 
be beyond the intellectual order? For intellect is essence. But if in in¬ 
tellect there is permanency and motion, and Parmenides demonstrates 
that the one transcends both these, does he not immediately bring us to 
the ineffable cause of all things, which is prior to every intellect? And if 
every intellect is converted to itself, and is in itself, but the one is demon¬ 
strated to be neither in itsejf, nor in another, how can we any longer con¬ 
sider intellect as the same with the first cause of all ? In what respect, 
also, will the one which is prior to being differ from the one being, which 
is the subject of the second hypothesis, if intellect is the best of things, 
and the first principle of all ? For the one being participates of the one ; 
but that which participates is secondary to that which is participated. 
That the one, however, is according to Plato more ancient than intellect 
and essence, is through what has been said recalled to our memory. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



118 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IF. 


CHAPTER V. 

In the next place, if the one is neither intelligible nor intellectual, nor 
in short participates of the power of being, let us survey what will be the 
modes of leading us to it, and through what intellectual conceptions 
Plato unfolds as far as he is able, to his familiars, the ineffable and un¬ 
known transcendency of the first. I say then, that at one time he unfolds 
it through analogy, and the similitude of secondary natures ; but at an¬ 
other time he demonstrates itg exempt transcendency, and its separation 
from the whole of things, through negations. For in the Republic, indeed, 
he indicates the ineffable peculiarity and hyparxis of the goody through 
analogy to the sun; but in the Parmenides, he demonstrates the differ¬ 
ence of the one with respect to all things posterior to it through negations. 
But he appears to me through one of these modes to unfold the progres¬ 
sion from the first cause of all other things, and prior to other things, of 
the divine orders. For on this account the first cause is exempt from all 
the natures produced by it, because every where cause is established 
above its effects; and on this account the first is nothing of all things, 
because all things proceed from him. For he is the principle of all things, 
both of beings, and at the same time of non-beings. But again, accord¬ 
ing to the other of these modes, he adumbrates the conversion to the first 
of the things which have proceeded from it. For in each order of beings, 
through similitude to it there is a monad analogous to the goody which has 
the same relation to the whole series conjoined with it, that the good has 
to all the orders of the Gods. The cause, however, of this similitude is 
entirely the conversion of the whole of things to the good. These, there¬ 
fore, proceed from thence and are converted to it. And the progression 
indeed of all things demonstrates to us the ascent to the first through ne¬ 
gations ; but the conversion of all things demonstrates this to us through 
analogies. Let not, however, any one considering these negations to be 
Such things as privations despise such a mode of discussion, nor defining 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. V. 


OF PLATO. 


119 


the sameness in words analogously, and words in habitudes, endeavour to 
calumniate this anagogic progression to the first principle. For negations, 
as it appears to me, extend a triple peculiarity in things. And at one 
time, indeed, being more primogenial than affirmations, they are procrea¬ 
tive and perfective of the generation of them. But at another time, they 
are allotted an order co-ordinate to affirmations, and negation is then in 
no respect more venerable than affirmation. And again, at another time, 
they are allotted an order subordinate to affirmations, and are nothing else 
than the privations of them. For with respect to non-being itself, with 
which there is also a negation of beings, at one time considering it as be¬ 
yond being, we say that it is the cause and the supplier of beings ; but at 
another time we evince that it is equivalent to being; just as I think, the 
Elean guest demonstrates [in the Sophista] that non-being is in no respect 
less, if it be lawful so to speak, than being; and at another time we leave 
it as a privation of, and indigent of being. . For indeed, according to this 
mode, we call every generation, and matter itself, non-being. 

Analogies, however, are assumed for the purpose alone of indicating the 
similitude of secondary natures to the first principle. And neither any 
reason, nor habitude, nor communion of this principle with things pos¬ 
terior to it, becomes apparent from these. For its exempt nature is not 
of such a kind as is beheld in the second and third orders of beings; but 
the good transcends the whole of things in a much greater degree than 
intellect surpasses the natures posterior to itself, whether it be the demi¬ 
urgic intellect, or the intellect of the whole world, or some other intellect 
from among the number of those that are called divine. Every intellect 
however, and every god, is allotted a transcendency with respect to subor¬ 
dinate natures, and those things of which it is the cause, inferior to that 
which the first principle has to every being ; for this principle similarly 
transcends all things, and not some in a greater, but others in a less de¬ 
gree ; since thus we should introduce a greater and less habitude of it to 
secondary natures. It is necessary, however, to preserve it without habi¬ 
tude to all things, and similarly exempt from the whole of things. But 
of other natures, some are indeed nearer, and others are more remote 
from it. For each thing proceeds from it, since it produces all things 


Digitized by oooQle 



120 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK. If. 


according to one cause. And different things are indeed converted to it 
in a different manner, this principle in the mean time, receiving no habi¬ 
tude or communion with things posterior to itself. 


CHAPTER VI. 

The mode of demonstration, therefore, pertaining to the one is, as 
we have said, twofold. For again, Plato delivers to us twofold names 
of the ineffable cause. In the Republic indeed he calls it the good, and 
demonstrates it to be the fountain of the truth which unites intellect 
and intelligibles. But in the Parmenides, he denominates such a prin¬ 
ciple as this the one , and shows that it gives subsistence to the divine 
unities. Again therefore, of these names, the one is the image of the 
progression of the whole of things, but the other of their conversion. 
For because indeed all things derive their subsistence and proceed from 
the first principle, on this account referring the one to it, we demonstrate 
that it is the cause of all multitude and every progression. For whence 
is multitude unfolded into light except from the one 9 But because 
again the progressions from it are naturally converted to it, and de¬ 
sire its ineffable and incomprehensible hyparxis, we denominate it the 
good. For what else is that which converts all things, and which is ex¬ 
tended to all beings as the object of desire, but the good f For all other 
things subsist distributedly, and are to some beings honourable, but to 
others not.' And every thing which in any respect whatever is said to 
have a subsistence aspires after some things, and avoids others. But the 
good is the common object of desire to all beings, and all things accord¬ 
ing to their nature verge and are extended to this. The tendency however 
of desiring natures is every where to the appropriate object of desire. 
The good therefore converts, but the one gives subsistence to all secondary 
natures. Let not, however, any one suppose that the ineffable can on this 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



chap. vi. 


OF PLATO. 


121 


account be named, or that the cause of all union is doubldti. For here 
indeed we transfer to it names, looking to that which is posterior to it, and 
to the progressions from, or the circular conversions to it. Because, in¬ 
deed, multitude subsists from it, we ascribe to it the appellation of the 
one; but because all things even as far as to things that have the most 
obscure existence, are converted to it, we denominate it the good. 

We endeavour therefore to know the unknown nature of the first prin¬ 
ciple, through the things which proceed from, and are converted to it; 
and we also attempt through the same things to give a name to that which 
is ineffable. This principle, however, is neither known by beings, nor is 
effable by any one of all things; but being exempt from all knowledge, 
and all language, and subsisting as incomprehensible, it produces from 
itself according to one cause all knowledge, every thing that is known, 
all words, and whatever can be comprehended by speech. But its 
unical nature, and which transcends all division, shines forth to the fiew 
dyadically in the natures posterior to it, or rather triadically. For 
all things abide in, proceed from, and are converted to the one. For at 
one and the same time, they are united to it, are in subjection to its union 
which is exempt from the whole of things, and desire the participation of 
it. And union indeed imparts a stable transcendency to all secondary 
natures, and which subsists in unproceeding conjunction with the cause 
of them. But subjection defines the progression of beings, and their se¬ 
paration from the imparticipable and first unity. And desire perfects the 
conversion of the subsisting natures, and their circular tendency to the 
ineffable. First natures therefore, being always entirely united, [to the 
ineffable] some more remotely, but others more proximately, and receiv¬ 
ing through this union their hyparxis, and their portion of good, we en¬ 
deavour to manifest through names the progression and conversion of the 
whole of things. But with respect to their stable comprehension, if it 
be lawful so to speak, in the first, and their union with the ineffable, this 
as being incomprehensible, and not to be apprehended by knowledge, 
those who were wise in divine concerns were unable to indicate it by 
words. But as the ineffable is primarily concealed in inaccessible places, 
and is exempt from all beings, thus also the union of all things with it isoc- 
Proc. Vol. I. Q 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



122 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK n. 


cult, ineffable, and unknown to all beings. For every being is united to it, 
neither by intellectual injection, [or projection} nor the energy of essence; 
since things which are destitute of knowledge are united to the first, and 
things deprived of all energy, participate according to their order of a 
conjunction with it. That which is unknown therefore in beings according 
to their union with the first, we neither endeavour to know, nor to ma¬ 
nifest by names, but being more able to look to their progression and 
conversion, we ascribe indeed to the first two names, which we derive as 
resemblances from secondary natures. We also define two modes of 
ascent to the first, conjoining that mode which is through analogy with 
the appellation of the good, but that which is through negations with the 
appellation of the one ; which Plato also indicating, in the Republic in¬ 
deed calls the first the good, and at the same time makes a regression to it 
through analogy; but in the Parmenides establishing it as the one itself, he 
unfolds the transcendency of it which is exempt from beings, through 
negative conclusions. According to both these inodes therefore, the first 
principle transcends both gnostic powers, and the parts of speech ; but 
all other things afford us the cause of knowledge and of appellation. 
And the first principle indeed unically gives subsistence to all the unions 
and hyparxes of secondary natures; but the things posterior to this 
cause participate of it in’a divided manner. These also, as we have before 
observed,become multiplied by abiding, proceeding and returning; but the 
one is at once perfectly exempt from all the prolific progressions, conver- 
tive powers, and uniform hypostases in beings. What the modes there* 
fore are of the doctrine about the first, and through what names Plato en¬ 
deavours to indicate.it, and whence the narfies and the modes of this indica¬ 
tion which is unknown to all things are derived, is, I think, through what 
has been said sufficiently manifest. 




Digitized by v^ooQle 



CRAP. VII. 


OF PLATO, 


193 


CHAPTER VII. 

It, however, it be requisite to survey each of the dogmas about it 
which are scattered in the writings of Plato, and to reduce them to one 
science of theology, let us consider, if you are willing, prior to other 
things, what Socrates demonstrates in the bth book of the Republic, 
conformably to the before mentioned mode, and how through analogy 
he teaches us the wonderful transcendency of the good with respect to 
all beings, and the summits of the whole of things. In the first place 
therefore, he distinguishes beings from each other, and establishing some 
of them to be intelligibles, but others sensibles, he defines science by the 
knowledge of beings. But he conjoins sense with sensibles, and giving a 
twofold division to all things, he places one exempt monad over intelli¬ 
gible multitude, and a second monad over sensible multitude, according 
to a similitude to the former monad. Of these monads also, he shows 
that the one is generative of intelligible light, but the other of sensible 
light. And he evinces that by the intelligible light indeed, all intelligibles 
are deiform, and boniform, according to participation from the first God ; 
but that by the sensible light, according to the perfection derived from the 
sun, all sensible natures are solarform, and similar to their one monad. In 
addition also to what has been said, he suspends the second monad from 
that which reigns in the intelligible. And thus he extends all things, both 
the first and the last of beingsj I mean intelligibles and sensibles, to the 
good. Such a mode of reduction to the first as this, appears to me to 
be most excellent, and especially adapted to theology ; viz. to congregate 
all the Gods in the world into one union, and suspend them from their 
proximate monad ; but to refer the supermundane Gods to the intellec¬ 
tual kingdom; to suspend the intellectual Gods from intelligible union ; 
and to refer the intelligible Gods themselves, and all beings through these, 
to that which is first. For as the monad of mundane natures is super¬ 
mundane, as the monad of supermundane natures is intellectual, and of 
intellectual natures intelligible, thus also it is necessary that first intelli- 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



124 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK'll. 


gibles should be suspended from the monad which is above intelligibles 
and perfected by it, and being filled with deity, should illuminate secon¬ 
dary natures with intelligible light. But it is necessary that intellectual 
natures which derive the enjoyment of their being from intelligibles, but 
of good and a unifonn hyparxis from the first cause, should connect su¬ 
permundane natures by intellectual light. And that the genera of the 
Gods prior to the world, through receiving a pure intellect from the in¬ 
tellectual Gods, but intelligible light from the intelligible Gods, and a 
unical light from the father of the whole of things, should send into this 
apparent world the illumination of the light which they possess. On this 
account, the sun being the summit of mundane natures, and proceeding 
from the etherial profundities, imparts to visible natures supernatural 
perfection, and causes these as much as possible to be similar to the su* 
perceleslial worlds. These things therefore we shall afterwards more 
abundantly discuss. 

The present discourse, however, suspends all things after the above 
mentioned manner from the good , and the first unity. For if indeed the 
sun connects every thing sensible, but the good produces and perfects 
every thing intelligible, and of these, the second monad [i. e. the -sun] 
is denominated the offspring of the good , and on this account causes 
that which is sensible to be splendid, and adorns and fills it with good, 
because it imitates the primogenial cause of itself,—if this be the case, 
all things will thus participate of the good, and will be extended to this 
one principle, intelligibles indeed, and the most divine of beings without 
a medium, but sensibles through their monad [the sun.] 

Again therefore, and after another manner, Plato narrates to us in this 
extract from the Republic the analysis to the first principle. For he sus¬ 
pends all the multitudes in the world from the intelligible monads, as for 
instance, all beautiful things from the beautiful itself, all good things from 
the good, and all equal things from the equal itself. And again, he con¬ 
siders some things as intelligibles, but others as sensibles ; but the sum-. 
mits of them are uniformly established in intelligibles, Again, from these 
intelligible forms he thinks fit to ascend still higher, and venerating in a 
greater degree the goodness which is beyond intelligibles, he apprehends 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



OF PLATO. 


125 


CH AP. VII. 

that all intelligibles, and the monads which they contain, subsist and are 
perfected through it. For as we refer the sensible multitude to a monad 
uncoordinated with sensibles, and we think that through this monad the 
multitude of sensibles derives its subsistence, so it is necessary to refer the 
intelligible multitude to another cause which is not connumerated with in¬ 
telligibles, and from which they are allotted their essence and their divine 
hyparxis. 

Let not, however, any one fancy that Plato admits there is the same 
order of the good in intelligible forms, as there is prior to intelligibles. 
But the good indeed, which is coordinated with the beautiful, must be 
considered as essential, and as one of the forms which are in intelligibles. 
For the first good, which by conjoining the article with the noun we 
are accustomed to call rayaBw or the good, is admitted to be something 
superessential, and more excellent than all beings both in dignity and 
power; since Socrates also, when discussing the beautiful and the good, 
calls the one the beautiful itself and the other the good itself, and thus 
says he we must denominate all the things which we then very properly 
considered as many. Again, particularly considering each thing as being 
one, we denominate each thing that which it is, and thus Socrates leading 
us from sensible things that are beautiful and good, and in short from 
things that are participated, subsist in other things, and are multiplied, 
to the superessential unities of intelligibles and the first essences, from 
these again, he transfers us to the exempt cause of every thing beautiful 
and good. For in forms, the beautiful itself is the leader of many beau¬ 
tiful things, and the good itself of many goods, and each form alone gives 
subsistence to things similar to itself. But the first good is not only the 
cause of what is good, but similarly of things beautiful, as Plato else¬ 
where says ; and “ all things are for its sake, and it is the cause of every 
thing beautiful." 

For again, in addition to what has been said, the good which is in 
forms is intelligible and known, as Socrates himself teaches; but the 
good prior to forms is beyond beings, and is established above all know¬ 
ledge. And the former is the source of essential perfection; but the 
latter is the supplier of good to the Gods so far as they are Gods, and is 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



126 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


generative of goods which are prior to essences. We must not therefore 
apprehend that when Socrates calls the first principle the goody from the 
name of idea, that be directly calls it the intelligible goodness; but though 
the first principle is superior to all language and appellation, we permit 
Socrates to call it the cause of every thing beautiful and good, transfer- 
ring through the things which are proximately filled by it, appellations 
to it. For this I think Socrates indicating asserts in all that he says 
about the goody that it is beyond knowledge and things that are known, 
and likewise beyond essence and being, according to its analogy to the 
sun. And after a certain admirable manner he presents us with an epi¬ 
tome of the negations of the one in the Parmenides. For the assertion 
that the good is neither truth, nor essence, nor intellect, nor science, at one 
and the same time separates it from the superessential unities, and every 
genus of the Gods, and from the intellectual and intelligible orders, and 
from every psychical subsistence. But these are the first things, aod 
through the first hypothesis of the Parmenides, these are taken away from 

the principle of the whole of things. 

Moreover, neither when he celebrates the good the leader of the divine 
orders, as the most splendid of being, does he denominate it most splendid 
as participating of light. For the first light proceeds from it to intelligi- 
bles and intellect, but he gives it this appellation as the cause of the light 
which is every where diffused, and as the fountain of every intelligible, or 
intellectual, or mundane deity. For this light is nothing else than the 
participation of a divine hyparxis. For as all things become boniform 
through participating of the goody and are filled with the illumination pro¬ 
ceeding from thence, thus also the natures which are primarily beings are 
deiform; and as it is said, intelligible and intellectual essences become 
divine through the participation of deity. Looking therefore to all that 
has been said, we shall preserve the exempt transcendency of the good 
with reference to all beings and the divine orders. But again, in each 
order of beings, we must grant that there is a monad analogous to it, not 
only in sensibles, as Plato says the sun is, but likewise in supermundane 
natures, and in the genera of Gods arranged from the good prior to these. 
For it is evident that the natures which are nearer to the first cause and 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAR VII. 


OF PLATO. 


127 


which participate of it in a greater degree, possess a greater similitude to it, 
And as that is the cause of all beings, so these establish monads which are 
the leaders of more partial orders. And Plato indeed arranges the multi* 
tudes under the monads ; but extends all the monads to the exempt prin¬ 
ciple of the whole of things, and establishes them uniformly about it. It 
is necessary therefore that the theological science should be unfolded con¬ 
formably to the divine orders, and that our conceptions about it should 
be transcendent, and unmingled and unconnected with other things. And 
we should survey indeed all secondary natures, subsisting according to 
and perfected about it;. but we should establish it as transcending all the 
monads in beings, according to one excess of simplicity, and as unically 
arranged prior to the whole orders [of Gods.] For as the Gods themselves 
enact the order which is in them, thus also it is necessary that the truth 
concerning them, the precedaneous causes of beings, and the second and 
third progeny of these should be definitely distinguished. 

This, therefore, is the one truth concerning the first principle, and which 
possesses one reason remarkably conformable to the Platonic hypothesis, 
via. that this principle subsists prior to the whole orders in the Gods, that 
it gives subsistence to the boniform essence of the Gods, that it is the 
fountain of superessential goodness, and that all things posterior to it being 
extended towards it, are filled with good, after an ineffable manner are 
united to it, and subsist uniformly about it. For its unical nature is not 
unprolific, but it is by so much the more generative of other things, as it 
pre-establishes a union exempt from the things which have a subsistence* 
Nor does its fecundity tend to multitude and division ; but it abides with 
undefiled purity concealed in inaccessible places. For in the natures also 
which are posterior to it, we every where see that what is perfect desires 
to generate, and that what is full hastens to impart to other things its 
plenitude. In a much greater degree therefore it is necessary that the 
nature which contains in one all perfections, and which is not a certain 
good, but good itself, and super-full, (if it be lawful so to speak) should 
be generative of the whole of things, and give subsistence to them; pro¬ 
ducing all things by being exempt from all things, and by being irnparti- 
cjpable, similarly generating tbe first and the last of beings. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



128 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


You must not, however, suppose that this generation and progression 
is emitted in consequence of the good either being moved, or multiplied, 
or possessing a generative power, or energizing; since all these are secon¬ 
dary to the singleness of the first. For whether the good is moved, it will 
not be the good; since the good itself , and which is nothing else, if it were 
moved would depart from goodness. How, therefore, can that which is 
the source of goodness to beings, produce other things when deprived of 
good ? Or whether the good is multiplied through imbecility, there will 
be a progression of the whole of things through a diminution, but not 
through an abundance of goodness. For that which in generating departs 
from its proper transcendency, hastens to adorn inferior natures, not 
through prolific perfection, but through a diminution and want of its own 
power. But if the good produces all things by employing power, there 
will be a diminution of goodness about it. For it will be two things and 
not one, viz. it will be good and power. And if indeed it is in want of 
power, that which is primarily good will be indigent. But if to be the 
good itself is sufficient to the perfection of the things produced, and to 
the plenitude of all things, why do we assume power as an addition? For 
additions in the Gods are ablations of transcendent unions. Let the good 
therefore alone be prior to power, and prior to energy. For all energy is 
the progeny of power. Neither, therefore, does the good energizing give 
subsistence to all things through energy, nor being in want of power does 
it fill all things with powers, nor being multiplied do all things participate 
of good, nor being moved do all beings 1 enjoy the first principle. For 
the good precedes all powers, and all energies, and every multitude and 
motion ; since each of these is referred to the good as to its end. The good 
therefore is the most final of all ends, and the centre of all desirable na¬ 
tures, All desirable natures, indeed, impart an end to secondary beings t 
but that which pre-subsists uncircumscribed by all things is the first 
good, 

* For xitrra. xetfovra, I read xavrct t* w r*. 


Digitized by LjOOQle 



CHAP. VIII. 


OF PLATO. 


129 


CHAPTER VIII. 

After these things, however, let us direct our attention to the concep¬ 
tions about the first' principle in the epistle [of Plato] to Dionysius, and 
survey the manner in which he considers its ineffable and immense tran¬ 
scendency. But perhaps some one may be indignant with us for rashly 
drawing to our own hypotheses the assertions of Plato, and may say that 
the three kings of which he speaks are all of them intellectual Gods; but 
that Plato does not think fit to co-arrange or connumerate the good with 
secondary natures. For such a connumeration ought not to be considered 
as adapted to the exempt transcendency of the good with respect to other 
things, nor in short, must it be said that the good contributes as the first 
with reference to another second or third cause to the completion of a 
triad in conjunction with other natures; but that it in a greater degree 
precedes every triad and every number, than the intelligible precede the 
intellectual Gods. How, therefore, can we connumerate with other kings 
the good which is at once exempt from all the divine numbers, and co¬ 
arrange one as the first [king,] another as the second, and another as the 
third ? Some one may also adduce many other things, indicating the 
transcendency of the first principle with respect to every thing divine. 
Such a one, however, in thus interpreting the words of Plato will remark¬ 
ably accord with us who assert the good to be imparticipable, to transcend 
all the intelligible and intellectual genera, and to be established above all 
the divine tnonads. • 

That Plato, indeed, admits the first God to be the king of all things, 
and says that all things are for his sake, and that he is the cause of all 
beautiful things, does not I think require much proof to those who consi¬ 
der his words by themselves apart from their own conjectures, by intro¬ 
ducing which they violently endeavour to accord with Plato. But that 
we do not assert these things connumeratingfthe first God with secondary 
Proc . Vol. I. R 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


ISO 

natures,] Plato himself manifests, neither calling the first king the first, 
but alone the king of all things, nor asserting that some things are about 
liim, as he says that second things are about that which is second, and 
third things about that which is third, but' he says, in short, that all 
things are about him. And to the other kings, indeed, he introduces 
number and a divided kingdom; but to the king of all things he neither 
attributes a part of number, nor a distribution of dominion opposite to> 
that of the others. Such a mode of words, therefore, neither connumerates 
the king of all things with the other kings, nor co-arranges him as the- 
leader of a triad with the second and third power. For of a triadic divi¬ 
sion the first monad, indeed, is the leader of first orders, and which are 
co-ordinate with itself; but the second of second; and the third of third’ 
orders. If, however, some one should apprehend that the first monad is 
the leader of all things, so as to comprehend at once both second and 
third allotments; yet the cause which subsists according to comprehen¬ 
sion is different from that which similarly pervades to all things. And to 
the king of all dungs, indeed, all things are subject according to one rea¬ 
son and one order; but to the first of the triad, things first are subjected 
according to the same order; and it is necessary that things second and 
third should be subservient according to their communion with the remain¬ 
ing kings. Does not, therefore, what is here said by Plato remarkably 
celebrate the exempt nature of the first cause, and his un-coordination, 
with the other kingdoms of the Gods ? Since he says that this cause si¬ 
milarly reigns over all things, that all things subsist about him, and that 
for his sake essence and energy are inherent in all things. 

If also Socrates in the Republic clearly * teaches that the sun reigns 
over the world analogous to the good , let no one dare to accuse this ana¬ 
logy as connumerating the good with the king of mundane natures. For 
unless 1 together with the similitude of secondary causes to the first 
principles, we think fit to preserve that exempt dominion [of the first 


. * For xeu here, it is necessary to read « xa «: 
* For it is necessary to read 
2 In the original fuj is wanting after 


Digitized by v^ooQle 


CHAP. VIII. 


6F PLATO. 


131 


cause] it will be impossible for us to evince that the super-mundane kings 
have their allotment analogous to the first cause, who subsists prior to the 
whole of things according to one transcendency. But what occasion is 
there to be prolix ? For Plato indeed calls the first God king; but he 
does not think fit to give the others the same appellation, not only in the 
beginning of what he says about the first, but shortly after, he adds: 
“ About the king himself and the natures of which I have spoken there 
is nothing of this kind.” The first God, therefore, alone is called king. 
But he is called not only the king of things first, in the same manner as 
the second of things second, and the third of things third, but as the 
cause at once of all being and all beauty. Hence the first God precedes 
the other causes in an exempt and uniform manner, and according to a 
transcendency of the whole of things, and is neither celebrated by Plato 
as co-ordinated with them, nor as the leader of a triad. 

That these things, however, are asserted by Plato about the first God 
we shall learn by recurring a little to the preceding words, which are a$ 
follow : “ You say, that I have not sufficiently demonstrated to you the 
particulars respecting the first nature. I must speak to you, therefore, in 
enigmas, that in case the letter should be intercepted, either by land or 
sea, he who reads it may not understand this part of its contents. All 
things are situated about the king of all; and all things are for his sake; 
and he is the cause of every thing beautiful.'* In these words, therefore, 
Plato proposing to purify our conceptions about the first principle through 
enigmas, celebrates the king of all things, and refers tcx him the cause of 
the whole of things beautiful and good. Who, therefore, is the king of 
all things, except the unical God who is exempt from all things, who pro¬ 
duces all things from himself, and is the leader of all orders according to 
one cause? Who is he that converts all ends to himself, and establishes 
them about himself? For if you call him, for whose sake all things sub¬ 
sist, the end of all ends, and the primogenial cause, you will not deviate 
from the truth concerning him. Who is he that is the cause of all beauti¬ 
ful things, shining upon them with divine light, and who encloses that 
which is deformed and without measure, and the most obscure of all 
things in the extremity of the universe ? 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



132 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


If you are willing also from the words of Plato that follow the prece¬ 
ding, we will show that to be the recipient neither of language nor of 
knowledge is adapted to the first principle. For the words : “ This your 
inquiry concerning the cause of all beautiful things is as of a nature en¬ 
dued with a certain quality," are to be referred to this principle. For 
it is not possible to apprehend it intellectually, because it is unknown, nor 
to unfold it, because it is uncircumscribed; but whatever you may say 
of it, you will speak as of a certain thing; and you will speak indeed 
about it, but }'ou will not speak it. For speaking of the things of which it is 
the cause, we are unable to say, or to apprehend through intelligence what 
it is. Here therefore, the addition of quality, and the busy energy of the 
soul, remove it from the goodness which is exempt from all things, by the 
redundancy of its conceptions about it. This likewise draws the soul 
down to kindred, connate, and multiform inteliigibles, and prevents her 
from receiving that which is characterized by unity, and is occult in the 
participation of the good. And it is not only proper that the human soul 
should be purified from things co-ordinate with itself in the union and 
communion with that which is first, and that for this purpose it should 
leave all the multitude of itself behind, and exciting its own hyparxis, 
approach with closed eyes, as it is said, to the king of all things, and par¬ 
ticipate of his light, as much as this is lawful for it to accomplish ; but 
intellect also, which is prior to us, and all divine natures, by their highest 
unions, superes9ential torches, and first hyparxes are united to that which 
is first, and always participate of its exuberant fulness ; and this not so 
far as they are that which they are, but so far as they are exempt from 
things allied to themselves, and converge to the one principle of all. For 
the cause of all disseminated in all things impressions of his own all-per¬ 
fect transcendency, and through these establishes all things about himself, 
and being exempt from the whole of things, is ineffably present to all 
things. Every thing therefore, entering into the ineffable of its own nature, 

. finds there the symbol of the father of all. All things too naturally vene¬ 
rate him, and are united to him, through an appropriate mystic impres¬ 
sion, divesting themselves of their own nature, and hastening to become 
his impression alone, and to participate him alone, through the desire of 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. IX. 


QF PLATO. 


133 


his unknown nature, and of the fountain of good. Hence, when they 
have run upwards as far as to this cause, they become tranquil, and are 
liberated from the parturitions and the desire which all things naturally 
possess of goodness unknown, ineffable, imparticipate, and transcen¬ 
dency full. But that what is here said is concerning the first God, and 
that Plato in these conceptions leaves him uncoordinated with and exempt 
from the other causes, has been, I think, sufficiently evinced. 


CHAPTER IX. 


Let us in the next place consider each of the dogmas, and adapt them 
to our conceptions concerning cause, that from these we may comprehend 
by a reasoning process, the scope of the whole of Plato's theology. Let 
then one truth concerning the first principle be especially that which 
celebrates his ineffable, simple, and all-transcending nature; which esta¬ 
blishes all things about him, but does not assert that he generates or pro¬ 
duces any thing, or that he presubsists as the end of things posterior to 
himself.' For such a form of words neither adds any thing to the unknown, 
who is exempt from all things, nor multiplies him who is established above 
all union, nor refers the habitude and communion of things secondary to 
him who is perfectly imparticipate. Nor in short, does it announce that 
it teaches any thing about him, or concerning his nature, but about the 
second and third natures which subsist after him. 

Such then being this indication of the first God, and such the manner 
in which it venerates the ineffable, the second to this is that which con¬ 
verts all the desires of things to him, and celebrates him as the object of 
desire to and common end of all things, according to one cause which 
precedes all other causes. For the last of things subsists oqly for the 
sake of something else, but the first is that only for the sake of which all 
other things subsist: and all the intermediate natures participate of these 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



134 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II, 


two peculiarities. Hence they genuinely adhere to the natures which 
surpass them, as objects of desire, but impart the perfection of desires to 
subordinate beings. 

'The third speculation of the principle of things is far inferior to the 
preceding, considering him as giving subsistence to all beautiful things. 
For to celebrate him as the supplier of good, and as end preceding the 
two orders of things, is not very remote from the narration which says, 
that all causes are posterior to him, and derive their subsistence from him, 
as well those which are paternal, and the sources of good, as those that 
are the suppliers of prolific powers. But to ascribe to him a producing 
and generati ve cause, is still more remote from the all-perfect union of the 
first. For as it cannot be known or discussed by language, by secondary 
natures, it must not be said that it is the cause, or that it is generative of 
beings, but we should celebrate in silence this ineffable nature, and this 
perfectly causeless cause which is prior to all causes. If, however, as we 
endeavour to ascribe to him the good and the one , we in like manner at¬ 
tribute to him cause , and that which is final or paternal , we must pardon 
the parturition of the soul about this ineffable principle, aspiring to per¬ 
ceive him with the eye of intellect, and to speak about him ; but, at the 
same time, the exempt transcendency of the one which is immense, must be 
considered as surpassing an indication of this kind. From these things 
therefore, we may receive the sacred conceptions of Plato, and an order' 
adapted to things themselves. And we may say that the first part of this 
sentence sufficiently indicates the simplicity, 1 transcendency, and in short 
the uncoordination with all things of the king of all. For the assertion 
that all things subsist about him, unfolds the hyparxis of things second, 
but leaves that which is bej’ond all things without any connexion with 
things posterior to it. But the second part celebrates the cause of all 
the Gods 1 as prearranged in the order of end. For that which is the 
highest of all causes, is immediately conjoined with that which is prior to 
cause; but of this kind is the final cause, and that for the sake of which 

* For ?rpa£*V| it is necessary to read r 

* For tijs ear\0Tr}T9$ I read njv «irXoT>jTa. 

3 For tow 6eov, it is necessary to read t»v 9ea>v. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



GBAP. IX. 


OF PLATO. 


135 


all things subsist.' This part therefore is posterior to the other, and is 
woven together with the order of things, and the progression of the Pla¬ 
tonic doctrine. 

Again, the third part asserts him to be productive of all beautiful things, 
and thus adds to him a species of cause 1 inferior to the final. Whence 
also Plotinus, I' think, does not hesitate to call the first God the fountain 
of the beautiful. It is necessary therefore to attribute that which is best 
to the best of all things, that he may be the cause of all, and in reality 
prior to cause. But this is the good. This too, which is an admirable 
circumstance, may be seen in the words of Plato, that the first of these 
three divine dogmas, neither presumes to say any thing about the good, 
and this ineffable nature, nor does it permit us to refer any species of 
cause to it. But the second dogma leaves indeed the good ineffable, as it 
is fit it should, but from the habitude of things posterior to it, enables us 
to collect the final cause : for it does not refuse to call it that for the sake 
of which all things subsist. But when it asserts that all things are for the 
sake of the good , it excites in us the conception of the communion and 
co-ordination of. that which is the object of desire with the desiring na¬ 
tures. And the third dogma evinces that the good is the cause of all 
beautiful things. But this is to say something concerning it, and to add 
to the simplicity of the first cause, and not to abide in the conceptions of 
the end, but to conjoin with it the producing principle of things second. 
And it appears to me thAt Plato here indicates the natures which are 
proximatcly unfolded into light after the first. For it is not possible to say 
any thing concerning, it except at one time being impelled to this from 
all things, and at another from the best of things: for it is the cause of 
hyparxis to all things, and unfolds its own separate union through the 
peculiarities of these. We ascribe to it therefore the one and the goody 
from the donation which pervades to all things from it. For of those 
things of which all participate, we say there is no other cause than that 
which is established prior to all these. But the about which (to irtpt o,) the 


* For mt-iov it is necessary to read xwov. 


Digitized by LjOOQle 



136 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK 11. 


on account of which (to Si, o *), and the from which (to oup’ou,) particularly 
subsist in the intelligible Gods: and from these they are ascribed to.the 
first God. For whence can we suppose the unical Gods derive their pe¬ 
culiarities, except from that which is prior to them ? To this summit of 
intelligibles therefore the term about is adapted, because all the divine 
orders occultly proceed about this summit which is arranged prior to them. 
But the term on account of which pertains to % the middle order of intelli¬ 
gibles : for all things subsist for the sake of eternity and an' hyparxis per¬ 
fectly entire. And the term from which is adapted to the extremity of 
intelligibles: for this first produces all things, and adorns them uniformly. 
These things, therefore, we shall indeed make more known in the doctrine 
which will shortly follow concerning the intelligible Gods. 


CHAPTER X. 

In the next place, let us finish the discussion concerning the first God, 
with the theory of Parmenides, and unfold the mystic conceptions of the 
first hypothesis as far as pertains to the present purpose. For we shall 
refer the reader for the most perfect interpretation of them to our com¬ 
mentaries on that dialogue. In the first place therefore, it is requisite to 
determine this concerning the first hypothesis, that it comprehends as 
many conclusions negatively, as the hypothesis which follows it does af¬ 
firmatively. For this latter demonstrates all the orders proceeding from 
the one ; but the former evinces that the one is exempt from all the divine 
genera. From both these hypotheses however, it is obvious to every one 
how it is necessary that the cause of the whole of things should transcend 
his productions. For because the one is the cause of all the Gods, he 

r 

1 For Si’ 8« it is necessary to read Si* o ; since the former denotes the instrumental , but the latter 
the Jinal cause. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. X. 


OF PLATO. 


transcends all things. And because he is exempt from them through 
transcendency, on this account he gives to all things their hypostases. 
For through being expanded above^all things he causes all things to subsist. 
Since in the second and third orders also of beings, causes which are en¬ 
tirely exempt from their effects, more perfectly generate and connect their 
progeny than those causes do which are coordinate with their effects. And 
the one by ineffably producing all the divine orders, appears to be unically 
established above all. For in the productions posterior to it, cause is every 
where different from the things caused. And on this account nature 
indeed being incorporeal, is a cause which transcends bodies; but soul 
being perfectly perpetual, is the cause of things generated; and intellect 
being immoveable is the cause of every thing that is moved. If, there¬ 
fore, according to each progression of beings effects are denied of their 
causes, it is certainly necessary to take away all things similarly from the 
cause of all. 

In the second place, I think it is necessary that the order of the nega¬ 
tions should be defined by those who receive theology according to the 
intention of Parmenides ; and that it should be admitted that they pro¬ 
ceed indeed from the monads which subsist primarily in the divine genera, 
and that Parmenides takes away from the one all second and third natures, 
according to an order adapted to each. For that which transcends more 
principal causes must in a much greater degree subsist prior to those that 
are subordinate. Parmenides, however, does not begin his negations from 
the Gods that are united to the first: for this genus is with difficulty dis¬ 
tinguished from the one : because being arranged naturally [immediately] 
after it, it is most unical and occult, and transcendently similar to its pro¬ 
ducing cause. Parmenides therefore beginning where prior to all other 
things division and multitude are apparent, and proceeding regularly 
through all the second orders as far as to the last of things, again returns 
to the beginning, and shows how the one differs from the Gods that are 
most similar to it, and which primarily participate of it, according to one 
ineffable cause. 

In the third place, in addition to what has been said, I determine con¬ 
cerning the mode of negations, that they are not privative of their sub- 
Proc. Vol. I. S 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



138 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IT. 


jects, but generative of things which are as it were their opposites. For 
because the first principle is not many, the many proceed from it, and be¬ 
cause it is not a whole, wholeness proceeds from it, and in a similar man¬ 
ner in other things. And in thus determining, I speak conformably to 
Plato, who thinks it proper to abide in negations, and to add nothing to 
the one. For whatever you add, you diminish the one , and afterwards 
evince that it is not the one, but that which is passive to [or participates] 
the one. For it is thus not one only, but in addition to this possesses some¬ 
thing else also by participation. This mode therefore of negations is 
exempt, unical, primary, and is a departure from the whole of things, in an 
unknown and ineffable transcendency of simplicity. It is likewise neces¬ 
sary, having attributed such a mode as this to the first God, again to 
exempt him from the negations also. For neither does any discourse, nor 
any name belong to the one , says Parmenides. But if no discourse belongs 
to it, it is evident that neither does negation pertain to it. For all things 
are secondary to the one, things knowable and knowledge, and the in¬ 
struments of knowledge, and after a manner that which is impossible 
presents itself at the end of the hypothesis. For if nothing whatever can 
be said of the one , neither is this discussion itself adapted to the one. Nor 
is it at all wonderful that the discourse of those who wish to know the 
ineffable by words should terminate in that which is impossible; since all 
knowledge when conjoined with an object of knowledge which does not 
at all pertain to it loses its power. For sense, if we should say that it per¬ 
tained to that which is the object of science would subvert itself; and 
this would be the case with science and every kind of knowledge if we 
should say that they belonged to that which is intelligible; so that lan¬ 
guage when conversant with that which is ineffable, being subverted about 
itself, has no cessation, and opposes itself. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XI. 


OF PLATO. 


139 


CHAPTER XI. 


Let us now therefore, if ever, abandon multiform knowledge, exter¬ 
minate from ourselves all the variety of life, and in perfect quiet approach 
near to the cause of all things. For this purpose, let not only opinion 
and phantasy be at rest, nor the passions alone which impede our anago- 
gic impulse to the first, be at peace; but let the air be still, and the uni¬ 
verse itself be still. And let all things extend us with a tranquil power to 
communion with the ineffable. Let us also, standing there, having trans¬ 
cended the intelligible (if we contain any thing of this kind,) and with 
nearly closed eyes adoring as it were the rising sun, since it is not lawful 
for any being whatever intently to behold him—let us survey the sun 
whence the light of the intelligible Gods proceeds, emerging, as the poets 
say, from the bosom of the ocean; and again from this divine tranquillity 
descending into intellect, and from intellect, employing the reasonings of 
the soul, let us relate to ourselves what the natures are from which, in this 
progression, we shall consider the first God as exempt. And let us as it 
were celebrate him, not as establishing the earth and the heavens, nor as 
giving subsistence to souls, and the generations of all animals ; for he 
produced these indeed, but among the last of things ; but, prior to these, 
let us celebrate him as unfolding into light the whole intelligible and intel¬ 
lectual genus of Gods, together with all the supermundane and mundane 
divinities—as the God of all Gods, the unity of all unities, and beyond 
the first adyta,'—as more ineffable than all silence, and more unknown 
than all essence,—as holy among the holies, and concealed in the intelligi¬ 
ble Gods, And again after these things descending into a reasoning pro¬ 
cess from an intellectual hymn, and employing the inreprehensible science 

1 For aSvMcraw, it is necessary to read a&vrm. For the occult and invisible order of Night and 
Phanes is called by Orpheus the adytum. So that by the Jirst adyta, Produs means the highest 
order of intelligibles. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



140 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


of dialectic, let us, following the contemplation of first causes, survey the 
manner in which the first God is exempt from the whole of things. And 
let our descent be as far as to this. But opinion and phantasy and sense, 
prevent us indeed from partaking of the presence of the Gods, and draw 
us down from Olympian goods to earth-born motions, Titannically divide 
the intellect that is in us, and divulse us from an establishment in wholes 
to the images of beings. 


CHAPTER XII. 

What therefore will be the first conception of the science proceeding 
from intellect, and unfolding itself into light ? What other can we assert 
it to be than that which is the most simple and the most known of all the 
conceptions contained in this science ? What therefore is this ? “ The one , 
says Parmenides, if it is the one will not be many.” For it is necessary that 
the many should participate of the one ; but the one does not participate 
of the one, but is the one itself. Neither is that which is primarily one par¬ 
ticipate. For it would not be purely one if mingled with the many, nor 
that which is one, if it received the addition of that which is subordinate. 
The one therefore is exempt from the many. The many however subsist pri¬ 
marily in the summit of the first intellectual Gods, and in the intelligible 
place of survey , as we are taught in the second hypothesis. The one , there¬ 
fore, entirely transcends an order of this kind, and is the cause of it. For 
theftof many , is not privation, as we have said, but the cause of the many. 
This, therefore, Parmenides does not think it requisite to demonstrate, but 
as a thing most manifest to every one, he first evinces this, through the 
opposition as it were of the many to the one. But employing this he takes 
away that which follows; and he takes away that which is posterior to this 
by employing the conclusions prior to it, and this he always does, after the 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XII. 


OF PLATO. 


141 


same manner. And at one time indeed, he assumes the elements of the 
demonstrations from proximate conclusions, but at another time from 
those that are more remote. For after this intelligible order of Gods, as 
we have said, he gives subsistence to that order which connectedly con¬ 
tains and bounds the extent of them, from their exempt cause. But this 
order is called by him in the second hypothesis parts and a whole. These 
therefore he denies of the one employing the many for the purpose of 
distinguishing the subjects and the one. For, as he says, that which is 
a whole and has parts is many ; but the one is beyond the many. If, 
therefore, the one transcends the intelligible simplicity, but whole and that 
which has parts proceed from it in order to become the bond of the whole 
of this distribution, is it not necessary that the one should neither be a 
whole, nor be indigent of parts ? And I think it is through this trans¬ 
cendency that the one presubsists as the cause of this order of Gods, and 
that it produces this order, but in an exempt manner. 

In the third place after these, we may survey the order which is allotted 
the boundary of the intellectual and at the same time intelligible Gods, 
proceeding from the one , and may behold the one perfectly expanded above 
it. For this order indeed subsists from the second genera, and from the 
intellectual wholeness of the genera. But Me one, as has been demon¬ 
strated, is exempt according to cause from this wholeness. The one there¬ 
fore has neither beginning, or middle, or end, nor has it extremes, nor does 
it participate of any figure. For through these Gods, the before men¬ 
tioned order of Gods becomes apparent. Whether therefore, there be a 
perfective summit, or what is celebrated as the middle centre in these 
Gods, or a termination converting the end of these divinities to their be¬ 
ginning, the one is similarly beyond every triple distribution. For the 
one would have parts, and would be many, if it participated of things of 
this kind. But it has been demonstrated that the one unically subsists 
prior to the mariy, and to wholeness together with its parts, as the cause 
of them. And you see how Parmenides indeed exhibits to us one-nega¬ 
tion of the highest order, but two negations of the middle, and three of 
the last order. Besides this also, he shows that the one has no extremity. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



142 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


But the infinite is a thing of this kind. And separately from this he like¬ 
wise shows that the one is unreceptive of all figures. 

Again therefore, after these triple orders we must direct our attention to 
the intellectual Gods subsisting from these, and receiving a tripartite di¬ 
vision, and must demonstrate that the one transcends these also. For 
such is the one , says Parmenides, since it is neither in itself, nor in another. 
For if it were in another, it would be on all sides comprehended by that 
in which it is, and would every where touch that which comprehends it. 
But in this case, it would have a figure, would consist of parts, and on 
this account would be many and not one. And if it were ip itself it 
would entirely comprehend itself in itself. But comprehending and at 
the same time being comprehended, it will be two, and will be no longer 
primarily one. 'The discourse therefore proceeds to the same conclusion, 
and evinces that the one will not be one, by the summit of the intellectual 
order, if any one endeavours to mingle it with other things. Hence the one 
being perfectly exempt from this summit also, gives subsistence to it, this 
summit at one and the same time participating of the third of the Gods 
placed above it, but being produced from the second of these Gods, and 
being perfected from the first, and entirely established in it. 

Moreover, the one likewise generates the second intellectual order, being 
unmingled with it. For the one neither stands still, nor is moved. It 
participates therefore of neither of these; but being similarly exempt 
from both, it at the same time transcends the middle orders of the intel¬ 
lectual progression of the Gods. For if it were moved, it would be 
moved in a twofold respect, viz. either according to a change in quality, 
or local motion. But it is not possible that the one can be changed in 
quality; for being thus changed it will be not one, and will fall off from 
a unical hyparxis. Nor can it be locally moved. For it is impossible 
that it should be moved in a circle, because it would have parts, viz, middle 
and extremes. And if it changed one place for another it would be par¬ 
tible. For it would be necessary that it should neither be wholly in that 
place to which it is moved, nor in that whence it begins to be moved. 
For if it were wholly in either of them, it would be immoveable, in con¬ 
sequence of partly not yet being moved, and partly having now ceased 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XII. 


OF PLATO. 


143 


its motion. But if the one stands still, it is certainly necessary that it 
should abide in the same thing. But it has been demonstrated that the 
one is no where. Hence it is neither in itself, nor in another thing. In 
no respect therefore is the one moved, or does it stand still, which things 
[viz. motion and permanency] particularly belong to the middle order of 
intellectuals, as will be evident from the second hypothesis. For the first 
God produces this order also, being exempt from it. 

In the third place, we may survey through what next follows, the last 
order of intellectuals, proceeding firom the one , and subordinate to it. For 
in this order sameness and difference subsist unitedly. But at the same 
time the one subsists prior to both these. For different is said to be dif¬ 
ferent both from itself and from other things. And in a similar manner 
same is the same with itself, and with other things. But the one is not 
indeed different from itself, because that which is different from the one 
will be not one. And it is not the same with other things, lest becoming 
the same with them, it should latently pass into their nature. Moreover, 
neither is the one different from other things. For it would be at the same 
time one, and would have as an addition the power of difference. For 
so far as it is different it will not be one; since difference is not the one. 
Hence being one and different, it will be many and not the one. Nor 
is the one the same with itself. For if the one and the same differ only in 
name, the many will not be in consequence of participating of sameness 
with each other. For it is impossible that the many should become one 
by participating of the many. But if the one and sameness are essentially 
different, that which is primarily one does not participate of sameness, 
lest by receiving sameness in addition to the one, it should become a pas¬ 
sive one, and not that which is primarily one. If however the extremity 
of intellectuals is characterized by this tetrad, it is evident that the one exist¬ 
ing beyond this also supernally unfolds it into light, and places over die 
wholes of the universe a tetradic monad, the source of ornament to all 
secondary natures. For from henee other things primarily receive a com¬ 
munication with the one which are also indeed produced and connectedly 
contained by the one. 

But after the intellectual Gods, the ineffable transcendency of the one 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



144 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


arranges the extent of the supermundane divinities, the one in the mean 
time, being occultly exempt from its supermundane progeny. And this 
extent indeed proximately subsists from the intellectual Gods, but uni¬ 
formly receives its hyparxis from the first God. This, therefore, Parmen¬ 
ides produces through similitude and dissimilitude, from the deity which 
encloses the boundary of the intellectual monads. For the similar is that 
which is passive to sameness, in [the same manner as dissimilitude is 
that which is passive to difference. Parmenides therefore demonstrates 
that the one transcends according to one simplicity such a peculiarity of 
the Gods also as this. For that which is established above the power of 
same and different, in a much greater degree transcends the genera which 
are allotted a subsistence according to similitude and dissimilitude. 

What therefore remains after this ? Is it not evident that it is the mul¬ 
titude of the mundane Gods ? But this also is twofold, the one being 
celestial, but the other sublunary. Of these, therefore, the genus which 
revolves in the heavens, proceeds together with the equal, the greater and 
the less. But in the sublunary genus the equal is allotted a difference in 
multitude from the celestial equality, but the unequal is again divided by 
the power of the more and the less. According to another genus there¬ 
fore of the divine orders, there will be a monad and a duad, but above 
indeed, they are allied to the one and to sameness, and beneath to multi¬ 
tude, and the intellectual cause of difference. Hence the one transcends 
all these. For the equal indeed every where consists of the same parts. 
By what contrivance therefore is it possible that the qature which at one 
and the same time is exempt from sameness, and the difference which is 
associated with it, should participate of equality and inequality ? 

Besides all these divine orders therefore we must intellectually survey 
the genera of deified souls, and which are distributed about the Gods, 
For in each of the divine progressions and in the progressions also of souls, 
the first genus presents itself to the view connascent with the Gods; since 
both in the heavens, and in the sublunary region divine souls receive the 
division of the Gods into the world, as the Athenian Guest in a certain 
place demonstrates. The psychical extent therefore, is characterized by 
time, and by a life according to time. But the peculiarity of divine souls 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XII. 


OF PLATO. 


145 


is shown by Parmenides to consist in their being younger and at the same 
time older both than themselves and other things. For revolving always 
according to the same time, and conjoining the beginning with the end, as 
at one and the same time proceeding to the end of the whole period they 
become younger, but as at the same time circulating to the beginning of 
it, they become older. All their ages however, perpetually preserve the 
same measures of time. Again, there is sameness in them and difference, 
the former indeed preserving equality, but the latter inequality, according 
to time. The one therefore subsists prior to divine souls, and generates 
these also together with the Gods. We now therefore come to the end of 
the whole distribution of more excellent natures ; and the cause of all 
intelligibles at once unfolds into light the genera that follow the Gods, 
and that are triply divided by the three parts of time. But this c^use is 
demonstrated by the intellectual projections of Parmenides to be also 
exempt from these. For that which is beyond all time and the life which 
is according to time, can by no contrivance become subservient to the 
more partial periods of time. 

That which is the first of all things therefore, unfolds into light all the 
Gods, divine souls, and the more excellent genera, and is neither compli¬ 
cated with its progeny, nor multiplied about them ; but being perfectly 
exempt from them in an admirable simplicity, and transcendency of 
union, it imparts to all things indifferently progression and at the same 
time order in the progression. Parmenides therefore beginning from the 
intelligible place # of survey of the first intellectual Gods, proceeds thus 
far, according to the measures of generation, giving subsistence to the 
genera of the Gods, and to the natures that are united to and follow the 
Gods,' and perpetually evinces that the one is ineffably exempt from all 
things. But again, from hence he returns to the beginning, and imitating 
the conversion of the whole of things, separates the one from the highest, 
viz. from the intelligible Gods. For thus especially we may survey the 
transcendency of the one, and the immense difference of its union from 
all other things, if we not only demonstrate that it is established above 

* For rwv itmv it is necessary to read rsi; tins- 
Proc. Vol. i. T 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



146 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK II. 


the second or third progressions in the divine orders, but also that it sub¬ 
sists prior to the intelligible unities themselves, and this in a manner con¬ 
formable to the simplicity of their occult nature, and not through a variety 
of words, but through intellectual projection alone. For intelligibles are 
naturally adapted to be.known by intellect. This therefore, Parmenides 
also evinces in reality, relinquishing logical methods, but energizing ac¬ 
cording to intellect, and asserting that the one is above essence, and being 
characterized by the one. For this assertion was not collected from the 
preceding conclusions. For the discourse about the first Gods them¬ 
selves would be without demonstration, if it derived its credibility from 
things subordinate. At the same time therefore, Parmenides contends 
that all knowledge, and all the instruments of knowledge, fall short of the 
transcendency of the one, and beautifully end in the ineffable of that 
God who is beyond all things. For after scientific energies, aud intellec¬ 
tual projections, a union with the unknown follows, to which also Par¬ 
menides referring the whole of his discussion, concludes the first hypo¬ 
thesis, suspending indeed all the divine genera from the one, but evincing 
that the one is unically exempt from all things, subsisting without the 
participation of intelligibles and sensibles, and in an ineffable manner 
giving subsistence to the participated monads. Hence also, the one is 
said to-be beyond that one which is conjoined with essence, and at the 
same time to be beyond every participated multitude of unities. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



BOOK III 


CHAPTER 1. 


Such therefore is the theology with Plato concerning the first God, as 
it appears to me, and so great is the transcendency which it is allotted , 
with respect to all other discussions of divine concerns; at one and the 
same time venerably preserving the ineffable union of this God exempt 
from the whole of things, uncircumscribed by all gnostic comprehensions, 
and apart from all beings ; and unfolding the anagogic paths to him, per¬ 
fecting that parturient desire which souls always possess of the fatfier, and 
progenitor of all things, and enkindling that torch in them, by which they 
are especially conjoined with the unknown transcendency of the one. But 
after this impartipipable, ineffable, and truly superessential cause, which 
is separated from all essence, power and energy, the discussion of the 
Gods immediately follows. For to what other thing prior to the unities 
is it lawful to be conjoined with the one, or what else can be more united 
to the unical God than the multitude of Gods ? Concerning these there¬ 
fore, we shall in the next place unfold the inartificial theory of Plato, in¬ 
voking the Gods themselves to enkindle in us the light of truth. I wish 
however prior to entering on the particulars of this theory, to convince 
the reader, and to make it evident to him through demonstration, that 
there are necessarily as many orders of the Gods, as the Parmenides of 
Plato unfolds to us in the second hypothesis. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



148 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


This therefore is I think prior to all other things apparent to those whose 
conceptions are not perverted, that every where, but especially in the 
divine orders, second progressions, are completed through the similitude 
of these to their proper principles. For nature and intellect, and every 
generative cause, are naturally adapted to produce and conjoin to them¬ 
selves things similar, prior to such as as are dissimilar to themselves. For 
if it is necessary that the progression of beings should be continued, and 
that no vacuum should intervene either in incorporeal natures, or in 
bodies, it is necessary that every thing which proceeds naturally should 
proceed through similitude. For it is by no means lawful that the thing 
caused should be the same with its cause; since a remission and deficiency 
of the union of the producing cause generates secondary natures. For 
again, if that which is second were the same as that which is first, each 
would be similarly the same, and one would not be cause, but the other 
the thing caused. If however, the one by its very being, or essentially, 
has an exuberance of productive power, but the other falls short of the 
power that produced it, these are naturally separated from each other, and 
the generative cause precedes in excellence the thing generated, and there 
is not a sameness of things which so greatly differ. But if that which is 
second is not the same with that which is first, if indeed it is different 
only, they will not be conjoined to each other, nor will the one participate 
of the other. For contact and participation, are indeed a communion of 
things conjoined, and a sympathy of participants with the natures they 
participate. But if it is at the same time the same with and different 
from that which is first, if indeed the sameness is indigent, and vanquished 
by the power which is contrary to it, the one will no longer be the leader 
of the progression of beings, nor will every generative cause subsist prior 
to things of a secondary nature, in the order of the good. For the one 
is not the cause of division, but of friendship. And the good converts 
generated natures to their causes. But the conversion and friendship of 
things secondary to such as are primary is through similitude, but not 
through a dissimilar nature. If therefore the one is the cause of the whole 
of things, and if the good is in an exempt manner desirable to all things, 
it will every where give subsistence to the progeny of precedaneous causes, 



Digitized by 


G oogle 



CHAP. 1. 


OF PLATO. 


149 


through similitude, in order that progression may be according to the one, 
and that the conversion of things which have proceeded may be to.Me 
good. For without similitude there will neither be the conversidn of things 
to their proper principles, nor the generation of effects. Let this there¬ 
fore be considered as a thing admitted in this place. 

But the second thing besides this, and which is demonstrated through 
this, is, that it is necessary every monad should produce a number co-or¬ 
dinate to itself, nature indeed a natural, but soul a psychical, and intellect 
an intellectual number. For if every thing generative generates similars 
prior to dissimilars, as has been before demonstrated, every cause will 
certainly deliver its own form and peculiarity to its own progeny, and 
before it gives subsistence to far distant progressions, and things which 
are separated from its nature, it will produce things essentially near to it, 
and conjoined with it through similitude. Every monad therefore, gives 
subsistence to a multitude indeed, as generating that which is second to 
itself, and which divides the powers that presubsist occultly in itself. For 
’those things which are uniformly and contractedly in the monad, present 
themselves to the view separately in the progeny of the monad. And this 
indeed the wholeness of nature manifests, since it contains in one the 
reasons, [i. e. productive principles] of all things both in the heavens 
and in the sublunary region ; but distributes the powers of itself, to the 
natures which are divided from it about bodies. For the nature of earth, 
of fire, and of the moon, possesses from the wholeness of nature its pecu¬ 
liarity and form, and energizes together with this wholeness, and con¬ 
tains its own allottment. This also the monad of the mathematical sci¬ 
ences and of numbers manifests. For this being all things primarily, and 
spermatically producing in itself the forms of numbers, distributes dif¬ 
ferent powers to different externally proceeding numbers. For it is not 
possible that what is generated, should at once receive all the abundance 
of its generator. And it is necessary that the prolific power of every 
thing that pre-exists in the cause * itself should become apparent. The 
monad therefore gives subsistence to a multitude about itself, and to 

* For ninety it is necessary to read am*. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



150 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


number which distributes the peculiarities that abide collectively in itself. 
Since however, as was before observed, the similar is always more allied 
to cause than the dissimilar, there will be one multitude of similars to the 
monad, proceeding from the monad ; and another of dissimilars. But 
again, the multitude which is similar to the monad is that in a divided 
manner which the monad is indivisibly. For if the monad possesses a 
peculiar power and hyparxis, there will be the same form of hyparxis in 
the multitude together with a remission with reference to the whole. 

After this however, it is necessary to consider in the third place, that 
of progressions, such as are nearer to their cause are indicative of a greater 
multitude of things, and are at the same time in a certain respect equal 
to their containing causes; but that such as are more remote possess a 
less extended power of signification ; and on account of the diminution 
of their power, change and diminish at the same time the amplitude of 
production. For if, of progressions, that which subsists the first in order 
is more similar to its principle, and that which gives subsistence to the 
greatest number is both with respect to essence and power more similar 
to the generating principle of all things, it is necessary that of secondary 
natures, such as are nearer to the monad, and which receive dominion after 
it, should give a greater extent to their productions ; but that such things 
as are more separated from their primary monad should neither pervade in 
a similar manner through all things, nor extend their efficacious energies to 
far distant progressions. And again, as similar to this, it is necessary that 
the nature which gives subsistence to the greatest number.of effects, should 
be arranged next to the monad its principle ; and that the nature gene¬ 
rative of a more numerous progeny, because it is more similar to the 
supplying cause of all things than that which is generative of a few, must 
be arranged nearer to the monad, according to hyparxis. For if it is more 
remote, it will be more dissimilar to the first principle; but if it is more 
dissimilar, it will neither possess a power comprehending the power of 
similar natures, nor an energy abundantly prolific. For an abundant 
cause is allied to the cause of all. And universally, that- which is gene* 
rative of a more abundant, is more naturally allied to its principle than 
that which is productive of a less numerous progeny. For the production 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. I. 


OF PLATO. 


151 


of fewer effects is a defect of power ; but a defect of power is a diminu¬ 
tion of essence; and a diminution of essence becomes redundant on ac¬ 
count of dissimilitude to its cause, and a departure from the first prin¬ 
ciple. 

Again therefore, in addition to what has been said, we shall assert this 
which possesses the most indubitable truth, that prior to the causes which 
are participated, it is every where necessary that imparticipable causes 
should have a prior subsistence in the whole of things. For if it is neces¬ 
sary that a cause should have the same relation to its progeny as the one 
to all the nature of beings, and that it should naturally possess this order 
towards things secondary ; but the one is imparticipable, being similarly 
exempt from all beings, as unically producing all things;—if this be the 
case, it is requisite that every other cause which imitates the transcen¬ 
dency of the one with respect to all things, should be exempt from the 
natures which are in secondary ranks, and which are participated by them. 
And again, as equivalent to this, it is requisite that every imparticipable 
and primary cause should establish monads of secondary natures similar 
to itself, prior to such as are dissimilar. I say, for instance, it is requisite 
that one soul should distribute many souls to different natures; and one 
intellect participated intellects to many souls. For thus the first exempt 
genus will every where have an order analogous to the one. And secon¬ 
dary natures which participate kindred causes will be analogous to these 
causes, and through the similitude of these will be conjoined with their 
imparticipable principle. Hence prior to the forms which are in other 
things, those are established which subsist in themselves; exempt causes 
prior to such as are co-ordinate; and imparticipable monads prior to such 
as are participable. And consequently (as that which is demonstrated at 
the same time with this) the exempt causes are generative of the co-or¬ 
dinate, and imparticipable natures extend participable monads to their 
progeny. And natures which subsist from themselves produce the powers 
which are resident in other things. These things therefore being discussed, 
let us consider Row each of the divine genera subsists through analogy , 1 
and survey following Plato himself, what are the first and most total 

* For avcthjetoif it is necessary to read mmAoyiaf. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



152 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IH. 


orders of the Gods. For having discovered and demonstrated this, we 
shall perhaps be able to perceive the truth concerning these several orders. 

It is necessary therefore, from the before-mentioned axioms, since there 
is one unity the principle of the whole of things, and from which every 
hyparxis derives its subsistence, that this unity should produce from itself, 
prior to all other things, a multitude characterized by unity, and a num¬ 
ber most allied to its cause. For if every other cause constitutes a pro¬ 
geny similar to itself prior to that which is dissimilar, much more must 
the one unfold into light after this manner things posterior to itself, since 
it is beyond similitude, and the one itself must produce according to union 
things which primarily proced from it. For how can the one give subsist¬ 
ence to its progeny except unically ? For nature generates things secon¬ 
dary to itself physically, soul psychically, and intellect intellectually. 
The one therefore is the cause of the whole of things according to union, 
and the progression from the one is uniform. But if that which prima¬ 
rily produces all things is the one, and the progression from it is unical, it 
is certainly necessary that the multitude thence produced should be self¬ 
perfect unities, most allied to their producing cause. Farther still, if 
every monad constitutes a number adapted to itself, as was before demon¬ 
strated, by a much greater priority must the one generate a number of 
this kind. For in the progression of things, that which is produced is 
frequently dissimilar to its producing cause, through the dominion of dif¬ 
ference : for such are the last of things, and which are far distant from 
their proper principles. But the first number, and which is connascent 
with the one, is uniform, ineffable, superessential, and perfectly similar to 
its cause. For in the first causes, neither does difference intervening 
separate from the generator the things begotten, and transfer them into 
another order, nor does the motion of the cause effecting a remission of 
power, produce into dissimilitude and indefiniteness the generation of the 
whole of things ; but the cause of all things being unically raised above 
all motion and division, has established about itself a divine number, and 
has united it toits own simplicity. The one therefore prior to beings has 
given subsistence to the unities of beings. 

For again, according to another mode [of considering the subject] it is 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. I. 


OF PLATO. 


153 


necessary that primary beings should participate of the first cause through 
their proximate unities. For secondary things are severally conjoined to 
the natures prior to them through similars; bodies indeed to the soul which 
ranks as a whole, through the several souls [which they participate]; but 
souls to universal intellect through intellectual monads; and first beings, 
through unical hyparxes to the one. For being is in its own nature dis¬ 
similar to the one. For essence and that which is in want of union ex¬ 
ternally derived, are unadapted to be conjoined with that which is super¬ 
essential, and with the first union, and are far distant from it. But the 
unities of beings, since they derive their subsistence from the imparticipa- 
ble unity, and which is exempt from the whole of things, are able to con¬ 
join beings to the one, and to convert them to themselves. 

It appears therefore to me, that Parmenides demonstrating these things 
through the second hypothesis, connects the one with being, surveys all 
things about the one, and evinces that this proceeding nature, and which 
extends its progressions as far as to the last of things is the one. For 
prior to true beings it was necessary to constitute the unities ; since it 
neither was nor is lawful, says Timaeus, for that which is the best of 
things to effect any thing else than that which is most beautiful. But 
this is in a remarkable degree most similar to that which is best. To the 
one however, a unical multitude is most similar; since the demiurgus of 
the universe also being good, constituted all things similar to himself 
through goodness itself. Much more therefore, does the fountain of all 
good produce goodnesses naturally united to itself, and establish them 
in beings. Hence there is one God, and many Gods, one unity-and many 
unities prior to beings, and one goodness, and many after the one good¬ 
ness, through which the demiurgic intellect is good; and every intellect is 
divine, whether it be an intellectual or intelligible intellect. And that 
which is primarily superessential is the one; and there are many superes¬ 
sentials after the one. Whether therefore, is this multitude of unities im- 
participable in the same manner as the one itself, or is it participated by 
beings, and is each unity of beings the flower as it were of a certain 
being, and the summit and center of it, about which each being * subsists ? 


Proc. 


1 For tv it is necessary to read ov. 


VOL. I. 


u 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



154 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Ill. 


But if these unities also are imparticipable, in what do they differ from 
the one ? For each of them is one, and primarily subsists from the one. 
Or in what being more redundant than the first cause were they consti¬ 
tuted by it ? For it is every where necessary that what is second being 
subordinate to that which is prior to itself, should fall short of the union 
of its producing 1 cause, and by the addition of a certain thing should 
have a diminution of the monadic simplicity of the first. What addition 
therefore, can we adduce, or what redundancy besides the one y if each of 
these also is by itself one ? For if each of them is one and many, we 
shall appear to transfer to them the peculiarity of being. But if each is 
one only, in the same manner as the one itself, , why does this rank as the 
cause which is exempt from all things, but each of these is allotted a 
secondary dignity ? Neither therefore shall we preserve the transcendency 
of the first with reference to the things posterior to it, nor can we admit 
that the unities proceeding from it are unconfused either with respect to 
themselves, or to the one principle of them. 

But neither shall we be persuaded by Parmenides who produces the one 
together with being, and demonstrates that there are as many parts of the 
one as there are of being; that each being 1 also participates of the one , 
but that the one is every where consubsistent with being ; and in short, 
who asserts that the one of the second hypothesis participates of being, 
and is participated by being, the participation in each not being the same. 
For the one indeed participates of being, as not being primarily one, nor 
exempt from being, but as illuminating truly-existing essence. But being 
participates of the one t as that which is connected by it, and filled with 
divine union, and converted to the one itself which is imparticipable. For 
the participated monads conjoin beings to the one which is exempt from 
the whole of things, in the same manner as participated intellects conjoin 
souls to the intellect which ranks as a whole, and as participated souls 
conjoin bodies to the soul which ranks as a whole. For it is not possible 
that the dissimilar genera of secondary natures should be united without 

* For *agovTo$ it appears requisite to read iragcryovros. 

1 Here alsa for iy it is necessary to read oy. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XL 


OF PLATO. 


155 


media to the cause which is exempt from multitude; but it is necessary 
that the contact should be effected through similars. For a similar mul¬ 
titude, so far indeed as it is multitude, communicates with the dissimilar; 
.but so far as it is similar to the monad prior to itself, it is conjoined with 
it. Being established therefore, in the middle of both, it is united to the 
whole, and to the one which is prior to multitude. But it contains in 
itself remote progressions, and which are of themselves dissimilar to the 
one. Through itself also, it converts all things to that one, and thus all 
things are extended to the first cause of the whole of things, dissimilar* 
indeed through similars , 1 but similars through themselves. For similitude 
itself by itself conducts and binds the many to the one , and converts 
secondary natures to the monads prior to them. For the very being of 
similars so far as they are similars is derived from the one. Hence, it con¬ 
joins multitude to that from which it is allotted its progression. And on 
this account similitude is that which it is, causing many things to be allied, 
to possess sympathy with themselves, and fnendship with each other and 
the one. 


CHAPTER II. 


If however it be requisite, not only by employing the intellectual pro¬ 
jections of Parmenides to unfold the multitude of Gods participated by 
beings, but also concisely to demonstrate the theory of Socrates about 
these particulars, we must recollect what is written in the Republic, where 
he says that the light proceeding from the good is unific of intellect and 
of beings. For through these things the good is demonstrated to be ex¬ 
empt from being and essence, in the same manner as the sun is exempt 
from visible natures. But this light being in intelligibles illuminates 
them, in the same manner as the solar-form light which is in visible na- 

1 For otvofjjHow it is necessary to read o/toiov. 


i 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



156 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


* 

BOOK 111. 

tures. For visible natures no otherwise become apparent, and known 
to the sight, than through the light which is ingenerated in them. All 
intelligibles therefore become boniform through the participation of 
light, and through this light, every true ‘ being is most similar to the 
good. If, therefore, it makes no difference to speak of this light, or of 
the one (for this light conjoins intelligibles, and causes them to be one, 
as deriving its subsistence from the one) if this be the case, the deity 
proceeding from the first is participable, and all the multitude of unities 
is participable. And that indeed which is truly superessential is the one. 
But each of the other Gods, according to his proper hyparxis, by which 
he is a superessential God, is similar to the first; but they are participated 
by essence and being. According to this reasoning therefore, the Gods 
appear to us to be unities, and participable unities, binding indeed all 
beings to themselves, but conjoining through themselves to the one which 
similarly transcends all things, the natures posterior to themselves. 

Since therefore each of the Gods is indeed a unity, but is participated 
by some being, whether shall we say that the same being participates of 
1 each of the unities or that the participants of some of the unities are 
more, but of others less numerous ? And if this be the case either the par¬ 
ticipants of the superior unities must be more, but of the inferior must 
be fewer in number, or vice versa. For it is necessary that there should 
be an order of the unities, in the same manner as we see that of numbers 
some are nearer to their principle, but othejs more remote from it. And 
that some are more simple, but others more composite, and exceed indeed 
in quantity, but suffer a diminution in power. But it is well that we 
have mentioned numbers. For if it is necessary to survey the order of 
the first monads with respect to each other, and their progression about 
beings, from these as images, in these also the monads which are nearer 
to the one will be participated by things which are more simple in essence, 
but thos<i which are more remote from it, will be participated by more 
composite essences. For thus the participation will be according to the 
analogous ; first monads being always participated by the first beings, but 
second monads by secondary beings. For again, if the first is exempt 

* oyrco; is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. 11. 


OF PLATO. 


157 


from all things, and is imparticipable, but that which is connascent with 
the most simple nature and the one is more similar to the imparticipable 
than that which is connascent with a more various and multiform nature, 
and which has more powers suspended from it,—if this be the case, it is 
perfectly obvious, that the unities which are nearer to the one are neces¬ 
sarily participated by the first and most simple essences; but that those 
which are more remote are participated by more composite essences, 
which are less in power, but are greater in number and multitude. For 
in short, additions in these unities are ablations of powers; and that 
which is nearer to the one , which surpasses the whole of things by an 
admirable simplicity, is more uniform, and is consubsistent with more 
total orders. And it happens according to the ratio of power, that the 
simplicity of the first unities is transcendent. For those things which are 
the causes of a greater number of effects, imitate as much as possible the 
cause of all things, but those which are the causes of fewer effects, have 
an essence more various than the natures that are prior to them.* For 
this variety distributes into minute parts and diminishes the power which 
abides in one. Moreover, in participated souls also, such as are first and 
most divine subsist in simple and perpetual bodies. Others again are 
connected with bodies that are simple, but in conjunction with these with 
material bodies also. And others are connected at one and the same 
time with simple, material and composite bodies. For the celestial souls 
indeed rule over simple bodies, and such as have an immaterial and im¬ 
mutable subsistence. But the souls that govern the wholes of the elements, 
are at the same time invested with etherial garments, and at the same 
time through these are carried in the wholes of the elements, which as 
wholes indeed are perpetual and simple, but as material receive genera¬ 
tion and corruption, and composition from dissimilar natures. And the 
souls that rank in the third order, are those which proximately inspire 
with life their luciform * vehicles, but also attract from the simple ele- 

* Instead of ra pay yap tAsiovcov ama, xai ra>v xayrooy aiTuvv xara njr Suya/tiy row xpo atrrcoy 
votxtXarregwv xara rrjv ovrtctv gtrriv, it is necessary to read rot psv yap wXeiowv ama, xou tcov xavrcov 
amov xara tiwapuv ^(lowrat, ra tie tqov eXaovovow rav *go ccvtqm noixthtorepa xara njv ou<n*v tariv. 

a For auroettierw it is requisite to read avyo fiSwiv. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



158 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


ment material vestsments, pour into these a secondary life, and through 
these communicate with composite and multiform bodies, and sustain 
through this participation another third life. 

If, however, you are willing to survey the intellectual orders, some of 
these are arranged in the souls which rank as wholes, and in the most 
divine of mundane souls, which also they govern in a becoming manner. 
But others being arranged in the souls of the more excellent genera, are 
proximately participated by the rulers that are in them; and are parti¬ 
cipated secondarily by more partial essences. But again they arrange 
third intellectual orders in partial souls. And according as the power 
which they are allotted is diminished, in such proportion is participation 
in them more various, and far more composite than the participation of 
the natures that are prior to them. If, therefore, this is the mode of par¬ 
ticipation in all beings, it is certainly necessary that of the Gods also 
those that are nearer to the one , should be carried in the more simple parts 
of being, but that those which have proceeded to a greater distance 
should be carried in the more composite parts of being. For the parti¬ 
cipations of second genera are divided after this manner according to a 
similitude to them. 

Again therefore, we may summarily say, that after the one principle 
of the whole of things, the Gods present themselves to our view as self¬ 
perfect monads, participated by beings.' How many orders 'therefore 
there are of beings we shall afterwards unfold, and show what beings are 
allotted a more simple, and what a more various hyparxis. Of all. beings 
then, the last is that which is corporeal. For this derives its being, and all 
its perfection from another more ancient cause, and is neither allotted sim¬ 
plicity nor composition, nor perpetuity, nor incorruptibility from its own 
power. For no body is either self-subsistent, or self-begotten; but every 
thing which is so contracting in one, cause, and that which proceeds from 
cause, is incorporeal and impartible. And in short, that which is the 
cause of hyparxis to itself, imparts also to itself an infinite power of ex- 


* In the original here, about a line and a half is so defective, that not being able to supply the 
deficiency, I have not attempted to translate it. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. II. 


OF PLATO. 


159 


istence. For never deserting itself, it will never cease to be, or depart from 
its own subsistence. For every thing that is corrupted, is corrupted through 
being separated from the power that supplied it with being. But that 
which imparts being to itself, as it is not separated from itself, is allotted 
through itself a perpetual essence. No body however, since it is not the 
cause of perpetuity to itself, will be perpetual. For every thing which is 
perpetual possesses an infinite power. But body being finite is not the 
cause of infinite power. For infinite power is incorporeal, because all power 
is incorporeal. But this is evident, because greater powers are every 
where. But no body is capable of being wholly every where. If there¬ 
fore, no-body imparts to itself power, whether the power be infinite or 
finite, but that which is self-subsistent imparts to itself the power of being, 
and of existing perpetually, no body will be self-subsistent. Whence 
therefore is being imparted to bodies, and what is it which is adapted 
proximately to supply them with being ? Must we not say that the cause 
of being to bodies primarily is that which by being present renders the 
nature of body more perfect than its kindred bodies [when they are de¬ 
prived of it?] This indeed is obvious to every one. For it is the province 
of that which imparts perfection to connect also the essence of secondary 
natures, since perfection itself is the perfection of essence. What there£ 
fore is that of which bodies participating, are said to be better than the 
bodies which do not participate of it ? Is it not evident that it is soul ? 
For we say that animated bodies are more perfect than such as are 
inanimate. Soul therefore is primarily beyond bodies ; and it must be 
admitted that all heaven and every thing corporeal is the vehicle of soul. 
Hence, these two orders of beings present themselves to our view; the one 
indeed being corporeal, but the other which is above this; psychical. 

With respect to soul itself however, whether is it the same with or dif¬ 
ferent from intellect ? For as the body which participates of soul is per¬ 
fect, thus also the soul is perfect which participates of intellect. And 
of the soul indeed, which is able to live according to reason, all things do 
not participate: but of intellect and intellectual illumination rational 
souls participate, and also such things as partake of any kind of know¬ 
ledge. And soul indeed energizes according to time; but intellect com- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



160 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK ni. 


prelietids in eternity both its essence, and at the same time its stable energy. 
And not every soul indeed is adapted to preserve immutably and without 
diminution the perfection of itself; but every intellect is always perfect, 
and possesses a never-failing power of its own blessedness. The intellec¬ 
tual genus therefore is essentially beyond the psychical; since the former, 
neither in whole nor in partial intellects, admits the entrance of the na¬ 
ture of evil; but the latter being undefiled in whole souls, departs in 
partial souls from its own proper blessedness. What therefore is the first of 
beings? Shall we say intellect, or prior to this the extent of life? For 
soul indeed is self-vital, supplying itself with life; and intellect is the best 
and most perfect, and as we have said, an eternal life. But.the life of 
intellect is indeed in a certain respect intellectual, and is mingled from 
the intellectual and vital peculiarity. It is necessary however, that there 
should be life itself. Whether therefore is life or intellect the more ex¬ 
cellent thing? But if gnostic beings only participate of intellect, but 
such beings as are destitute of knowledge participate of life, (for we say 
that plants live) it is certainly necessary that life should be arranged 
above intellect, being the cause of a greater number of effects, and im¬ 
parting by illumination more gifts from itself than intellect. What then ? 
Is life the first of beings ? And is to live the same thing as to be f But 
this is impossible. For if life is that which is primarily being, and to be 
vital is the same thing as to have being, and there is the same definition of 
both life and being, every thing which participates of life would also 
participate of being, and every thing which participates of existence 
would likewise participate of life. For if each is the same thing all 
things woyld similarly participate of being and life. All vital natures 
indeed have essence and being; but there are many beings that are des¬ 
titute of life. Being therefore subsists prior to the first life. For that 
which is more universal, and the cause of a greater number of effects, is 
nearer to the one, as has been before demonstrated. Soul therefore is 
that which is piimarily established above bodies; but intellect is beyond 
soullife is more ancient than intellect; and being which is primarily 
being is established above all these. Every thing also which participates 

* Instead of here it is necessary to read 'bx y ll- 


Digitized by ooQle 



CHAP. II. 


OF PLATO. 


l6l 


of soul, by a much greater priority participates of intellect; but not every 
thing which enjoys intellectual efficiency, is also adapted to participate of 
soul. For of soul rational animals only participate; since we say that 
the rational soul is truly soul. For Plato in the Republic says, that the 
work of soul is to reason and survey beings. And every soul [i. e. every 
rational soul] is immortal, as it is written in the Phaedrus; the irrational 
soul being mortal, according to the demiurgus in the Timaeus. And in 
short, it is in many places evident that Plato considers the rational soul 
to be truly soul, but others to be the images of souls, so far as these also 
are intellectual and vital, and together with whole souls produce the lives 
that are distributed about bodies. Of intellect however, we not only 
admit that rational animals participate, but also such other animals as 
possess a gnostic power; I mean such as possess the phantasy, memory 

and sense; since Socrates also in the Philebus refers all such animals to 

\ 

the intellectual series. For taking away intellect from the life which is 
according to pleasure, he likewise takes away not only the rational life, 
but every , gnostic power of the irrational life. For all knowledge is the 
progeny of intellect, in the same manner as allreason is an image of soul. 

Moreover, all things which participate of intellect, by a much greater 
priority participate of life, some things indeed more obscurely, but others 
more manifestly. But all living beings do not participate of intellectual 
power, since plants indeed are animals, as Timaeus .says, but they neither 
participate of sense, or phantasy ; unless some one should say that they 
have a co-sensation of what is pleasing and painful. And in short, the 
orectic powers every where are lives, and the images of the whole of life, 
and the last productions of life; but they are of themselves destitute of 
intellect and without any participation of the gnostic power. Hence 
also, they are of themselves indefinite, and deprived of all knowledge. 

Again therefore, all animals indeed receive a portion of being, and 
different animals a different portion, according to their respective natures; 
but all beings are not similarly able to participate of life; since we say 
that qualities and all passions, and the last of bodies, receive the ultimate 
effective energy of being, but we do not also say that they participate of 
life. Being therefore is more ancient than life; life than intellect; and 
Proc. Vol. I. X 


l 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


163 

intellect than soul. For it is necessary that the causes of a greater number 
of effects being more ancient and according to order more principal, 
should preside over causes which are able to produce and adorn fewer 
effects. Very properly therefore, does Plato in the Timaeus give subsist¬ 
ence to soul from intellect, as being secondary to it according to its own 
nature. But in the Laws he says that intellect is moved similarly to a 
sphere fashioned by a wheel.' For that which is moved, is moved by 
participating of life, and is nothing else than real .life about motion. And 
in the Sophista he exempts being from all the total genera of things, and 
from motion. For being, says he, according to its own nature, neither 
stands still, nor is moved. But that which neither stands still nor is moved* 
is beyond eternal life. 

These four causes therefore being prior to a corporeal subsistence, via. 
essence, life, intellect and soul, soul indeed participates of all the causes 
prior to itself, being allotted reason from its own peculiarity, but intellect, 
life and being, from more ancient causes. Hence it gives subsistence to 
things posterior to itself in a fourfold manner. For according to its being 
indeed, it produces all things as far as to bodies; according to its life, 
all things which are said to live, even as far as to plants ; according to 
its intellect, all things which possess a gnostic power, even as far as to the 
most irrational natures; and according to its reason, the first of the 
natures that are able to participate of it.* But intellect being established 
beyond soul, and existing as the plenitude of life and being, adorns all 
things in a threefold manner, imparting indeed by illumination the power 
of the intellectual peculiarity to all gnostic beings, but supplying the 
participation of life to a still greater number, and of being to all those to 
whom primary being imparts itself. But life being arranged above intel¬ 
lect, presubsists as the cause of the same things in a twofold respect, vivi¬ 
fying secondary natures indeed, together with intellect, and filling from 
itself with the rivers of life, such things as are naturally adapted to live, 
but together with being supernally producing essence in all things. But 
being itself which is primarily being generates all things by its very exist- - 

* For tvrovo 15 it is necessary to read tv ropvoi$. 

*■ For auroi* read av 


Digitized by L.00Q Le 



CHAP. II. 


OF PLATO. 


16S 


ence, all lives, and intellects and souls, and is uniformly present to all 
things, and is exempt from the whole of things according to one cause 
which gives subsistence to all things. Hence it is the most similar of all 
things to the one , and unites the comprehension of beings in itself to the 
first principle of the whole of things, through which all beings, and non- 
being, wholes and parts, forms and the privations of forms subsist, which 
privations do not necessarily participate of being, but it is entirely neces¬ 
sary that they should participate of the one. 

These things as it appears to me persuaded the Elean guest in the So- 
phista, when discussing that which is perfectly being, to admit that not 
only being is there, but also life, intellect and soul. For if true and real 
being is venerable and honorable, intellect is there in the first place, says 
he. For it is not lawful for that which is of itself venerable and immate¬ 
rial to be without intellect. But if intellect is in that which is perfectly 
being, intellect will entirely be moved. For it is not possible for intellect 
ever to subsist, either without motion or permanency. But if intellect is 
moved and stands still, there are in being both life and motion. Hence, 
from what has been said, three things become apparent, viz. being, life 
and intellect. Moreover, soul also in the next place is discovered through 
these things. For it is necessary, says he, that life and intellect which 
before were by themselves, should also be in soul. For every soul is a 
plenitude of life and intellect, participating of both, which the Elean 
guest indicating adds, “ Shall we say that both these are inherent in it, 
but yet it does not possess these in soul?” For to possess, as some one 
says in a certain place, is secondary to existing. And soul indeed parti¬ 
cipates of each of these according to the peculiarity of itself; but it 
mingles the rational form of its own hyparxis, with the intellectual vivific 
power. But both intellect and life subsist prior to soul, the former as 
being moved and standing still at one and the same time, and the latter as 
being motion and permanency. These four monads also, soul, intellect, 
life and being are not only mentioned by Plato here, but in many other 
places. And as in soul all things subsist according to participation, so in 
intellect the things which are prior to it subsist, and in life that which is 
prior to life. For we say that life exists, or has a being. Or how could 
it be said to be arranged in being unless it participated of being ? We 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



164 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


likewise say that intellect is and lives. For it is moved, and is a portion 
of being. Hence it is the third of the more comprehensive monads. 
Prior however to beings which are participated, it is every where neces¬ 
sary that imparticipable causes should subsist, as wa3 before demonstrated, 
conformably to the similitude of beings to the one. Being therefore which 
is primarily being, is imparticipable ; but life first participates of being, 
yet is imparticipable, being exempt from intellect. And intellect is filled 
indeed from being and life; but is imparticipable in souls, and in the 
natures posterior to itself. Intellect also presides over soul, imparting to 
it by illumination the participation of life and being; but being imparti¬ 
cipable subsists prior to bodies. The last order of beings therefore is that 
to which bodies are annexed ; celestial bodies indeed primarily, but sub¬ 
lunary bodies with the addition of material [vestments.] This therefore 
is the progression of beings, through life, intellect and soul, ending in a 
corporeal nature. 

If, however, it is necessary that the superessential unities of the Gods 
which derive their subsistence from the imparticipable cause * of all things 
should be participated, some of them indeed, by the first orders in beings, 
others by the middle, and others by the last orders, as was before demon¬ 
strated, it is evident that some of them deify the imparticipable portion 
of being, but that others illuminate life, others intellect, others soul, and 
others bodies. And of the last unities indeed, not only bodies participate, 
but likewise soul, intellect, life and essence. For intellect in itself is a 
plenitude of life and being. But from the unities which are above this 
world intellect is suspended, and the psychical power, which preexists in 
intellect. From the unities above these, imparticipable and intellectual 
intellect is suspended. From those that are beyond these, the first and im¬ 
participable life is suspended. And from the highest unities, the first being 
itself, and which is the most divine of beings, is suspended. Hence Par¬ 
menides beginning from the one being, produces from thence the whole 
orders of the Gods. These things therefore being previously determined by 
us, let us speak concerning the divine dialogues, beginning from on high, 
and producing from the one the whole orders of the Gods. Let us also, 

’ For it is necessary to read amu;. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



CHAP. III. 


OF PLATO. 


166 


following Plato, in the first place demonstrate the several orders from 
other dialogues, by arguments which cannot be confuted. Afterwards, 
let us thus conjoin and assimilate the conclusions of Parmenides ,to the 
divine progressions, adapting the first conclusions to the first, but the last 
to the last progressions. 


CHAPTER III. 


Again therefore, the mystic doctrine concerning the one must be re¬ 
sumed by us, in order that proceeding from the first principle, we may 
celebrate the second and third principles of the whole of things. Of all 
beings therefore, and of the Gods that produce beings, one exempt and 
imparticipable cause preexists,—a cause ineffable indeed by all language, 
and unknown by all knowledge and incomprehensible, unfolding all 
things into light from itself, subsisting ineffably prior to, and converting all 
things to itself, but existing as the best end of all things. This cause 
therefore, which is truly exempt from all causes, and which gives subsist¬ 
ence unically to all the unities of divine natures, and to all the genera of 
beings, and their progressions, Socrates in the Republic calls the good, 
and through its analogy to the sun reveals its admirable and unknown 
transcendency with respect to all intelligibles. But again, Parmenides 
denominates it the one. And through negations demonstrates the exempt 
and ineffable hyparxis of this one which is the cause of the whole of things. 
But the discourse in the epistle to Dionysius proceeding through enigmas, 
celebrates it as that about which all things subsist, and as the cause of all 
beautiful things. In the Philebus however, Socrates celebrates it as that 
which gives subsistence to the whole of things, because it is the cause of 
all deity. For all the Gods derive their existence as Gods from the first 
God. Whether therefore, it be lawful to denominate it the fountain 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



166 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK HI. 


of deity, or the kingdom of beings, or the unity of all unities, or the good¬ 
ness which is generative of truth, or an hyparxis exempt from all these 
tilings, and beyond all causes, both the paternal and the generative, let 
it be honored by us in silence, and prior to silence by union, and of the 
mystic end may it impart hy illumination a portion adapted to our souls. 

But let us survey with intellect the biformed principles proceeding from 
and posterior to it. For what else is it necessary to arrange after the 
union of the whole theory, than the duad of principles? What * the two 
principles therefore are of the divine orders after the first principle, we 
shall in the next place survey. For conformabty to the theology of our 
ancestors, Plato also establishes two .principles after the one. In the Phi- 
lebus therefore, Socrates says, that God gives subsistence to bound and 
infinity, and through these mingling all beings, has produced them, the 
nature of beings, according to Philolaus subsisting from the connexion 
of things bounded, and things infinite. If, therefore, all beings subsist 
from these, it is evident that they themselves have a subsistence prior to 
beings. And if secondary natures participate of these mingled together, 
these will subsist unmingled prior to the whole of things. For the pro¬ 
gression of the divine orders originates, not from things coordinated and 
which exist in others, but from things exempt, and which are established 
in themselves. As therefore the one is prior to things united, and as that 
which is passive to the one, has a second order after the imparticipable 
union, thus also the two principles of beings, prior to the participation of 
and commixture with beings, are themselves by themselves the causes of 
the whole of things. For it is necessary that bound should be prior to 
things bounded, and infinity prior to infinites, according to the similitude 
to the one of things which proceed from it. For again, if we should pro¬ 
duce beings immediately after the one , we shall no where find the pecu¬ 
liarity of the one subsisting purely. For neither is being the same with 
the one , but it participates of the one, nor in reality is that which is the 
first the one ; for, as has been frequently said, it is better than the one. 
Where therefore is that which is most properly and entirely one ? Hence 


- 1 For rjyoj it is necessary to read nvij. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. in. 


OF PLATO. 


167 

there is a certain one prior to being, which gives subsistence to being, 
and is primarily the cause of it; since that which is prior to it is beyond 
union, and is a cause without habitude with respect to all things, and 
imparticipable, being exempt from all things. If however this one is the 
cause of being, and constitutes it, there will be a power in it generative 
of being. For every thing which produces, produces according to its 
own power, which is allotted a subsistence between that which produces 
and the things produced, and is of the one the progression and as it were 
extension, but of the other is the pre-arranged generative cause. For 
being which is produced from these, and which is not the one itself , but 
uniform, possesses its progression indeed from the one , through the power 
which produces and unfolds it into light from the one; but its occult 
union from the hyparxis of the one. This one therefore which subsists 
prior to power, and first presubsists from the imparticipable and unknown 
cause of the whole of things, Socrates in the Philebus calls bound , but he 
denominates the power of it which is generative of being, infinity. But 
he thus speaks in that dialogue, “ God we said has exhibited the bound, 
and also the infinite of beings/' 

The first therefore and unical God, is without any addition denominated 
by him God; because each of the second Gods is participated by being, 
and has being suspended from its nature. But the first indeed, as being 
exempt * from the whole of beings, is God, defined according to the in¬ 
effable itself, the unical alone, and superessential. But the bound and 
the infinite of beings, unfold into light that unknown and imparticipable 
cause; bound indeed, being the cause of stable, uniform, and connective 
deity ; but the infinite being the cause of power proceeding to all things 
and capable of being multiplied, and in short, being the leader of every 
generative distribution. For all union and wholeness, and communion of 
beings, and all the divine measures, are suspended * from the first bound. 
But all division, prolific production, and progression inlo multitude, de¬ 
rive their subsistence from this most principal infinity. Hence, when we 


* For t&nfirfteu it is necessary to read e^pn)T«u. 

* Here also it is necessary for tfaprjrtu to read »£ijpniT*». 


Digitized by v^.ooQle 



168 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


% 


say that each of the divine orders abides ' and at the same time proceeds, 
we must confess that it stably abides indeed, according to bound, but 
proceeds according to infinity, and that at one and the same time it has 
unity and multitude, and we must suspend the former from the principle 
of bound, but the latter from that of infinity. And in short, of all the 
opposition in the divine genera, we must refer that which is the more 
excellent to bound, but that which is subordinate to infinity. For from 
these two principles all things have their progression into being, even as 
far as to the last of things. For eternity itself participates at once of 
bound and infinity ; so far indeed, as it is the intelligible measure, it par¬ 
ticipates of bound ; but so far as it is the cause of a never-failing power 
of existing, it participates of infinity. And intellect, so far indeed as 
it is uniform, and whole, and so far as it is connective of paradigmatical 
measures, so far it is the progeny of bound. But again, so far as it pro¬ 
duces all things eternally, and subsists conformably to the whole of eter¬ 
nity, supplying all things with existence at once, and always possessing its 
own power undiminished, so far it is the progeny of infinity. And soul 
indeed, in consequence of measuring its own life, by restitutions and pe¬ 
riods, and introducing a boundary to its own motions, is referred to the 
cause of bound; but in consequence of having no cessation of motions, 
but making the end of one period the beginning of the whole of a second 
vital circulation, it is referred to the order of infinity. The whole of this 
heaven also, according to the wholeness of itself, its connexion, the order 
of its periods, and the measures of its restitutions, is bounded. But ac¬ 
cording to its prolific powers, its various evolutions, and the never-failing 
revolutions of its orbs, it participates of infinity. Moreover, the whole of 
generation, in consequence of all its forms being bounded, and always 
permanent after the same manner, and in consequence of its own circle 
which imitates the celestial circulation, is similar to bound. But agaiu, 
in consequence of the variety of the particulars of which it consists, their 
unceasing mutation, and the intervention of the more and the less in the 
participations of fonns, it is the image of infinity. And in addition to 
these things, every natural production, according to its form indeed, is 

* funiv is omitted in the original. 


t 



Digitized by LjOOQie 



CHAP. IX. 


OF PLATO. 


169 


similar to bound, but according to its matter, resembles infinity. For 
these are suspended in the last place 1 from the two principles posterior 
to the one, and as far as to these the progression of their productive power 
extends. Each of these also is one, but form is the measure and boun¬ 
dary of matter, and is in a greater degree one. Matter however is all 
things in capacity, so far as it derives its subsistence from the first power. 
There, however, power is generative of all things. But the power of matter 
is imperfect, and is indigent of the hypostasis which is generative* of all 
things according to energy. Very properly therefore is it said by So¬ 
crates that all beings are from bound and infinity, and that these two in¬ 
telligible principles primarily derive their subsistence from God. For 
that which congregates both of them, and perfects them, and unfolds it¬ 
self into light through all beings is the one prior to the duad. And union 
indeed is derived to all things through that which is first ; but the division 
of the two orders of things is generated from these primary causes, and 
through these is extended to the unknown and ineffable principle. Let 
it therefore be manifest through these things, what the two principles of 
beings are, which become proximately apparent from the one , according 
to the theology of Plato. 


CHAPTER IX. 

In the next place let us show what the third 1 thing is which presents 
itself to the view from these principles. It is every where therefore called 
that which is mixed, as deriving its subsistence from bound and infinity. 
But if bound is the bound of beings, and the infinite is the infinite of 
beings, and beings are the things which have a subsistence from both 


1 Tor it is necessary to read wgarcof. 

* The word yfw?nx>)£ is omitted in the original. 

3 rgirov is omitted in the original. 

Proc. Vol. I. Y 


Digitized by CjOOQle 



170 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


these, as Socrates himself clearly teaches us, it is evident that the first of 
things mingled, is the first of beings. This, however, is nothing else than 
that which is highest in beings, which is being itself, and nothing else than 
being. My meaning is, that this is evident through those things by which 
we demonstrate that what is primarily being, is comprehensive of all 
things intelligibly, and of life and intellect. For we say that life is triadic 
vitally, and intellect intellectually ; and also that these three things being 
life and intellect are every where. But all things presubsist primarily 
and essentially in being. For there essence, life and intellect subsist, and 
the summit of beings. Life however is the middle centre of being, which 
is denominated and is intelligible life. But intellect is the boundary of 
being, and is intelligible intellect. For in the intelligible there is intellect, 
and in intellect the intelligible. There however intellect subsists intelli¬ 
gibly, but iu intellect, the intelligible subsists intellectually. 

And essence indeed is that which is stable in being, and which is woven 
together with the first principles, and does not depart from the one. But 
life is that which proceeds from the principles, and is connascent with in¬ 
finite power. And intellect is that which converts itself to the principles, 
conjoins the end with the beginning, and produces one intelligible circle. 
The first of beings therefore is that which is mingled from the first prin¬ 
ciples, and is triple, one thing which it contains subsisting in it essentially, 
another vitally, and another intellectually, but all things presubsisting in 
it essentially. I mean however by the first of beings essence. For 
essence itself is the summit of all beings, and is as it were the monad 
of the whole of things. In all things therefore, essence is the first. And 
in each thing that which is essential is the most ancient, as deriving its 
subsistence from the Vesta of beings. For the intelligible is especially 
this. Since intellect indeed is that which is gnostic, life is intelligence, 
and being is intelligible. If however every being is mingled, but 
essence is being itself, prior to all other things essence is that which sub¬ 
sists as mingled from the two principles proceeding from the one. Hence 
Socrates indicating how the mode of generation in the two principles 
differs from that of the mixture says, “ that God has exhibited bound and 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. IX. 


OF PLATO; 


171 


infinity.” For they are unities deriving their subsistence from the one , and 
as it were luminous patefactions from the imparticipable and first union. 
But with respect to producing a mixture, and mingling .through the first 
principles, by how much to make is subordinate to the unfolding into light % 
and generation to patefaction, by so much is that which is mixed allotted 
a progression from the one , inferior to that of the two principles. 

That which is mixed therefore, is intelligible essence, and subsists pri¬ 
marily from [the first] God, from whom infinity also and bound are de¬ 
rived. But it subsists secondarily from the principles posterior to the 
unical God, I mean from bound and infinity. For the fourth cause which 
is effective of the mixture is again God himself; since if any other cause 
should be admitted besides this, there will no longer be a fourth cause, 
but a fifth will be introduced. For the first cause was God, who unfolds 
into light the two principles. But after him are the two principles bound 
and infinity. And the mixture is the fourth thing. If therefore the 
cause of the mixture is different from the first divine cause, this cause 
will be the fifth and not the fourth thing, as Socrates says it is. Far¬ 
ther still, in addition to these things, if we say that God is especially 
the supplier of union to beings, and the mixture itself of the principles is 
a union into the hypostasis of being, God is also certainly the cause of this 
primarily. Moreover, Socrates in the Republic clearly evinces that the good 
is the cause of being and essence to intelligibles, in the same manner as the 
sun is to visible natures. Is it not therefore necessary, if that which is mix¬ 
ed is primarily being, to refer it to the first God, and to say that it receives 
its progression from him ? If also the demiurgus in the Timaeus, consti¬ 
tutes the essence of the soul itself by itself from an impartible and a par¬ 
tible essence, which is the same thing as to constitute it from bound and 
infinity ; for the soul according to bound is similar to the impartible, but 
according to infinity, to the partible essence;—-if therefore the demiurgus 
mingles the essence of the soul from these, and again separately, from 
same and different, and if from these being now preexistent, he constitutes 
the whole soul, must we not much more say that the first God is the 
cause of the first essence ? That which is mixed therefore, proceeds, as 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



172 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK HI. 


we have said, frora the first God, and does not subsist from the principles 
alone posterior to the one, but proceeds also from these, and is triadic. 
And in the first place indeed, it participates from God of ineffable union, 
and the whole of its subsistence. But from bound, it receives hyparxis, 
and the uniform, and a stable peculiarity. And from infinity, it receives 
power, and the occult power which is in itself, of all things. For in short, 
since it is one and not one, the one is inherent in it according to bound, 
but the .non-one according to infinity. The mixture however of both 
these, and its wholeness, are derived from the first God. That which is 
mixed therefore, is a monad, because it participates of the onej and it is 
biformed, so far as it proceeds from the two principles ; but it is a triad, 
so far as in every mixture, these three things are necessary according to 
Socrates, viz. beauty, truth, and symmetry. Concerning these things 
however, we shall speak again. 

In what manner, however, essence is that which is first mixed, we shall 
now explain. For this is of all things the most difficult to discover, viz* 
what that is which is primarily being, as the Elean guest also somewhere 
says; for it is njost dubious how being is not less than non-being. In 
what manner therefore essence subsists from bound and infinity must be 
shown. For if bound and infinity are superessential, essence may appear 
to have its subsistence from non-essences. How therefore can non-ts- 
sences produce essence ? Or is not this the case in all other things which 
subsist through the mixture of each other ? For that which is produced 
from things mingled together, is not the same with things that are not min¬ 
gled. For neither is soul the same with the genera, from which, beingmingled 
together, the father generated it, nor is a happy life the same with the life 
which is according to intellect, or with the life which is according to plea¬ 
sure, nor is the one in bodies the same with its elements. Hence it is not 
wonderful, if that which is primarily being, though it is neither bound nor 
infinity, subsists from both these, and is mixed, superessential natures them¬ 
selves not being assumed in the mixture of it, but secondary progressions, 
from them coalescing into the subsistence of essence. Thus therefore 
being consists of these, as participating of both, possessing indeed the 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. IX. 


OF PLATO. 


173 


uniform from bound* but the generative, and in short, occult multitude 
from infinity. For it is all things occultly, and on this account, is the 
cause of all beings; which also the Elean guest indicating to us, calls 
being the first power, as subsisting according to the participation of the 
first power, and participating of hyparxis from bound, and of power 
from infinity. Afterwards however, the Elean guest defines being to be 
power, as prolific and generative of all things, and as being all things uni¬ 
formly. For power is every where the cause of prolific progressions, and 
of all multitude; occult power indeed being the cause of occult multi¬ 
tude j but the power which exists in energy, and which unfolds itself into 
light, being the cause of all-perfect multitude. Through this cause there¬ 
fore, I think, that every being, and every essence has connascent powers. 
For it participates of infinity, and derives its hyparxis indeed from bound, 
but its power from infinity. And being is nothing else than a monad of 
many powers, and a multiplied hyparxis, and on this account being is 
one many. The many however subsist occultly and without separation 
in the first natures; but with separation in secondary natures. For by 
how much being is nearer to the one, by so much the more does it conceal 
multitude, and is defined according to union alone. It appears to me 
also that Plotinus and his followers,. frequently indicating these things, 
produce being from form and intelligible matter, arranging form' as ana¬ 
logous to the one, and to hyparxis, but power as analogous to matter^ 
And if indeed they say this, they speak rightly. But if they ascribe a 
certain formless and indefinite nature to an intelligible essence, they ap¬ 
pear to me to wander from the conceptions of Plato on this subject. For 
the infinite is not the matter of bound, but the power of it, nor is bound 
the form of the infinite, but the hyparxis of it. But being consists of 
both these, as not only standing in the one, but receiving a multitude of 
unities and powers which are mingled into one essence. 


* For xXrfios in the original it it necessary to read 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



174 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III 


CHAPTER X. 

That therefore which is primarily being is through these things deno¬ 
minated by Plato that which is mixed. And through the similitude of 
it, generation also is mingled from bound and infinity. And the in¬ 
finite indeed in this is imperfect power; but the bound in it is form and 
the morphe of this power, dn this account we establish this power to be 
matter, not possessing existence in energy, and requiring to be bounded 
by something else. We no longer however say that it is lawful to call the 
power of being matter, since it is generative of energies, produces all 
beings from itself, and is prolific of the perfect powers in beings. For the 
power of matter being imperfect dissimilarly imitates the power of being; 
and becoming multitude in capacity, it expresses the parturition of mul¬ 
titude in the power of being.' Moreover, the form of matter imitates 
ultimately bound, since it gives limits to matter, and terminates its infi¬ 
nity. But it is multiplied and divided about it. It is also mingled with 
the privation of matter, and represents the supreme union of the hyparxis 
of being, by its essence always advancing to existence, and always tending 
to decay. For those things which subsist in the first natures according to 
transcendency, are in such as are last according to deficiency. For that 
also which is primarily being is mixed, is exempt from the bound of in¬ 
finite life, and is the cause of it. But that which consists of the last * of 
forms and the first matter, is in its own nature void of life; since it pos¬ 
sesses life in capacity. For there indeed generative causes subsist prior 
to their progeny, and things perfect prior to such as are imperfect. But 
here things in capacity are prior to such as are in energy, and concauses 

1 The punctuation in the latter part of this sentence in the original is erroneous : for instead of 
xou rr)v ev sxsivrjrou tAijOou* coSivot tiwcc/A «i yivo/4 evrj, to x\vjto$ etireixaa’aTO, it should be xai ttjv ev sxttvrj 
too ir\r)iou$ cofova Buvx/x,ei yevoj&syi) to irAij fio$, aveixetrct to. 

* For Tgwrou here, it is necessary to read co^oerov. For in this place, Produs is speaking of body. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. X. 


OF PLATO. 


175 


are subject to the things which are produced from them. This however, 
I think, happens naturally, because the gifts of thefirst principles pervade 
as far as to the last of things, and not only generate more perfect natures, 
but also such as have a more imperfect subsistence. And on this account 
that which is mixed is the cause of generation, and of the nature which is 
mingled here. The bound and infinity however, which are prior to being, 
are not only the causes of this nature, but also of the elements of it, of 
which that which is mixed is not the cause, so far as it is mixed. For 
bound and infinity are twofold. And one kind of these is exempt from 
the things mingled, but another kind is assumed to the completion of the 
mixture. For I think it is every where necessary that prior to 
things that are mingled, there should be such as are unmingled, prior to 
things imperfect, such as are perfect, prior to parts, wholes, and prior to 
things that are in others, such as are in themselves; and this Socrates 
persuades us to admit not in one thing only, but also in beauty and sym¬ 
metry, and in all forms. If therefore the second and third genera of being 
and forms subsist prior to their participants, how can we assert that 
bound and infinity which pervade through all beings have their first sub¬ 
sistence as things mingled ? It must be admitted therefore, that they are 
unmingled and separate from being, and that being is derived from them, 
and at the same time consists of them. It is derived from them indeed, 
because they have a prior subsistence; but it consists of them, because 
they subsist in being according to a second progression. 

The genera of being also are twofold ; some of them indeed being fa- 
bricative of beings, but others existing as the elements of the nature of 
each being. For some of them indeed presubsist themselves by themselves, 
jas possessing a productive power ; but others being generated from these* 
constitute each particular being. Let no one therefore any longer won¬ 
der, how Socrates indeed in the Philebus establishes that which is min¬ 
gled, prior to bound and infinity, but we on the contrary evince that bound 
and infinity are exempt from that which is mixed. For each is twofold, 
and the one indeed is prior to being, but the other is in being ; and the 
one is generative, but the other is the element of the mixture. Of this 
kind also, are the bound and infinity of the mixed life, each being the 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



176 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


element of the whole of felicity. Hence also each is indigent of each. 
And neither is intellect by itself desirable, nor perfect pleasure. It is 
necessary however, that the good should consist of all these, viz. of the 
desirable, the sufficient, and the perfect. Bound itself therefore and in¬ 
finity, which are separate, subsist according to cause prior to that which is 
mixed. But the bound and infinity which are mixed are more imperfect 
than the mixture. Hence, from what has been said, it is evident what the 
things are of which the mixture consists. 


CHAPTER XI. 

In the next place, we must speak of the triad, which is consubsistent 
with this mixture. For> every mixture, if it is rightly made, as Socrates 
says, requires these three things, beauty, truth, and symmetry. For nei¬ 
ther will any thing base, if it is introduced into the mixture, impart recti¬ 
tude, since it will be the cause of error, and qf inordinate prerogative, nor 
if truth is at any time separated, will it suffer the mixture to consist of 
things that are pure, and which are in reality subdued, but it will fill the 
whole with an image and with non-being. Nor without symmetry will 
there be a communion of the elements, and an elegant association. Sym¬ 
metry, therefore, is necessary to the union of the things that are mingled, 
and to an appropriate communion. But truth is necessary to purity. 
And beauty to order; which also renders the whole lovely. For when 
each thing in the mixture has a place adapted to itself, it renders both 
the elements, and the arrangement resulting from them, beautiful. Here 
therefore, in the first mixture, these three things are apparent, symmetry, 
truth, and beauty. And symmetry indeed is the cause to the mixture, 
that being is one ; truth is the cause of the reality of its existence; and 
beauty is the cause of its being intelligible. Hence it is intelligible and 
truly being. That also which is primarily being is more uniform, and in- 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 


CHAP. XII. 


OF PLATO. 


177 


tellect is conjoined to it, according to its familiarity with the beautiful. 
But each participates of existence, because it is being derived from 
being. That which is mixed however, is supreme among beings, because 
it is united to the good. And it appears to me, that the divine Iamblichus 
perceiving these three causes of being, defines the intelligible in these 
three, viz. in symmetry, truth, and beauty, and unfolds the intelligible 
Gods through these in the Platonic theology. In what manner indeed, 
the intelligible breadth consists of these, will be most evident as we pro¬ 
ceed. Now however, from what has been said, it is perfectly manifest 
why Socrates says that this triad is found to be in the vestibules of the 
good. For that which is primarily being participates of this triad through 
its union with the good. For because indeed the good is the measure of 
all beings, the first being becomes itself commensurate. Because the 
former is prior to being, the latter subsists truly and really. And because 
the former is good and desirable, the latter presents itself to the view as 
the beautiful itself. Here therefore, the first beauty also subsists; and on 
this account the one is not only the cause of good, but likewise of beauty, 
as Plato says in his Epistles. Beauty however subsists here occultly, 
since this order comprehends all things uniformly, in consequence of sub¬ 
sisting primarily from the principles [bound and infinity]. But where 
and how beauty is unfolded into light, we shall shortly explain. 


CHAPTER XII. 

Such therefore, is the first triad of intelligibles, according to Socrates 
in the Philebus, viz. bound, infinite, and that which is mixed from these. 
And of these, bound indeed is a God proceeding to the intelligible sum¬ 
mit, from the imparticipable and first God, measuring and defining all 
things, and giving subsistence to every paternal, connective, and undefiled 
Proc. VoiaI. Z 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



178 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


genus of Gods. But infinite is the never-failing power of this God, un¬ 
folding into light all the generative orders, and all infinity, both that which 
is prior to essence, and that which is essential, and also that which pro¬ 
ceeds as far as to the last matter. And that which is mixed, is the first 
and highest order of the Gods, comprehending all things occultly, deriving 
its completion indeed through the intelligible connective triad, but uni- 
cally comprehending the cause of every being, and establishing its summit 
in the first intelligibles, exempt from the whole of things. 


CHAPTER XIII. 

After this first triad subsisting from, and conjoined with the one , we 
shall celebrate the second, proceeding from this, and deriving its comple¬ 
tion through things analogous * to the triad prior to it. For in this also 
it is necessary that being should participate, and that the one should be 
participated, and likewise that this one'which is secoudarily one, should 
be generative of that which is secondarily being. For every where parti¬ 
cipated deity constitutes about itself that which participates it. Thus 
whole souls render bodies consubsistent with their causes: and partial 
souls generate, in conjunction with the Gods, irrational souls. Much 
more therefore, do the Gods produce in conjunction with the one all things. 
Hence, as the first of the unities generates the summit of being, so like¬ 
wise the middle unity constitutes the middle being. But every thing 
which generates, and every thing which makes or produces, possesses a 
power prolific of the things produced, according to which it produces, 
corroborates and connects its progeny. Again therefore, there will be a 
second triad unfolded into light analogously to the first. And one thing 
indeed, is the summit of it, which we call one, deity, and hyparxis. But 

* For aAoycov it is necessary to read etvaXoymv. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XIII. 


OF PLATO. 


179 


another thing is the middle of it, which we call power. And another 
thing is the extremity of it, which we say is that which is secondarily 
being. This however is intelligible life. For all things are in the intelli- 
gible, as was before demonstrated, viz. to be, to live, and to energize intel¬ 
lectually. And the summit indeed, of the intelligible order, is all things 
according to cause, and as we have frequently said, occultly. But the 
middle of it, causes multitude to shine forth, and proceeds from the union 
of being into manifest light. And the extremity of it, is now all intelli¬ 
gible multitude, and the order of intelligible forms. For forms have their 
subsistence at the extremity of the intelligible order. For it is necessary 
that forms should subsist first and become apparent in intellect. If there¬ 
fore being abides exemptly in the first mixture, but now proceeds, and is 
generated dyadically from the monad, there will be motion about it; and 
if there is motion, it is also necessary that there should be intelligible life. 
For every where motion is a certain life, since some one calls even the 
motion of material bodies life. That which is first therefore, in this second 
triad, may be called bound ; that which is second in it, infinity; and that 
which is the third, life. For the second triad also is a God, possessing pro¬ 
lific power, and unfolding into light from, and about itself, that which is 
secondarily being. Here however also, the triad is analogous to the first 
triad. 

But again, it is necessary to comprehend by reasoning the peculiarity 
of this triad. For the first triad being all things, but intelligibly and uni- 
cally, and as I may say, speaking Platonically, according to the form of 
bound, the second triad is indeed all things, but vitally, and as I may 
say, following the philosopher, according to the form of infinity, just as 
the third triad proceeds according to the peculiarity of that which is 
mixed. For as in the progression according to breadth, that which is 
mixed presents itself to the view as the third, so likewise in the progres¬ 
sion according to depth of intelligibles, the third has the order of that 
which is mixed with reference to the superior triads. The middle triad 
therefore, is indeed all things, but is characterized by intelligible infinity. 
For the three principles after the first, orderly distribute for us the intelli¬ 
gible genus of the Gods. For bound indeed, unfolds into light the first 
triad; but infinity the second; and that which is mixed, the third. It is 


Digitized b' L.OOQ Le 



180 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK ill. 


infinite power therefore, according to which the second triad is characte¬ 
rized. For being the middle, it subsists according to the middle of the 
first triad, being all things from all. For in each triad, there is bound, 
infinity, and that which is mixed. But the peculiarity of the monads 
being respectively different, evolves the intelligible order of the Gods. 
The middle triad however, thus subsisting, but I say thus, because it con¬ 
sists of all the things of which the triad prior to it consists, yet it contains 
and connects the middle of intelligibles according to infinite power, and 
is filled indeed from a more elevated union, but fills the union posterior to 
itself with the powers of being. And it is measured indeed, from thence 
uniformly, but measures the third triad by the power of itself. And it 
abides indeed, in the first triad stably, but it establishes in itself the triad 
which is next in order. And in short, it binds to itself the intelligible 
centre, and establishes one intelligible coherence; causing indeed that 
which is occult and possesses the form of the one in the first triad, to shine 
forth; but collecting the intelligible multitude of the third triad, and 
comprehending it on all sides. The being however, which gives comple¬ 
tion to this triad is mixed, in the same manner as the being of the triad 
prior to it, and receives the peculiarity of life. For the infinity in this 
generates life. 

It is likewise necessary that this triad should participate of the three 
things, symmetry, truth, and beauty. That which is primarily being 
however, principally subsists according to symmetry, which unites it, and 
conjoins it to the good. But the second triad, principally subsists accord¬ 
ing to truth. For because it participates of that which is primarily being, 
it is being, and truly being. And the third triad principally subsists 
according to the beautiful. For there intelligible multitude, order and 
beauty, first shine forth to the view. Hence this being is the most beau¬ 
tiful of all intelligibles. This however will be discussed hereafter. As 
there is a triad therefore, in each of the mixtures, the first indeed, sym¬ 
metry especially comprehends and connects; the second truth, and the 
third beauty. And this induced the divine Iamblichus to say, that Plato' 
in these three defines the whole of the intelligible ([order]. For all are 
in each, but one of these predominates more in one of the intelligible 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


181 


monads than in another. Moreover, the third triad presents itself to the 
view after this. For it is necessary that the extremity of being should 
also be deified, and should participate of an intelligible unity. For beings 
are not more in number than the unities, as Parmenides says,nor are the 
unities more numerous than beings; but each progression of being par* 
ticipates of the one; since this universe also, according to each part of 
itself, is governed by soul and intellect By a much greater priority 
therefore, must the intelligible in its first, middle, and last hypostases, 
participate of the intelligible Gods. 

♦ 


CHAPTER XIV- 


As the first unity therefore, after the exempt cause of all things,unfolds 
into light intelligible being, and the second unity, intelligible life, thus also 
the third constitutes about itself, intelligible intellect, and fills it with divine 
union, constituting poweras the medium between itself and being, through 
which it gives completion to this being, and converts it to itself. In this 
therefore, every intelligible multitude shines forth to the view. For the 
whole of this being is intelligible intellect, life, and essence. And it is 
neither all things according to cause, in the same manner as that which is 
primarily being, nor does it cause all things to shine forth, as the second 
being does, but it is as it were all things according to energy, and openly. 
Hence also, it is the boundary of all intelligibles. For since the progres¬ 
sion of beings is accomplished according to similitude, the first being is 
most similar to the one ; the second, is parturient with multitude, and is 
the origin of. separation; but the third, is now all-perfect, and unfolds 
into light in itself, intelligible multitude and form. 

Farther still, as the first triad abides occultly in bound, and fixes in 
itself every thing that is stable in intelligibles; but the second abides 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



182 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


and at the same time proceeds ; so the third, after progression converts 
the intelligible end to the beginning, and convolves the order to itself. 
For it is every where the province of intellect to convert and converge to 
the intelligible. All these likewise are uniform [i. e. have the form of one] 
and intelligible, viz. the abiding, the proceeding, and the returning. For 
each of these is not asserted after the same manner in intelligibles. And 
the' intelligible genus of Gods ' is unical, simple, and occult, conjoining- 
itself to the one itself which is prior to beings ; and unfolds 1 into light 
nothing else than the transcendency of the one. For these three triads, 
mystically announce that unknown cause the first and perfectly imparti- 
cipable God. The first of them indeed, announcing his ineffable union ; 
the second his transcendency, by which he surpasses all powers; and 
the third, his all-perfect generation of beings. For as they are able to 
comprehend the principle which surpasses both the union and the 
powers of all beings, so they exhibit to secondary natures, his 1 admirable 
transcendency; receiving indeed separately the unical power and domi¬ 
nion of the first God; but unfolding into light intelligibly the cause which 
is prior to intelligibles. For these Gods though they are allotted a sim¬ 
plicity which is equally exempt from all the divine orders, yet they fall 
short of the union of the father. Of this triad therefore, which, converts 
all intelligibles to the first principle, and convolves the multitude apparent 
in itself to the stable union of the whole of things, one thing is bound, 
and unity and hyparxis; another, is infinity and power; and another is 
that which is mixed, essence, life, and intelligible intellect. But the whole 
triad subsists according to being, and is the intellect of the first triad. 
For the first triad is an intelligible God primarily. But the triad posterior 
to it is an intelligible and intellectual God. And the third triad is an in¬ 
tellectual God. These three deities also, and triadic monads, give com¬ 
pletion to the intelligible genera. For they are monads‘according to their 
deities; since all other things are suspended from the Gods, and also 

* The words rm ptra in the original immediately before rc vo>jtov 0«ov yno(, are to be rejected 
as superfluous. 

* txpetmi is omitted in the original. 

* For uutms, it is necessary to read ixiiwij. 


Digitized by v^.ooQle 


CHAP. XlV. 


OP PLATO. 


183 


powers and beings. But they are triads according to a separate division. 
For bound, infinity, and that which is mixed, have a threefold subsist- 
ence; but in one place indeed, all things are according to bound; in 
another, all things are according to infinity ; and in another, all things 
are according to that which is mixed. And in one place, that which is 
mixed is essence; in another, it is intelligible life; and in another, intel¬ 
ligible intellect. In this last therefore, forms subsist primarily. For the 
separation of intelligible^, unfolds the order of forms; because form is 
being, but is not simply being. Hence that which is primarily being, is 
being itself, and is that which is being. But that which is the second 
being, is power, proceeding indeed from the first being, and existing as it 
were a duad generative of the multitude of beings, but not yet being 
multitude. And that which, is the third being, is itself the multitude of 
beings; being there existing with separation. For being is the exempt 
cause of those things which forms constitute divisibly. And of the things 
of which being is productive collectively, of these, forms are the cause in a 
way attended with separation. Because forms indeed, are causes produc¬ 
tive of separation in their effects, and also because forms are called the 
paradigms of beings. Being however, is the cause of all things posterior 
to itself, but is not the paradigm of them. For paradigms are the causes of 
things which are separated according to existence, and which have diffe¬ 
rent characters of essence. After the one therefore which is prior to 
beings, that which is one-many occultly, and the united subsists. On this 
account, it is that which is divided into multitude, and which tends from 
the uniform to the splendid. But the last of intelligibles, is that from 
which a certain distribution into parts originates, and which is compre¬ 
hensive of intelligible multitude. 


T 





Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



184 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK 1U. 


CHAPTER XV. 

* 

Socrates therefore, in the Philebus, affords us such like auxiliaries to 
the theory of the intelligible triads. It is requisite however, not only 
to abide in these conceptions, but also to demonstrate the theology of 
Plato about these triads from other dialogues, and from them to point out 
one truth adapted to the things themselves. We shall assume therefore, 
what is written in the Timaeus, and shall follow our leader [Syrianus^ who 
has unfolded to us the arcane mysteries of these triads, and conjoin with 
the end of what has been said the beginning of the following discussion. 
Inthe Timeeus therefore, Plato investigating what the paradigm of the 
whole world is, discovers that it is comprehensive of all intelligible ani¬ 
mals, that it is all-perfect, that it is the most beautiful of intelligibles, 
that it is only-begotten, and that it is the intelligible of the demiurgus. He 
likewise denominates it animal itself, as being the intelligible paradigm of 
every animal, and of that which is the object of sense. Hence it is ne¬ 
cessary that this animal itself, because it is all-perfect, and the most beau¬ 
tiful of intelligibles, should be established in the intelligible orders. For 
though there is intelligible animal in the demiurgus, yet it is rather intel¬ 
lectual than intelligible, and is not the most beautiful of all intelligibles, 
but is second to them in beauty and power. For primary beauty is in 
the intelligible Gods. In the demiurgus also, there are not only four 
forms of the things contained in the world, but there is all the multitude 
of forms. For in him the paradigms of individual forms presubsist. But 
animal itself is totally constitutive of all animals by the intelligible tetrad. 
The demiurgus likewise is not like animal itself only-begotten among be¬ 
ings, but subsists in conjunction with the vivific cause, together with which 
he constitutes the second genera of being, mingling them in the crater or 
bowl, in order to the generation of souls. For of the things of which in¬ 
telligible animal is effective and at the same time generative, of these the 
demiurgus is allotted the cause in a divided manner, in conjunction with 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XV. OF PLATO. * I85 

¥ 

the crater. Hence* as 1 have said, animal itself is exempt from the de» 
miurgus, and is, as Timaeus every where denominates it, intelligible. 

Nevertheless, because forms are first separated in it, and because it is 
all-perfect, it subsists in the third order of intelligibles. For neither that 
which is primarily, nor that whie&ie; secondarily'being,* is all-perfect. 
For the former is beyond all separation; but the latter generates indeed, 
and is parturient with intelligibles, but is not yet the multitude of beings. 

If therefore neither of these is multitude, how can either of them be all¬ 
perfect multitude ? If however all-perfect multitude shines forth in the 
third triad of intelligibles, as was a little befiwe densonstvated, but animal 
itself is the first paradigm (for it is comprehensive of aft intelligible ani¬ 
mals, is an only-begotten paradigm, and is not conjoined with any othet 
principle) it is necessary that animal itself should be established accord¬ 
ing to this order. For either there will not be an intelligible paradigm, 11 
(and in this case, how will sensibles be images of intelligibles ? or how 
will the intelligible Gods be the fathers of the whole of things f) or if 
there is, it is the third in intelligibles. For the natures which are priof 
to the triad in intelligibles* are not all-perfect; since they are exempt 
from the division into multitude. But the natures posterior to it are not 
only-begotten. For they proceed together with others; the male indeed, 
with the female, and those that are of a demiurgic together with those 
that are of a generative characteristic. Nor are they the most beautiful 
of intelligibles ; for beauty is in the intelligible. But animal itself is all¬ 
perfect, and at the same time only begotten. The first paradigm of beings 
therefore, is arranged in the third triad of intelligibles. Moreover, animal 
itself is eternal, as Timaeus himself says. For says he, “ the nature of 
animal is eternal." And again, in another place he asserts, “ that the 
paradigm is through all eternity being." If therefore it is eternal, it par¬ 
ticipates of eternity. And if that which participates is every where 
secondary to that which is participated, animal itself is secondary to eter¬ 
nity. And if it is through all eternity being, it is filled with the whole 
power of eternity. If this however be the case, it subsists proximately 

* viz. Intelligible life, or life itself, or the first life. 

Proc. Vol. I. 2 A 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



186 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


after eternity. For that which enjoys the whole of causes, is arranged 
proximately after them. 


CHAPTER XVI. 

Moreover, if eternity has the same ratio to intelligible animal, which 
time has to that which is sensible, but the universe proximately partici¬ 
pates of time (for time was generated together with the universe) it is 
certainly necessary that animal itself should primarily participate of 
eternity. Eternity therefore is beyond the first paradigm. For eternity 
indeed measures the existence of animal itself: but animal itself is mea¬ 
sured and filled with perpetuity from it. To which may be added, that 
we assert eternity to be the cause of immortality to all things. Hence 
eternity is that which is primarily immortal. For as that which is pri¬ 
marily, being is the cause of existence to all things, but that which is 
effective of form is itself prior to other forms, so that which is the cause 
of perpetuity and immortality, is itself primarily immortal. The daemo- 
niacal Aristotle also rightly calls eternity immortal and divine, and that 
from whence the existence and life of all things are suspended. If how¬ 
ever it is that which is primarily immortal, and not according to partici¬ 
pation, but is as it were immortality and perpetuity, it will be life, pos¬ 
sessing from itself the ever, and exuberantly scattering the power of per¬ 
petuity, and extending it to other things, so far as each is naturally adapt¬ 
ed to receive it. For the immortal is in life, and subsists together with 
Jife. Hence Socrates in the Phaedo,' after many and beautiful demon¬ 
strations of the psychical immortality, says, “ God therefore, my dear 
Cebes, and the form itself of life, are much more immortal." Hence, in¬ 
telligible life, and the God who is connective of this life, primarily pos¬ 
sess the immortal, and are the fountain of the whole of perpetuity. But 

* For $*<8 fa it is necessary to read 


Digitized by v^ooQle 


CHAP, xyi. :OF.PM,TO. 137 

this is eternity. Eternity therefore has its subsistence in life, and will 
be established in the middle of the intelligible order. 

Farther still, it is necessary to assert that intelligible eternity is one of 
these three things, viz. that it subsists either according to being, or ac¬ 
cording to life, or according to intelligible intellect. But being, as the 
Elean guest says, according to its own nature, neither stands still, nor is 
moved. For if being is being to all thihgs, and essence is 'a thing of 
this kind, much more most this be the case; with intelligible essence and 
that which is primarily being. For they, are nothing else than essence 
only. But being unfolds motion and permanency, and the other genera 
of beings, in the second and third, progressions: of itself . The first being 
therefore, as we have said, is at one and the same time exempt from 
motion and permanency. But eternity according to Timseus abides in 
one. Hence also tame imitates in its motion the intelligible permanency 
of eternity j Eferlnity therefore does not subsist according, to that 
which is primarily being, nor yet according to intelligible intellect.’ For 
neither is soul time, which is moyed through the whole of time. And in 
short, in divine beings, that which is participated is every where esta¬ 
blished above that which participates. But the eternal participates of 
eternity, just as that which is temporal participates of time. Eternity 
therefore is prior to intelligible intellect, and posterior to being; so that 
it is established in the middle of the intelligible breadth. And as ani¬ 
mal itself is eternal, so likewise eternity is that which is always being. 
For as animal itself participates of eternity, so eternity participates of 
being, and is the cause of existence, of perpetual life, and intellection^ 
and measures the essences, powers and energies of all things. ,, 


* It is here necessary to supply «XX' x«t« tov vm r/#» voyroy, 

■ ’ ■ ■ ' i 

t 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



188 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK HI. 


CHAPTER XVII. 

Since, however, eternity subsists according to the middle centre of in* 
belligibles, and animal itself according to the extremity of tliecn, and the 
most splendid of that which is intelligible, what is that which is the first 
of iateliigibies, and how is it denominated by Timaeus? He says there- 
fore Of eternity, that while it abides in one, time proceeds according to 
number; and that by motion it adumbrates the permanency of eternity, 
but by number, its stable union. What therefore is that one, in which 
Timaeus says ■eternity abides ? For it is necessary either to say that it is 
tbe one of eternity, or the o^e which transcends all intelligibles, or the 
one of the first triad. But if radioed, we say that it is the imparticipahle 
one, how is it possible that any thing can abide in that which is exempt 
item all things ; and which neither admits the habitude nor communion 
Of secondary natures with itself? For every thing which abides in any 
thing, is in a certain respect on all sides comprehended by that in which 
we say it abides. It is however perfectly impossible that the first one 
should cither comprehend any being, or be coarranged with beings. But 
if any ooe should suppose that it is the one of eternity, in which Timaeus 
cays-eternity abides, in this case, eternity will be in itself. It is necessary 
•however, that it should abide in itself, by having its subsistence in abiding 
in that which is prior to itself. For to abide in that wliich is prior to, is 
better than the establishment of things in themselves, in the same manner 
as it is more perfect than the collocation of better in less excellent natures. 
If therefore eternity abides m itself, to what shall we primarily assign 
permanency in that which is prior to itself? For it is necessary that this 
being more divine, should have its generation prior to that which is infe¬ 
rior to it. If therefore eternity can neither abide in itself, nor in the one 
which is prior to beings, it is evident that abiding in one according to 
Timaeus, it is established in the one of the first triad , or rather in the whole 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


m 

of that triad. For, as we have before observed, the first triad is the cause 
of stability to all beings, in the same manner as the middle triad is the 
cause of their progression, and the third triad of their conversion to their 
principle. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

Again therefore, three orders of intelligibles present themselves to our 
view, according to the doctrine of Timseus, via. animal itself, eternity, 
and 'the one. And through this one, and the firm establishment in it, 
eternity has fixed the intelligible kingdom. But through eternity* animal 
itself defines the boundary of the intelligible Gods, according to a pet* 
petual and invariable sameness. And animal itself indeed, having pro* 
ceeded tetradically, is suspended from the duad in eternity. For eternity 
is the ever in conjunction with being. But the duad in eternity participates 
of the intelligible monad, which Timeeus on this account denominates 
one, as being the monad and principle of all the intelligible breadth. Since 
otherwise indeed, he very properly calls the first triad one, in consequence 
of its being especially characterized according to bound, denominating 
it from bound. But he calls the middle triad dyadically, eternity, con¬ 
necting the names ; because this triad is defined according to intelligible 
{>ower. And lie denominates the third triad animal itself, transferring'the 
appellation to the whole of it, from the extremity of the triad. The first 
triad therefore is the union of all the intelligibles, being in a certain respect 
coordinated with them. For the union is different from this which is ex¬ 
empt from intelligibles and imparticipable. It is also the supplier of 
stable power. For all things are established on account of it. But eter¬ 
nity is primary being, and is that which is primarily established. Hence, 
with respect to the permanency of the whole of things, we say that the 


Digitized by 


Google 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Ill* 


190 

first triad is that on account of which this permanency is effected ; but that 
the second triad is that by which it is produced. For the firm establish-* 
meat of beings is indeed according to this second triad, but is on account 
of the first. But the second triad is the proximate measure of all beings; . 
and is coordinated with the things that are measured. There are also 
at one and the same time in it, bound and infinity; bound indeed, so far 
as it measures intelligibles; but infinity, so far as it is the cause of perpe¬ 
tuity, and the ever. For according to the oracle, eternity is the cause of 
never-failing life, of unwearied power, and unsluggish energy. Neverthe¬ 
less, eternity is more characterised by infinity [than by bound.] For it com¬ 
prehends in itself infinite time. And time indeed has bound and infinity 
in a divided manner. For according to its continuity, it is infinite; but 
according to the now it is bounded. For the now is a bound. But eter¬ 
nity establishes bound and infinity in the same. For it is a unity and 
power. And according to the one indeed, it is bound; but according to 
power infinite; which time 1 also demonstrates as from images ; because 
the.middle triad [of intelligibles] has bound, infinity, and that which is 
mixed. For whence is the bound of time derived except from eternal 
bound? For the temporal bound also is impartible, in the same manner 
as the bound of eternity is one. For the impartible is the image of the one i 
Whence likewise is the infinity of the continuity of time derived except 
from the power of the infinite? For the latter is a stable infinity, but the 
former an infinity which is moved. And as the latter stands still accord¬ 
ing to the one , so the fbrmer is moved according to number. Since 
whence is the alliance of time with lives, except from the first principle 
[of life, eternity ?] But time proceeds through all temporal life. 

Again, therefore, from these things it is evident, that eternity subsists 
according to the middle of the intelligible Gods. For here there is infi* 
nite life, and the cause of all life, intellectual, psychical, and that which 
subsists partibly in bodies. But eternity is the father and supplier of in¬ 
finite life; since eternity is also the cause of all immortality and perpe¬ 
tuity. And Plotinus, exhibiting, in a most divinely inspired manner, the 

* • xf oye s i® omitted in the original. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


191 


peculiarity 1 of eternity, according to the theology of Plato, defines it to 
be infinite life, at once unfolding into light the whole of itself, and its own 
being. For establishing its life in the intelligible centre, and through the 
one indeed measuring its being, and fixing it in that which is prior to itself, 
but through power causing it to be infinite, it unfolds indeed the uniform 
transcendency of the first triad, but defines the termination of the Gods, 
and extends from the middle on all sides, and to all the intelligible 
breadth. Moreover the third triad is filled indeed with intelligible life,* and 
on this account is an intelligible animal, and the first animal. For it pri¬ 
marily participates of the whole nature of this life; but unfolds into light 
in itself the first of forms, to which also the demiurgic intellect extending 
itself, constitutes the whole world, and is itself the intelligible universe* 
and the apparent world the sensible universe. Hence also, Plato denomi¬ 
nates animal itself all-perfect. Or rather, if you are willing we will speak 
thus : that in this third triad, there are bound, infinity, and that which is 
mired, which we have called intelligible intellect.' Hence the whole triad 
is denominated only-begotten from the father which is in it. For the 
cause of bound imparts that which is uncoordinated with other things* 
and an exempt transcendency. For that which comprehends, says Ti- 
nueus, all such animals as are intelligible, will not be the second with 
an}' other; since again, it would be requisite that there should be ano¬ 
ther animal about it. Hence that which comprehends in one all intelli¬ 
gible animals is a whole. But every where whole is referred 1 to bound* 
and parts to infinity. So that if on this account animal itself is only-be¬ 
gotten, it will possess this peculiarity according to bound. But again, it 
is denominated eternal according to the power of it. For this power 
especially pertains to that which is eternal. For eternity is infinite 
power abiding in one, and proceeding stably. Animal itself, however, is 
all-perfect according to intellect. For that which unfolds in itself all the 
intelligible separation of being, is intelligible intellect. And that intel* 

4 

1 Instead of is is necessary to read ihorvpa* 

* w is omitted ia the original* 

* Instead of row TfpaTo^ and vpo rr}$ a*upiu$ } it is necessary to read 7rpo$ tow Tcfoer©^ anck 

Vgo$ Vi|* onrsipiagi. * * 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



m 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK HI. 


lect, according to the decision of Plato, will be all-perfect, which compre¬ 
hends all intelligibles, and defines tbe boundary of the intelligible order. 
The only-begotten, therefore, the eternal, the all-perfect, bound, infinity; 
and that which is mixed, manifest the nature of intelligible animal. On 
this account, Timaus also, in these three conclusions, reminds us of the 
paradigm, viz. in the conclusion which shews that the universe is only- 
begotten, and again, in the generation of time, and in the all-perfect co*n-> 
prehension of all animals. 

If likewise Timseus says, that animal itself is tbe most beautiful of all 
intelligibles, and that this has the third order in intelligibles, it will not 
be wonderful. For it has been before asserted by us, that every where 
the cause of the best mixture is the triad symmetry, truth, and beauty. 
But beauty principally shines forth in the third progression of being, and 
exhibits its luminous nature together with intelligible forms, just as truth 
shines forth in the seoond, and symmetry in the first progression of bevag. 
If, however, truth is indeed the first, beauty the second, and symmetry 
the third, it is by no means wonderful, that according to order, truth and 
beauty should be prior to symmetry; but that symmetry being more ap¬ 
parent in the first triad than the other two, should shine forth as the 
third in tbe secondary progressions. For these three subsist occultly in 
the first triad. And truth indeed, so far as it is intelligible knowledge, is 
in the second triad; but beauty so far as itk the form of forms is in the 
third triad. For that this triad subsists there first, is evident from this, 
that truth is primarily in that which is especially being, prior to know¬ 
ledge. But beauty, which pervades as far as to the last of beings, is ne¬ 
cessarily in the first being, from which the last of beings are derived. 
And the first symmetry is in that which is primarily mixed. For every 
mixture requires symmetry, in order that what is produced from it may 
be one certain thing. Though these three things, therefore, presubsist 
there, for we assume, as acknowledged universally, that symmetry is 
there, and the most beautiful of intelligible animals, as Timaeus says, yet 
at present we shall dismiss the further consideration of them, as we have 
elsewhere precedaneously discussed them, and have especially endea¬ 
voured to enforce what we conceive to be the opinion of Plato concern- 



Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XIX. 


OF PLATO. 


igs 

rng their order. For we have spoken of these things in a treatise <?oftsit¬ 
ing of one book, in whieh we demonstrate that truth is co-ordinate to the 
philosopher, beauty to the lover, and symmetry to the musician; and 
that such as is the order of these lives, such also is the relation of truth, 
beauty, and symmetry to each other. 

Animal itself, therefore, may with the greatest justice, be called Wrest 
beautiful, so far as it is eminently contained in intelligible beauty. For 
beauty is wont to be carried in forms, and is as it were the forte of fortes, 
unfolding that which is occult in the good, causing its loveliness to 
forth, and attracting to its own splendor the desire which is concealed 
about it. And to the good indeed, all things possess a silent and arcane 
tendency; but we are excited to the beautiful with astonishment and 
motion. For the illumination from it, and its efficacy, acutely pervade 
through every soul, and as being the most simitar of all things to the gSMf, 
it converts every soul that surveys it. The soul also, beholding that 
which is arcane shining forth as it were to the view, rejoices in, and ad¬ 
mires that which it sees, and is astonished about it. And as in the most 
holy of the mysteries, prior to the mystic spectacles, those that are ini¬ 
tiated, are seised with astonishment, so in intelligible® prior to the partici¬ 
pation of the good, beauty shining forth, astonishes those that behold it, 
converts the soul to itself, .and being established in the vestibules [of the 
good] shows what that is which is in the adyta, and what the transcen¬ 
dency is of occult good. Through these things therefore, let it be appa¬ 
rent whence beauty originates, and how it first shines forth; and also 
that animal itself is the most beautiful of all iateHigiblet. 


CHAPTER XIX. 

Since, however, Timaeus says that the primary amd para¬ 

digms have their subsistence in intelligible animal, and that aU these are 
. Proc, Vol. I. SB 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



194 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK 111. 


four, unfolding themselves first into light, according to the all-perfect te¬ 
trad,—this being the case, in the first place it deserve^ to be considered, 
that as species or forms present themselves to the vitmv in the intelligible,, 
.it is necessary by a much greater priority, that the genera of beings should 
pre-subsist in intelligibles. For it is not possible to admit that forms are 
intelligible, but that genera are intellectual only. But as forms exist 
•intelligibly indeed, according to their first subsistence, but the pleroma, 
or plenitude of them shines forth in the intellectual ‘ gods, and divides 
that which is total into more partial decrements, produces the uniform 
into multitude, and expands that which is exempt into co-ordinate causes, 
thus also the genera of being are occultly and indivisibly in intelligibles, 
but are accompanied with separation in intellectuals. And on this ac¬ 
count the first triad indeed has essence for that which is mixed but the 
second has life, where there was motion and permanency, life both abiding 
•and proceeding; and in the third there are sameness and difference. 
For the all-perfect multitude indeed, is through intelligible difference, 
but the united and that which is comprehensive in common of parts 
.according to genera, and according to one, is through intelligible same- 
. ness. And all these subsist intelligibly, essentially, and uniformly in 
these triads. 

In the first place therefore, this deserves to be inferred by those who 

- love to survey the nature of things, and it is also fit that they should attri¬ 
bute co-ordinate genera to intelligible forms. For it neither was nor will 

- be lawful for genera to shine forth secondarily 1 after forms. Hence much 
more must it be admitted that genera subsist in the intelligible after the 
above-mentioned manner, by those who admit that there are intelligible 
forms. In the next place, in addition to these things we must sur¬ 
vey how this tetrad of forms subsists, and how it shines forth in intelli¬ 
gible intellect analogous to the principles. For it is divided into a mo¬ 
nad and triad. For so far as the idea of the celestial gods is arranged 
prior to the others, it is defined according to a divine cause. It appears 

* For mijtoi; it is necessary to read voipoif. 

* For JivTipa it is necessary to read iiunpvf 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XIX. 


OF PLATO. 


195 


however tome that intelligible intellect returning to the.principles of the 
whole of things, according to the conversion of itself, it becomes the ple¬ 
nitude of forms, and is all things intellectually and at the same time in¬ 
telligibly, comprehending in itself the causes of beings, and being full of 
the ineffable and exempt cause of all things, constitutes the monad of the 
gods; whence also, Plato I think calls it the idea of the gods. But re¬ 
ceiving the intellectual causes of the three principles posterior to the one, it 
exhibits three ideas after this, one of them indeed, being the cause of air- 
wandering and volant animals, this cause proceeding analogous to bound. 
Hence also it constitutes gods that are uniform, elevating, undefiled, 
united to the celestial gods, and which receive measures second in dignity 
to theirs, and have the same relation to those gods that govern generation 
co-ordinately, as the celestial gods have to these, according to exempt 
transcendency. But it exhibits the cause of the aquatic gods, co-ordi¬ 
nate with generative and infinite power, and which produces gods that 
are the suppliers of motion and prolific abundance, and that are the in- 
spective guardians of life; .since also this water itself which is the object 
of sense is under the dominion of effusion, infinite lation and iridefinite- 
ness. Hence likewise it is attributed to vivific powers. And intelligible 
intellect exhibits the precedaneous cause of terrestrial and pedestrious 
gods, in a manner adapted to the nature of that which is mixed. It also 
generates gods who contain the end of the whole of things, who arc stable, 
who subdue the formless nature of matter by the last forms, and fix the 
seat of mundane natures in the one centre of the universe. For deriving 
their subsistence from the first Vesta as it were, or seat of beings, they sta¬ 
bly define thjs mundane seat. Thus therefore forms first unfold them¬ 
selves into light in intelligible intellect, possessing their progression and 
order according to the first principles. It is necessary however, in addi¬ 
tion to these things, to infer this in the third place, following Timaeus, 
that according to this triad, the multitude of intelligible parts shines 
forth, and the whole is divided into an all-perfect order of parts. For 
that, says he, of which other intelligible animals both according to one, 
and according to genera are parts, is the first and most beautiful paradigm 
of the universe. But if other intelligible animals are parts of this, it is 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III, 


19$ 

evident that it is a whole, comprehending in itself the multitude of in¬ 
telligible parts, and that it is connective of all intelligible parts. It must 
be inferred therefore that this triad is the first cause of production and 
fabrication. For if it contains the primary paradigms of things, it is evi¬ 
dent that the orderly distribution of secondary natures, originates from it. 
And if it is an animal constitutive of all animals, every psychical extent, 
and. all the extent of bodies, have their progression from thence; and it 
will also, comprehend the intelligible causes of all the vivific and demiurgic 
orders. 


CHAPTER XX. 


Stnqn conceptions therefore, as these, may be assumed from what is 
written in the Timseuff concerning the three intelligible triads, conformably 
to what is said of them in the Philebus, surveying in each bound, infinity, 
and that virhich is mixed. If you are willing also, we will show from 
what is scattered in the Sophista, that Plato had the same conception as 
we have concerning the first principles. The Elean guest therefore, in 
that dialogue, doubting against the assertion of Parmenides that the uni¬ 
verse is one, unfolding intelligible multitude, and shouing how it is sus¬ 
pended from the one, at first indeed, he argues from the one being [or being 
characterized by the one] and reminds us that this is passivetofAe one, and 
participates of the one, but is not the one itself, nor that which is prima¬ 
rily one. But afterwards, he produces the conception of the distinction 
between the imparticipable one and being, from whole. For if the one 
beiqg is & whole, as Parmenides testifies, but that which is a whole has 
parts, and that which has parts, is not the one itself, the one being will not 
be &e same as the one. In the third place therefore, he argues from the 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP; XX. 


OF PLATO. 


197 


all-perfect. For that which is perfectly divided, and is connective of 
many parts, can never have the same subsistence as that which is entirely 
one. And having proceeded thus far he shows that what is void of mul¬ 
titude, is in its own nature exempt from the one being, proceeding in 
the demonstration of this through three arguments; And at one time 
indeed, he begins from the one being, at another time from whole, and at 
another from all. It is better however to hear the words themselves of 
Plato. That the om therefore,is not the same with the one being, he proves 
through the following words. “ But what with respect to those who 
assert that the universe is one ? Mlust we not enquire to the utmost 6f 
our power what they say- being'is? Certainly. To this question therefore 
they may answer: Do you say there is> one thing alone ? We do say so. 
Or will they notspeak.in this manner? They will. What then, do you'call 
being any thing? Yes* Do yoa call it the one, employing two names 
respecting the same thing? Or how do you say ? What'will be their an¬ 
swer after this O guest?’* Through this therefore, Plato separating the one 
and being from each other, and showing that the conception of the me 
is different from that of being*and that these are not the same with each 
other, evinces that the most proper and primary one is exempt from the; 
one being. For the one being does not abide purely in anhyparxis void 
of. multitude and possessing the form of one. But the one it seif is exempt 
from every addition. For by whatever you may add to it, you will di¬ 
minish its supreme and ineffable union. Hence it is necessary to arrange 
the one prior to the one being, and to suspend the one being from that 
which is one alone. For if the one and the one being were the same, and 
it made no difference to say one and being (since if they differed, the one 
would again be changed: from the one being,) if therefore the one differs 
in no respect from the one being, all things will be one, and there wifi 
not be multitude in beings, nor will it be possible to denominate things, 
lest there should be two things, the thing and the name. For being ex¬ 
empt from all multitude, and all division, there wiH neither be a name of* 
any thing, nor any discourse about it, but the name will appear to be the 
same with the thing. And neither will a name be the name of a thing. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



198 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IH. 


but a name will be the name of a name, if a thing is the same with a 
name, and a name is the same with a thing,’ and a tiling will be the thing 
of a thing. For all things will exist about a thing the same as about 
a name, through the union of the thing and the name. If therefore, these 
things are absurd, and the one is, and also being, and being participates of 
the one , the one and the one being are not the same. 

But that whole also is not the same with the one, Plato afterwards de¬ 
monstrates [in the same dialogue,] beginning as follows : “ What then ? 
Will they say that whole is different from the one being, or that it is the 
s am e with it? Undoubtedly they will and do say so. If therefore whole 
is, as Parmenides says, “ that which is every where similar to the bulk of 
a perfect sphere, entirely possessing equal powers from the middle; for 
nothing is greater or more stable than this—if this be the case, it is ne¬ 
cessary that being should have a middle and extremities. And having 
these, there is every necessity that it should have parts. Or how shall we 
say? Just so. Nothing however hinders but that when it is divided,it 
may have the passion of the one in all its parts, and that thus the all and 
whole may be one. Undoubtedly. But is it not impossible that that . 
which suffers these things should be the one ? Why ? Because according 
to right reason, that which is truly one should be said to be entirely with¬ 
out parts. It must indeed necessarily be so. But such a thing as we have 
just now mentioned, in consequence of consisting of many parts would 
not accord with the one.” Through these things therefore, the Elean guest 
arguing from wholeness after the one being,<and also from the division of 
the parts of wholeness, demonstrates that the all is not one. For if whole 
is in beings, as Parmenides in his verses testifies it is, all things will not be 
the one. For the one is impartible; but whole possesses parts. Whole 
therefore is not the one itself. For that transcends all things and whole¬ 
ness; but whole is passive to the one. Hence also it is denominated 
whole; for it is not the one itself. Hence all things are not one void of 
separation and multiplication. 

Moreover, the all is comprehensive of many parts. For whole indeed, 

1 Instead of to t rep ovoftari, it is necessary to read to owqjM rep wpoty/tem. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XX. 


OF PLATO. 


199. 

consists at first of two parts; but the all possesses a multitude of parts, 
and participating of wholeness at the same time is all, as being perfectly 
distributed into parts. This therefore is not the one itself , but is passive to 
the one. For the one itself is impartible. But it is impartible in such a 
manner as to be exempt from all parts. Hence the all is not the same 
with the one. We therefore, have divided whole and the all, but Plato 
conjoins them, when he says: “ Nothing however hinders but that when 
it is divided, it may have the passion of the one in all its parts, and that 
thus the all and whole may 1 be one." At the same time however, they are 
divided after the above mentioned manner. From these three arguments 
therefore, the Elean guest separates the one from the participants of the 
one, and doubts against those who assert all things to begone, viz. the one 
being, whole and the all; of which the all indeed participates of whole, 
and is a self-perfect multitude, consisting of many parts; but whole par¬ 
ticipates of being. For being is not whole, as Parmenides testifies. These 
therefore, having such an order as this, is it not necessary that the argu¬ 
ments of Plato should be made conformably to the three intelligible 1 
triads?. For it was requisite, since Parmenides defined the one being in 
intelligibles, that Plato should from thence derive his demonstrations of 
the distinction between the one prior to intelligibles, and the one which is 
in intelligibles.. For the doubts against Parmenides, evince in many 
places that the one which is participated derives its subsistence from the 
imparticipable union. The one ‘ therefore is not in these triads, but the 
one beingand whole. But with respect to the all, it is evident that it is 
in the extremity of the intelligible order. For that which is in every 
respect perfect, and all intelligible multitude, have their subsistence in that 
extremity. But whole is in the middle centre, and in the bond of the 
intelligible breadth. For whole is adapted to have a subsistence prior to 
the all; since the all is a whole, but whole is not necessarily all. For the 
all is divided multitude ; but that which contains multitude in itself, and 
which is not yet separated is whole. And this especially pertains to eter¬ 
nity. For eternity is the measure of all intelligible multitude, just as> 

1 For voipetf here itis necessary to read rot)twf- 

* It is requisite here to supply to «v.. 


Digitized by v^.ooQle 



200 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


whole is the coherence and union of the all. But the one being is in 
the firet triad. For the one is especially the peculiarity of this triad, as 
Timieus also has demonstrated. And being which is occultly and intelli¬ 
gibly being, and which is the cause of essence to all other things, prima¬ 
rily shines forth there. Again therefore, following the Elean guest, three 
triads present themselves to oar view; the first indeed according to the 
one being; the second aooording to whole; and the third according to 
the all. To which also the denuargus of the ’universe looking, adorns 
the sensible universe, defining the visible nature with reference to that 
intelligible all; but time with reference to the intelligible wholeness. On 
which account also time is continued. And as the mteHigible whole com¬ 
prehends two pants, but contains the parte in owe boundary, after the same 
manner, time also is bounded by the mo, but by its twofold parts is in¬ 
finite. These things therefore, we shall shortly after more fully discuss 
when we speak concerning the Parmenides. For the conceptions of the 
Elean guest are the proteiaa of the mysteries of the Parmenides. Before 
however we turn to the Parmenides, let us discuss, if it is agreeable to you, 
the three triads from the beginning, collecting the conception of Plato 
from his assertions that are scattered in many places. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


The ns are three triads therefore, as we have frequently observed, and 
they are divided after this manner into bound, infinity, and that wliich 
is mixed. Hence there are triple intelligible bounds, triple infinities, and 
triple mixtures. But of every intelligible triad, the bound in each is de¬ 
nominated father; the infinite, power; and that which is mixed, intellect. 
And let not any one apprehend .that these names are foreign from the 
philosophy of Plato. For it will appear that he uses these appellations 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP; XXI. 


or PLATO. 


201 


in the before mentioned triads more than any one. For he denominates 
the first God father and lord in his Epistles. It is evident however, that 
as the first God surpasses even the paternal order, the first paternal is in 
the intelligible Gods. For these are they that are most eminently allied 
to ike one, and that intelligibly unfold his ineffable and unknown union. 
If therefore the first God is denominated one and father from the natures 
that prosimately proceed from him,—if this be the case, as the intelligible 
Gods are primarily unities, so likewise they are primarily fathers. For 
Plato gives names to the ineffable in a twofold respect, either from the 
summits of beings, or from all beings. For through these the transcen¬ 
dency of the one is known. Moreover, the Elean guest calls being that 
which is powerful and power. The first power therefore exists prior to 
being, and is united to the father; but it particularly accords with being, 
which also it fills. Hence being as participating of power is denominated 
powerful); hut as united to it, and producing all beings according to it, 
it b called power. If however both Plato himself, and his most genuine 
disciples, frequently call all [true] beings intellect (on which account, in 
many places they make three principles, the good , intellect and soul, 
denominating every [true] being intellect) you will also have the third in 
these intellect. But it is necessary not to be ignorant of the difference. 
For with respect to intellect, one kind is intellect as with reference to 
hyparxis. For when we denominate the unity in each triad intelligible, 
as the object of desire to being, and as filling being, then we call that 
which ranks as the third in the triad intellect. For it is intelligible as 
essenee and intellect, but not as the intellect of essence, but of father aad 
deity. For every participated deity is intelligible, as being the plenitude 
of its participant. But another kind is intellect which is the intellect of 
essence; according to which we say that the being of the third triad, is 
the intellect of that which is primarily being. For this is essential intel¬ 
lect, being allotted its own essence by energizing.* For all things are 
essentially in it, and both the more simple genera, and the primary pa¬ 
radigms ; for it is intelligible intellect. But the third kind is intellectual 


Proc . 


1 For auro ra mpyuy it it necessary ttvreadL aura t f mngyuv. 


VOL. I. 


2 C 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



202 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


intellect, which subsists analogous to intelligible intellect, is conjoined with 
it, and is filled from it, possessing intellectually those things which are in 
the other intelligibly. And in short, it is necessary every where that 
such things as are first according to each series, should have the form of 
the things that are prior to them. Hence also they are called things first, 
and possess a certain transcendency of essence towards coordinate na¬ 
tures. Since therefore, that which is prior to inlelligibles is God, the first 
intelligibles are Gods and unities. And since the intelligible is essential, 
the first intellects are essences. Since also intellect is every where ac¬ 
cording to its own nature intellectual, the first souls are intellectual. 
Because likewise, souls are the plenitudes of life, the first of bodies are 
most vital. And because the bodies that are perpetual are moved in a 
circle, the summits of material bodies are moved in conjunction with 
those bodies that are perpetual. This therefore is the cause why the unities 
are frequently called intelligibles, and beings intelligible intellects. 

That Plato however knew this triad, I mean father, power and intellect, 
we shall learn hy looking to the demiurgic order. For in this the triad is 
most remarkably apparent. Hence, on account of its union with the in¬ 
telligible, it is filled with this triad, and possesses these things in a more 
divided manner than animal itself, or intelligible eternity. Immediately 
therefore, in the beginning of the fabrication in the Timaeus, the demi- 
urgus calls himself father, “ Of which works I am the demiurgus and 
father” * But shortly after he unfolds his power, “ Imitating my power 
in your generation.” This therefore is also wonderful, that he has deli¬ 
vered to us the most theological conception concerning power. For in 
the first place indeed, he calls it the power of the father, when he says, 
“ Of which works I am the demiurgus and father,” and that the power is 
his, [is evident from the words,] ** Imitating my powerso that accord¬ 
ing to Plato power is of the father. And in the next place, he ascribes 
to this power a peculiarity generative of the whole of things ; for this is 
evident from the words “ In your generation.” Power therefore is the 
cause of generation and of the progression of beings. And in the last 
place, he delivers the intellectual peculiarity of the demiurgus. “ Having 
thus spoke, again into the fosmer crater in which he bad tempered the 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXI. 


OF PLATO. 


203 


soul of the universe, he poured mingling the remainder of the former 
mixture. 1 * For to pour, to mingle, mixture, and to be productive of soul, 
pertain to intellect. Though what necessity is there for asserting these 
things, since prior to this he calls the demiurgus intellect. “ Whatever 
ideas therefore intellect perceived by the dianoetic energy in animal itself, 
such and so many he conceived it necessary for this universe to contain." 
Hence the demiurgus is father, and power and intellect. And he poss¬ 
esses these things as much as possible on account of intelligibles. For he 
is a God as father, on account of them. He is also power, and the gene- 
rator of wholes, and knows beings intellectually, on account of them. 
For in them intelligible knowledge first subsists. Much more therefore 
are father, power and intellect in intelligibles ; from which also the demi- 
urgus being filled, participates of this triad. For Plato assumes each of 
these analogously. For as the paternal triad in intelligibles gives sub¬ 
sistence to intelligible eternity, so the demiurgus makes those works to be 
indissoluble of which he is the father. And as in intelligibles, eternity 
proceeding according to all power generates intelligible animal itself, so 
the demiurgic power gives subsistence to mundane animals that are per¬ 
petual and divine, and imparts to the junior Gods another power which 
is generative of mortal animals. That any one therefore may assume 
these names from Plato is evident from what has been said. 

Since however, being has an hypostasis triply in intelligibles, one is 
primarily being and prior to the eternal; but another is secondarily being, 
and the first eternity; and another is being ultimately, and isdntelligible 
and eternal intellect. And here indeed there is being, but there eternity, 
and there intellect. And eternity is more comprehensive than intellect; 
but being than eternity. For every intellect is eternal, but not every 
thing eternal is intellect. For soul according to its essence is eternal, and 
every thing which participates of eternity, participates also by a much 
greater priority of being. For with perpetuity of existence, existence is 
entirely consubsistent* But that which participates of existence is not 
universally eternally being. For bodies also participate in a certain res¬ 
pect of the nature of existence, but they are not eternal. Intellect there¬ 
fore constitutes an intellectual essence only, so far as it is intellect; since 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



204 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK ill. 


so far as it is also life and being it constitutes all things. But eternity 
constitutes both the intellectual and psychical essence. Bor the mixture 
[in the second triad] was intelligible life. But being constitutes the in¬ 
tellectual, the psychical, and the corporeal life. Formatter also is being 
[most obscurely,] and is capacity indeed, but formless being, and non- 
being, falling off from the participation of being. If, however, some one 
should say that it is being in power or capacity, yet it has this power 
from being. For capacity is the forerunning participation of energy. 
And thus much concerning these things. 

But what sufficient argument of division does Socrates afford us in the 
Pbsedrus, concerning these intelligible triads ? And how from what is 
delivered by him may we recur to the conception of the hypostasis of the 
most principal Gods? Socrates therefore in that dialogue, being inspired 
by the Nymphs, celebrates every thing divine as beautiful, wise and good, 
and says that by these the soul is nourished. But if every thing divine 
is a thing of this hind, this is the case with the intelligible by a much 
greater priority. And all these indeed are every where, but in the first 
triad, the good principally subsists ; in the second the wise; and in the 
third thy beautiful. For in this there is the most beautiful of intelligibles. 
But in the second triad truth and the first intelligence subsist. And in 
the first there is the commensurate, which we say is the same as the good. 
But Soprates in the Philebus says that the element of the good is the de¬ 
sirable, the sufficient, and the perfect. The desirable therefore pertains 
indeed to bound ; for it is the union and goodness of all the triad, and 
the triad converges about it. But the sufficient pertains to infinity. For 
Sufficiency is a power capable of pervading to all things, and of being 
present to all things without impediment. And the perfect pertains to 
that which is mixed. For this is that which is primarily triadic ; since 
every mixture has its coalition from the triad. The elements therefore 
of the good unfold to us the first triad ; and the elements of intelligible 
twsdom, the seoond triad. But every tiling wise is full of being, is gene¬ 
rative of truth, and is convective of imperfect natures to their perfection. 
The foil therefore pertains to the second bound; for this is uniformly filled 
with the participation of the natures prior to itself. For the full is every 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXII. 


OP PLATO. 


205 


■where adapted to bound, just as that which cannot be filled is adapted to 
the infinite. But the prolific pertains to the second power, and to infinity. 
For that which does not abide in the fulness of itself, but is prolific and 
generative of other things, is especially indicative of divine infinity. And 
the convertive pertains to that which is mixed. For this as being allotted 
the end of the triad, converts every thing imperfect to the full, and unites 
itself prior to other things to the bound of the whole triad. 


CHAPTER XXII. 

Moreover, the elements of beauty are the peculiarities of the third 
. triad of intelligibles. But these are, as we have before observed, the 
lovely, the delicate, and the splendid. The lovely therefore, being ar¬ 
ranged analogous to the desirable, pertains to bound. But the delicate 
being coordinate to the sufficient, pertains to the infinite power which is 
in the beautiful. And the splendid is of an intellectual peculiarity. For 
this is the beautiful of beauty; is that which illuminates all things, and 
astonishes those that are able to behold it. And as apparent beauty 
shining most manifestly, is seen through the clearest of the senses (for 
the objects of this sense have many differences according to Aristotle, 
and this sense pervades farther than the rest) so likewise intelligible beauty 
appears to tbe intellect of the soul shining intelligibly. For it is an in¬ 
telligible form. And on this account the splendor of beauty is apparent 
to intellect. Splendid beauty therefore, as Socrates calls it, shines forth at 
the extremity of the intelligible order. For this is the most splendid of 
intelfigihles, is intelligible intellect, and is that which emits, the intelligible 
light, that when it appeared astonished the intellectual Gods, and made 
them admire thear father, as Orpheus says. Such tlterefore is the prepa¬ 
ration to the science of tbe intelligible Gods which may from these things, 
be assumed. And now it will appear how beauty is indeed occultly in 


t 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



20 6 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


the end of the first intelligible triad, but subsists in the third triad so as to 
have manifestly proceeded into light. For in the former it subsists Ac¬ 
cording to one form only ; but in the latter it subsists triadically. It is also 
evident how each of the triads is at one and the same time a monad and a 
triad. For the first triad being characterized according to the good,derives 
its completion from the three elements of the good. But the second 
being characterized by the wise is contained in the triad of wisdom. 
And the third subsisting according to the beautiful, is all-perfect through 
the triad of beauty. If however the beautiful is occultly in the first 
triad, and shines forth triadically in the third, it is evident that intelligible 
intellect loves the first triad, and has love conjoined with its beauty. 
And this is the intelligible love of the first beauty. From these there¬ 
fore, intellectual love proceeds, together with faith and truth, as we have 
before observed. For the three intelligible monads, the good, the wise 
and the beautiful, constitute three powers which lead upwards all other 
things, and prior to other things the intellectual Gods. Concerning these 
things however, we shall speak hereafter. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


Let us now then direct our attention to the theory of the Parmenides. 
But I wish again to remind the reader of what we have before demon¬ 
strated. It has been shown therefore, that it isnecessary to divide the 
second hypothesis into the whole progressions of the one being; and that 
this hypothesis is nothing else than the generation and progression of the 
Gods, proceeding supernally from the supreme union of intelligibles as 
far as to a deified essence. For the discussion is not, as some say it is, in 
the first hypothesis, concerning God and the Gods. For it was not lawful 
to Parmenides to conjoin multitude with the one, and the one with mul- 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXIII. 


OF PLATO. 


207 


titude. For the first God is perfectly exempt from the whole of things. 
But in the first hypothesis essence, and even the one itself , are taken away 
from the first God. That such an ablation, however, as this is not adapted 
to the other Gods is evident to every one. Moreover, neither does Par¬ 
menides in the first hypothesis speak about the intelligible Gods, as they 
say he does; for they assert that the negations are of these Gods, because 
they are conjoined with the one , and in simplicity and union precede 1 all 
the divine genera. For how can the similar or the dissimilar, or contact and 
the privation of contact, and all the other particulars which are denied 
of the one, be inherent in the intelligible Gods? They appear indeed to me 
to be right in asserting that the things which are taken away are simili¬ 
tudes of the Gods; but they do not speak rightly when they say that all 
of them are similitudes of the intelligible Gods. To which it may be 
added, in opposition to this assertion, that the discussion is again con¬ 
cerning the intelligihle Gods in the second hypothesis. For the things 
which are denied in the first, are affirmed in the second hypothesis. This 
therefore, as I have said, is demonstrated that the conclusions with refer¬ 
ence to each other have the order of prior and posterior, of causes and 
effects. It is necessary therefore, that proceeding from the beginning, we 
should adapt the first conclusions to the first orders, the middle conclu¬ 
sions to the middle orders, and the last conclusions to the last orders, and 
should demonstrate that as many questions are asked, as there are pro¬ 
gressions of the divine orders. And in the first place, we must deliver 
the doctrine of Parmenides concerning the intelligible Gods, of whom we 
have proposed to speak; since Plato speaks about these in many places^ 
partly indicating, and partly clearly unfolding his meaning. 

It is necessary however, that we should collect into one the elaborate 
and synoptical theory about each order, since it wQuld not be proper now 
to repeat the exposition which we have given in our commentaries on 
that dialogue. But assuming each of the conclusions itself by itself, I 
will endeavour to refer it to an appropriate order of the Gods, following 
in so doing the divine inspirations of our leader [Syrianus]. For we also 

1 For xpovxmif it is necessary to read *gt*x»nts. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



30 * 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOk 111. 


through his assistance hare with a divine head pursued these sacred paths 
about tlve theory of the Parmenides, being- agitated with a divine fury, 
and wakened as from a profound sleep to this arcane mystic discipline. 
And thus much concerning the mode of the whole of the conckisions. 
But from hence I shall pass to the narration of the things proposed. 

The first and imparticipate one therefore, which preexists beyond the 
whole of things, and not only beyond the unities that partici pate, but also 
those that are participated, is celebrated through the first hypothesis, 
being demonstrated to be the cause of all things ineffably, but not being 
defined itself in any one of all things, nor having any power or peculiarity 
of a kindred nature with the other Gods. But after this [imparticipable 
one,} that which is alone super essential and surpassing, and un mingled 
with all hyparxis, is a unity participated by being, and constituting about 
itself the first essence, and by the addition of this participation becoming 
more redundant than that which is primarily one. This however is a 
superessential hyparxis, and the hyparxis of the first intelligible triad. 
As there are therefore these two things in the first triad, vie. the one and 
being, and the former generates, but the latter is generated, and the former 
perfects, but the latter is perfected, it is necessary that the middle of both 
should be power, through which and together with which the one con¬ 
stitutes and is perfective of being. For the progression of being from the 
one , and its conversion to the one , is through power. For what else con¬ 
joins being to the one , or causes the one to be participated by being 
except power ? For it is the progression of the one t and its extension to 
being. Hence, in all the divine genera powers precede progressions and 
generations. This triad therefore, the one, power and being, k the summit 
of intelligibles. The first of these indeed producing; the third being pro¬ 
duced; and the second being suspended from the one , but coalescing with 
being. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


209 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

This triad therefore, Parmenides delivers immediately in the beginning 
of the second hypothesis, adjoining to the one the most simple participa¬ 
tion of essence. But he calls it the one being, and says that being par¬ 
ticipates of the one, and the one of being. The participation however of 
these is different. For the one 1 indeed so participates of being, as illumi¬ 
nating and filling, and deifying being; but being so participates of the 
one , as suspended from the one, and deified by it. But the habitude 
which is the middle of both, is not with them void of essence. For neither 
is the habitude which is among sensibles in no respect being, and much 
more is this the case with the habitude which is there. But this habitude 
is biformed. For it is of the one , and is connascent with being. For it 
is the motion of the one , and its progression into being. Parmenides de¬ 
livers this triad, beginning what he says about it as follows : “ See there¬ 
fore from the beginning if the one is. Is it possible then for it to be, and 
yet not to participate of essence ? It is not possible.” But he ends speaking 
about it in the following words: “ Will therefore that which is said be 
any thing else than this, that the one participates of essence, when it is 
summarily asserted by any one that the one is ? It will not.” This there¬ 
fore is the first intelligible triad, the one, being, and the habitude of both, 
through which being is of the one and the one of being, in a manner per- 
fcctlyadmirable; Plato indicating through these things, that the father is 
the father of intellect, and that intellect is the intellect of the father, and 
that power is concealed between the extremes. For deity is the father 
of the triad, and being is the intellect of this deity. Yet it is not intel¬ 
lect in the same way as we are accustomed to call the intellect of essence. 
For every such intellect stands still and is moved, as the Elean guest says. 


Proc. 


* In the original«» »», but the true reading is evidently tv alone. 


VOL. I. 


2D 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



210 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


But that which is primarily being, neither stands still, nor is moved, as 
he also teaches. The first triad therefore is called one being; since power is 
here occultly. .For the triad does not proceed from itself; but subsists 
without separation and uniformly, being primarily defined according - 
to divine union. Hence, this is the first participation of essence, which 
participates of the one- through power as the middle, which collects toge¬ 
ther and separates both the one and being. And it is superessential in¬ 
deed, but is conjoined with essence. We must never think therefore that 
all power is the progeny of essence. For the powers of the Gods are su¬ 
peressential, and are consubsistent with the unities themselves of the Gods. 
And through this power the Gods are generative of beings. Rightly there¬ 
fore, does poetry every where assert that the Gods are able to do all 
things. For essential powers indeed are not capable of effecting all 
things ; since they are not constitutive of superessential natures. The 
first triad therefore, is through these things unfolded to us by Parmenides. 


CHAPTER XXV. 

But immediately after this, the second triad is allotted a progression, 
which Parmenides characterizes by intelligible wholeness, as we have 
shown in the Sophista. For the first triad being uniform, and possessing 
all things intelligibly and occultly, viz. hyparxis, power and being, so that 
power which is the cause of division, subsisting between the one and being, 
is concealed, and becomes apparent through the communion of the ex¬ 
tremes with each other,— the second triad proceeds, being characterized by 
the first intelligible power, and having the monads in itself distinguished 
from each other. For all things being united and without distinction in 
the first triad, distinction and separation shine forth in this triad. Being 
also and power are more divided from each other. And that which con- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXV- 


OF PLATO. 


211 


sists of these is no longer one being [or being characterized by the one,] 
but is a whole, so that it has the one and being in itself as parts. For ' 
above indeed [i. e. in the first triad] all things are prior to parts and 
wholeness. But in this triad there are both parts and a whole, power 
unfolding itself into light. For as there is separation here, there are parts 
and the whole consisting of these. The second -triad therefore is called 
intelligible wholeness. But the parts of it, the one and being, I call the 
extremes. And power being here the middle, connects the one and being, 
and does not cause them to be one, in the same manner as in the first 
triad. Since also it is the middle of both, through its communion indeed 
with being, it renders the one one being ; but through its communion with 
the one , it perfectly causes being to be one. And thus the one being con¬ 
sists of two parts, viz. of being which is characterised by the one , and of 
the one which is characterized by being, as Parmenides himself says. He 
begins therefore to speak about this triad as follows : “ Again therefore, 
let us say if the one is what will happen. Consider then if it is not ne¬ 
cessary that this hypothesis should signify the one to be a thing of such a 
kind as to have parts Y* But he ends in the following words: “ That 
which is one therefore is a whole, and has a part.” 

Through these things therefore Parmenides defines the second order of 
intelligibles to be a wholeness. For as existence is derived to all things 
from the first triad, so whole from the second, and an all-perfect division 
from the third. This however will be considered by us hereafter. Whole¬ 
ness therefore is triple, being either prior to parts, or consisting of parts, 
or subsisting in a part, according to the doctrine of Plato. For in the 
Politicus indeed, he calls genus a whole, but species a part, not that genus 
derives its completion from species, but exists prior to it. And in the 
Timveus he says that the world is a whole of wholes. And all the world 
indeed derives its completion from parts that are wholes ; but each of the 
parts is a whole, not as the universe is, but partially. Wholeness there¬ 
fore, being triple as we have said, according to Plato, the unity, and the 
intelligible and occult cause of these is now delivered, unically compre¬ 
hending and constituting three wholenesses ; according to the hyparxis 
indeed of itself, the wholeness prior to parts; but according to its power, 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



212 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK HI 


the wholeness which is from parts ; and according to its being the whole¬ 
ness which is in a part. For the one is prior to all multitude ; but power 
communicates in a certain respect with both the extremes, and compre¬ 
hends in itself the peculiarities of them ; and being in a certain respect 
participates of the one. Hence the first of the wholenesses, or that which 
is prior to parts is derived from a unical hyparxis. For it is a monad, 
and is itself constitutive of parts, and of the multitude which is in them. 
But the second wholeness is from power. For it derives its completion 
from parts, just as in the power which is collective of the one and being, 
the extremes in a certain respect shine forth to the view. And the third 
wholeness is from being. For being is a part, and is the progeny both of 
power and the one , 1 and possesses each of these partially. After the in¬ 
telligible therefore, three wholenesses are divided according to the differ¬ 
ent orders of beings. But the intelligible wholeness comprehends the 
three unically, and is the intelligibly connective monad of this triad, every 
way extending the powers of itself from the middle of the intelligible 
and occult order. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 

Immediately after this triad we may see another proceeding, in 
which all intelligible multitude shines forth, ami which Parmenides indeed 
constitutes a wholeness, but a wholeness consisting of many parts. For 
after the occult union of the first triad, and the dyadic separation of the 
second, the progression of the third is generated, which has indeed its 
subsistence from parts, but the parts are many, with the multitude of 
which the triad prior to it is parturient. For in this triad there is a unity, 
nnd power, and being. But the one is multiplied, and also being and 

* Instead of ovtoj it is necessary to read nos. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXVI. 


OF PLATO. 


213 


power. And thus all the triad indeed is a wholeness; but each of its ex¬ 
tremes, viz. the one and being, as it is multitude conjoined through collec¬ 
tive power, is again divided and multiplied. For this power conjoining 
unical multitude to the multitude of beings, of some of these it causes 
each through progression to be being characterized by the one , but oi 
others each according to participation to be the one characterized by be¬ 
ing. For here indeed there are two parts of the wholeness, the one and 
being; but the one participates of being, for it is conjoined with it j- and 
being participates of the one. The one of being therefore, is again divid¬ 
ed, so that the one and being generate a second unity conjoined with the 
part of being. But being participating of the one , is again separated into 
being and the one. For it generates a more partial being suspended from 
a more partial unity. And being consists of more partial deified beings, 
and is a more specific mojiad. The cause however of this progression is 
power. For power is effective of two things, and is the operator of 
multitude. For the one indeed calls forth into multitude, but being con¬ 
verts to the participation of the divine unities. Whence therefore does 
Parmenides begin to teach us concerning this triad ? And where does he 
conclude his discourse about it? The beginning, therefore, of what he 
says on this subject is as follows : ** What then ? Can each of these parts 
of the one being, viz. the one and being, desert each other, so that the one 
shall not be a part of being, or being shall not be a part of the one ? It 
cannot be. 1 ” But he ends thus: “ Will not, therefore, the one being after 
this manner be an infinite multitude ? It seems so.” 

In the first place, therefore, it is proper to understand the manner of 
the progression of the divine genera ; and that conformably to the intel¬ 
ligible monad, which we arrange according to the one being, the duad 
posterior to it which we call a wholeness [proceeds.] But we say that it 
consists of two parts which are separated by power, and that intelligible 
multitude presents itself to the view from the monad and the duad. For 
when all things are said to be parts of the one being, viz. secondary things, 
and such as become apparent through the separating cause of power, theu 

1 It is necessary to correct the text here, and to read as follows: n ouv; raw fiopiwv sxartpov rot/- 
raw rov cvo$ omj.ro, r« tv xai ro ov etpot axotenrtriov, $ ro «v. x. r. A. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



214 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK ur. 


Parmenides delivers the union which pervades from the monad to the 
third triad. But when power separating and conjoining the unities and 
beings, gives completion to multitude, then the participation of the duad 
becomes perfectly apparent, as I think Parmenides demonstrates when 
he says, ** so that it is necessary two things should always be generated, 
and that there should never be one tiling (only.)” This triad, therefore, pro¬ 
ceeds according to both the preexistent triads, flowing according to the 
Oracle,and proceeding to all intelligible multitude. For infinite multitude is 
indicative of this flux, and of the incomprehensible nature of power. 

Hence, in the first place, I have said that the hypostasis of this triad is 
through these things demonstrated to be suspended from the triads prior 
to it. And in the next place, I say, that this triad, according to Parme¬ 
nides, is primogenial. For this first imparts the power of being generated; 
and Parmenides calls the multitude which is in it in generation , [i. e. be - 
coming to be, or rising into existence.'] For he says : “ And the part will 
be generated from two parts at least.” And again.: “ Whatever part is 
generated , will always have these parts.” And in what follows: “ So 
that it is necessary it should always be generated two things, and should 
never be one.” Does not he, therefore, who frequently uses the word ge¬ 
neration in teaching concerning the progression of the intelligible multi¬ 
tude, proclaim that the natures prior to this order are more united to each 
other? But this order proceeds to a greater extent, unfolds the occult 
nature of the triads prior to itself, and is primogenial, unfolding in itself 
prolific power. 

In addition to these things also, it is necessary to consider the infinity 
of multitude, not as those think fit to speak, who assume the infinite in \ 

quantity, but since in the principles of the whole of things, there are 
bound and infinity, the former being the cause of the union, but the 
latter of the separation of multitude, Parmenides calls the first and intel¬ 
ligible multitude infinite, because all multitude indeed, according to its 
own nature, is infinite, as being the progeny of the first infinity. All in¬ 
telligible multitude, however, is a thing of this kind. For it is the first 
multitude, and multitude itself. But multitude itself is the first progeny 
of intelligible infinity. Intelligible multitude, therefore, is on this ac- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXVH. 


OF PLATO. 


215 * 


count infinite, as unfolding into light the first infinity, and this infinity is 
the same with the all-perfect. For that which has proceeded to the all, 
and as far as it is requisite an intelligible nature should proceed, through 
the power which is generative of the whole of things, is infinite. For it 
cannot be comprehended by any other thing. But intelligible multitude 
is comprehensive of all intelligible .multitude. For if indeed that which 
is primarily infinite, was infinite according to quantity, it would be re¬ 
quisite to admit that the intelligible is infinite multitude of this kind. Since, 
however, the intelligible is infinite power, it is necessary that the partici¬ 
pant of the primarily infinite, should cause infinity to shine forth accord¬ 
ing to the power which is comprehensive of all prior natures. And if it 
be requisite to relate my own opinion, as that which is primarily one is 
primarily bound, so that which is primarily multitude is infinite multitude. 
For it receives the whole power of infinity, and producing all unities, and 
all beings, as far as to the most individual natures, it possesses never-failing 
power. It is, therefore, more total than all multitude, and is an incom¬ 
prehensible infinite. Hence unfolding into light all multitude, it bounds 
and measures it by infinite power, and through wholeness introduces 
bound to all things. These things, therefore, may be assumed from Par¬ 
menides concerning the third intelligible triad. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 

Let us in the next place speak in common about all the intelligible 
.triads. With respect to the first triad, therefore, which is occult, and is 
allotted the intelligible summit in intelligibles, Plato at one time proceed¬ 
ing from the union which is in it, and its exempt transcendency with re¬ 
spect to the other triads, denominates it one, as in tbeTimseus. For eter¬ 
nity, says he, abides in one. But Teason evinces that this one is the first 
triad of intelligibles. But at another time proceeding from the extremi- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



216 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK 111. 


ties which are in it, viz. that which is participated, and that which parti¬ 
cipates, he calls it the one being, considering the power which is compre¬ 
hended in these as ineffable, in consequence of its subsisting uniformly 
and occultly. And at another time, he unfolds the whole of it, accord¬ 
ing to the monads which are in it, bound, infinity, and that which is 
mixed ; bound indeed indicating its divine hyparxis, infinity its generative 
power, and that which is mixed, the essence proceeding from this power. 
Plato, therefore, as I have said, teaches us through these names the first 
intelligible triad ; at one time indeed through one name, but at another 
through two names, and at another again through three names, unfolding 
it to our view. For there is a triad in it, according to which the whole is 
characterized ; and a duad according to which the extremes communicate 
with each other; and a monad which exhibits the ineffable, occult, and 
unical nature of the first, through its own monads. 

But the second triad after this, Plato denominates in the Timseus in¬ 
deed, eternity; but in the Parmenides the first wholeness. How these, 
however, are allotted the same peculiarity we may learn by considering 
that every thing eternal is indeed a whole; viz. if it is perfectly eternal, 
and has the whole of its essence*and energy at once present. For every 
intellect is a thing of this kind, perfectly establishing at. once in itself, the 
whole of intellectual perception. It likewise does not possess one part of 
being, but is deprived of another part, nor does it partially participate of 
energy, but it summarily comprehends the whole of being, and the whole 
of intelligence. If, however, in its energies it proceeded according to 
time, but had an eternal essence, it would be allotted the whole of the 
latter, and this alwa} r s stably the same, but would possess the former va¬ 
riably, so as to exert different energies at different times. Eternity, there¬ 
fore, is every where the cause of wholeness to the natures to which it is 
primarily present. But whole also is every where comprehensive of per¬ 
petuity. For no whole abandons either its essence or its proper perfec¬ 
tion ; but that which is primarily corrupted and vitiated is a partial na¬ 
ture. For on this account also the whole world is perpetual, viz. because 
it is a whole, and this is likewise the case with all that the heavens contain, 
and with each of the elements. For every where wholeness is connective 


Digitized by L: )OQle 



CHAP. XXVII. % 


OF PLATO. 


*17 


of subjects. Hence eternity is consubsi&tent with wholeness, and whole 
and eternity are the same. Each also is a measure, the one of things 
eternal, and of all perpetual natures, but the other of parts and of all mul¬ 
titude. Since, however, there are three wholenesses, one indeed being 
prior to parts, another subsisting from parts, and another in a part,— 
through the wholeness which is prior to parts, eternity measures those 
unities of divine natures which are exempt from beings; but through the 
wholeness which derives its subsistence from parts, it measures the unities 
that are co-ordinate with beings; and through the wholeness which is in 
a part, it measures all beings and whole essences. For these wholenesses 
being parts of the divine unities, they possess partibly what pre-exists 
unically in the unities. And, moreover, eternity is nothing else than the 
ever shining forth from the unity which is connected with being. But 
whole consists of two parts, viz. of the one and being, power existing as 
the collector of the parts. According to both these conceptions, there¬ 
fore, the duad pertaining to the middle intelligible triad, unfolds the uni¬ 
form and occult hypostasis of the first triad. 

Moreover, in the Timaeus, Plato calls the third triad of intelligibles, 
animal itself, intelligible, all-perfect, and only-begotten. But in the Par¬ 
menides he denominates it infinite multitude, and a wholeness compre¬ 
hensive of many parts. And in the Sophista he perpetually calls it the 
intelligible distributed into many beings. All these assertions, therefore, 
are the progeny of one science, and tend to one intelligible truth. For 
when Timaeus calls tins triad intelligible animal, he also asserts it to be 
all-perfect, and comprehensive of intelligible animals as its parts, both ac¬ 
cording to one and according to parts. Hence animal itself is according 
to this a whole, comprehensive of intelligible animals as its parts. And 
Parmenides, when he shows that the one being is all-perfect multitude, 
demonstrates that it is consubsistent with this order. For the infinite will 
be all-powerful and all-perfect, as we have before observed, comprehend¬ 
ing in itself an intelligible multitude of parts, which also it generates; 
some of these being more total, but others more partial, and as Timseus 
says, both according to one, and according to genera. Farther still, as he 
calls animal itself eternal and only-begotten, so Parmenides first attri- 
Proc. Vol. I, 2 E 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



218 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


butes the ever and to be generated, to infinite multitude, when he says, 
** And thus, according to the same reasoning, whatever part is generated 
will always possess these two parts: for the one will always contain being, 
and being the one; so that two things will necessarily always be gene¬ 
rated, and no part will ever be one.” 

Who, therefore, so clearly reminds us of eternal animal, and the primo- 
genial triad, as Parmenides, first assuming in this order generation and the 
ever, and so continually using each of these? The same thing, therefore, 
is both an all-perfect animal, and all-powerful intelligible multitude. For 
the first infinity being power, and every intelligible subsisting according 
to it, and receiving from it a division into parts, I think it proper to call 
it all-powerful; thus avoiding the appellation of the infinite, which dis¬ 
turbs the multitude. That, however, which in these things is both diffi¬ 
cult to understand, and for which Plato especially deserves to be admired, 
we must not omit, but demonstrate to the genuine lovers of truth. For 
intelligible animal comprehends four intelligible ideas, according to which 
it not only constitutes the genera of Gods, but also the more excellent 
kind of beings after the Gods, and also mortal animals themselves; for 
generating it extends the idea of air-wandering, the idea of aquatic, and 
the idea of terrestrial animals, from the Gods as far as to mortal animals. 
Since animal itself, therefore, comprehends four ideas, and through the 
same paradigms produces totally divine, daemoniacal and mortal animals, 
this deservedly produces a doubt in those who love the contemplation of 
trutby.how, the causes being the same, and the same primary paradigms 
preexisting, some of the natures which are constituted are Gods, others 
daemons, and others mortal animals. For all these being generated with 
reference to one form, how is it possible they should not have the same 
form and nature; since it is requisite that one idea should every where 
be generative of things that have a similar form ? For on this account we 
admit the hypothesis of ideas, in order that the intelligible genus of Gods 
may possess and contain prior to multitude monads productive of similar 
natures. This doubt,' therefore, being so difficult, some one may solve it 
logically by saying, that all things which subsist according to one form 

' Instead of it is necessary to read anogiac. 


Digitized by LjC 3Qle 



CHAP. XXVII. 


OF PLATO. 


219 


are not synonimous, and that they do not similarly participate of their 
common cause, but some things primarily, and others ultimately. For 
each form is the leader of a certain series, beginning supernally, and sub¬ 
siding as far as to the last of things. For according to the oracle, all 
things begin supernally to extend their admirable rays to the downward 
place. Hence it will not be wonderful that the same idea should pre¬ 
exist as the cause of Gods, daemons, and mortal animals, producing all 
things totally, and delivering the more partial separation of things to the 
demiurgic order, in the same manner as this order delivers the production 
of individuals to the junior Gods. For intelligibles are the causes of 
whole series; but intellectuals of divisions according to common genera^. 
Supermundane forms are the causes of specific differences; but mundane 
of things which are now individuals. For they are causes which are 
moved, and are the leaders of mutation to their progeny. 

If however it be requisite to survey the thing itself by itself, and how 
one intelligible form is the cause* of Gods, and daemons and mortals, 
Parmenides alone is able to satisfy us about the parts which are contained 
in the intelligible multitude. For he characterizes some things according 
to being, but others according to the one. For the one being, indeed, is 
absorbed by the one , but being which is one is rather absorbed by being, 
and the one being, and being which is one, contain in themselves each of 
the intelligible animals. According to the one being, therefore, Parme¬ 
nides constitutes the divine genera, together with an appropriate peculiari¬ 
ty. But according to being which is one, he constitutes the genera posterior 
to the Gods. And according to the one being indeed of being which is 
one, he constitutes the genera of daemons, but according to being which is 
one, the mortal genera. And again, according to the one being of the one 
being, he constitutes the first and highest genera of the Gods; but accord¬ 
ing to the being which is one of it, the second genera, and which have an 
angelic order. And thus all things are full of Gods, angels, daemons, ani¬ 
mals, and mortal natures. And you see how the medium is preserved of 
the more excellent genera. For being which is one is the angelic boun¬ 
dary of the one being which produces the Gods. But the one being is the 

* It seems requisite to supply the word mrm after the words to s» mijtov «Soj. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



mo 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


demoniacal summit of being which is one, and which adorns secondary 
natures. As to the unions, however, of secondary natures, it is not im- 
manifest that they approximate to multitude, and to the progression of 
the natures placed above them. Nor must you wonder if being which is 
one is the cause of angels, but the one being of daemons. For in one 
place, being which is one is a part of the one being, but in another the 
one being is a part of being which is one. And here, indeed, the union 
is essential, but there essence has the form of the one. For the summit of 
being which is one is a thing of this kind. Deservedly, therefore, is intel¬ 
ligible multitude all-powerful, and intelligible animal all-perfect, as being 
at once the cause of all things, and this as far as to the last of things, Plato 
all but exclaiming, [in the words of the Chaldtean Oracle,] “ Thence a 
fiery whirlwind sweeping along, obscures the flower of fire, leaping at the 
same time into the cavities of the worlds." For the divine unities pro¬ 
ceeding gradually, generate the multitude of all mundane natures. This 
triad, therefore, is the fountain and cause of all things : and from it all 
the life, and all the progression of the Gods, and the genera superior to us, 
and of mortal animals subsist. For it produces totally and uniformly all 
things, and binds to itself the whole principles of the divisible rivers of 
vivification, and the production of forms. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


Again, therefore, let us recur from the divided theory of intelfigibles 
to the all-perfect and one science of them, and let us say to ourselves, that 
this intelligible genus of the Gods is unically exempt from all the other di¬ 
vine orders, and is neither called intelligible as known by a partial intel¬ 
lect, nor as comprehended by intelligence in conjunction with reason, nor 
yet as preexisting in all-perfect intellect. For it transcends both total 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


221 


and partial intelligibles, and exists prior to all intellectual objects, being 
an imparticipable and divine intelligible. Hence, also, it is allotted the 
same transcendency with respect to all the intelligible orders, as the one 
with respect to every genus of the Gods. For this intelligible is impar¬ 
ticipable, and supernally fills the divine and intellectual orders. For 
if every intellect is intelligible to itself, it possesses this property through 
the intelligible Gods. For plenitude is derived to all things from thence. 
And thus the intelligible is at the same time exempt from intellect, exist¬ 
ing itself by itself; and at the same time the intelligible is not external to 
intellect. For there is an intelligible which is conjoined with intellect; 
the co-ordinate being derived from that which is exempt, the participated 
from that which is imparticipable, that which is inherent from that which 
is preexistent, and that which is multiplied from that which is uniform. 
Intelligible simplicity, therefore, must not be defined to be such as that 
which we are accustomed to assert of intelligibles. For in these the one 
becomes equal to multitude, and separation to the uniform sameness of 
essence. But intelligible simplicity is uniform, without separation and 
occult, excelling every divisible form of life, and intellectual multitude, 
lienee I do not place intelligible simplicity in the order of idea. For this 
form is partial, and is subordinate to intelligible union. But I consider 
it as the hyparxis of divine natures, and as generative of the whole of the 
good which is distributed to all divine natures, and in which the Gods 
themselves subsist. For the goodness of the Gods, is neither form nor 
habit, but the plenitude of divine self-sufficiency and divine power, ac¬ 
cording to which the Gods fill all things with good. In a much greater 
degree, therefore, are the intelligible Gods, because they are united tO' 
the good , wholly full of superessential goodness, and being established in 
this, they contain in it the supreme hyparxis of themselves. Very pro¬ 
perly, therefore, do we say that the intelligible Gods unfold the ineffable 
principle of all things, and his admirable transcendency and uniop; sub¬ 
sisting themselves indeed occultly, but comprehending multitude uni¬ 
formly and unically; reigning over the whole of things exemptly, and be¬ 
ing uncoordinated with all the other Gods. For as the good illuminates 
all things with superessential light, and exhibits the Gods who are the fa* 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK III. 


m 

then of all things, so likewise the intelligible genus of Gods, according to 
a similitude to the good, imparts from itself to all the secondary Gods, 
intelligible plenitude. Hence, according to each distribution of the Gods, 
there is an appropriate intelligible multitude, just as a monad analogous 
to the good exists prior to each of the divine orders. And this monad 
indeed is the preexistent leader of union to secondary natures. But in¬ 
telligible multitude is the preexistent source of beauty, self-sufficiency, 
power, essence, and all intelligible goods. For the Gods antecedently 
and intelligibly comprehend all intellectual natures, and contain in them¬ 
selves all' things according to supreme union. 


* Instead of ret x«4’ tvaxnv, it is requisite to read irwnx xai’ evtociv, and then the end of this book 
will be co mplete, and not defective as the Latin translatorPortus imagined it was. 





Digitized by v^ooQle 



% 


\ 


BOOK IV. 


CHAPTER I. 


Let the discussion, therefore, of the intelligible Gods, unfolding the 
mystic doctrine of Plato concerning them be here terminated by us. But 
it entirely follows in the next place, that we should consider after the same 
manner the narration concerning the intellectual Gods. Since, however, 
of intellectuals some are both intelligible and intellectual, viz. such as ac¬ 
cording to the Oracle perceiving intellectually are at the same time intel¬ 
lectually perceived ; but others are intellectual only;—this being the case, 
beginning from those that are intellectual and at the same time intelligi¬ 
ble, we will in the first place determine what pertains to them in common, 
from which we shall render the doctrine concerning each order of them 
more perspicuous. Again, therefore, let us recal to our memory those 
things which we a little before demonstrated, viz. that there are three 
total monads which are entirely beyond the Gods that are divided accord¬ 
ing to parts, viz. essence, life and intellect. And these prior to the par¬ 
tial participate of the superessential unities. Essence, however, is exempt 
from the rest. Life is allotted the middle order. But intellect converts 
the end of this triad to the beginning. And all these are indeed intelli¬ 
gibly in essence; but intelligibly and intellectually in life; and intellec- 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



2U 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV 


tually in intellect. And as secondary natures always participate of the 
natures placed above them, but these prior to participation presubsist 
themselves by themselves; and as in each order there are these three 
things, the cause of abiding, the cause of proceeding, and the cause of con¬ 
version, though intellect is more formalized according to conversion, but 
life according to progression, and essence according to permanency;— 
this being the case, it is certainly necessary that the first intellectual Gods 
being essentialized according to life should conjoin imparticipable intel¬ 
lect, and the intelligible genus of Gods, and that they should uniformly 
* connect the various progressions of secondary, but unfold and expand the 
stable hyparxis of precedaneous causes. For imparticipable life is a 
thing of this kind, circumscribing that which is primarily being and 
intellect, and participating indeed of being, but participated by intellect. 
But this is the same thing ai to assert that intelligence is filled indeed 
from the intelligible, but fills intellect from itself. For being is the intel¬ 
ligible, but life is intelligence. And being indeed is characterized ac¬ 
cording to a divine hyparxis; but life according to power; and intellect 
according to intelligible intellect. For as being is to hyparxis, so is intel¬ 
lect to being. And as intelligible power is to each of the extremes, so is 
life to the intelligible and to intellect. And as power is generated from 
the one and hyparxis, bnt constitutes in conjunction with the one the 
nature of being, so life proceeds indeed from being, and gives subsistence 
to a power different from that which is in being. As also the one itself 
which exists prior to being, imparts to being from itself a second unity, 
so likewise life being allotted an hypostasis prior to intellect, generates in¬ 
tellectual life. For true beingand the intelligible which precede the rest, 
supply both life and intellect with union. Imparticipable life, therefore, 
but which participates of the intelligible monads is the second after being, 
is generative of imparticipable intellect, and giving completion to this 
medium, and containing the bond of intelligibles and intellectuals, is illu¬ 
minated by Gods who are allotted a union secondary to the occult sub¬ 
sistence of intelligibles, but preceding according to cause the separation of 
intellectual natures. For the unical, indivisible, simple, and primary na¬ 
ture of intelligibles, subsides through the medium of these Gods into 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. I. 


OF PLATO. 


225 


multitude and separation, and the inexplicable evolution of the divine 
orders. Whence also, I think, the Gods who connectedly contain life 
which is infinite, being the middle of the intelligible and intellectual 
Gods, and carried in the divisions of themselves as in a vehicle, are called 
intelligible and at the same time intellectual; being filled indeed, from the 
first intelligibles, but filling the intellectual Gods. For we call the intelligible 
Gods intelligible, not as coordinate with intellect. For the intelligible 
which is in intellect is one thing, and that which produces the intellect^ 
Gods another: and we denominate the Gods that subsist according to 
life intelligible and at the same time intellectual, not as giving completion 
to intellect, nor as being established according to intellectual intelligence, 
and imparting to intellect the power of intellectual perception, but to the 
intelligible the power of being intellectually perceived, but we give them 
this appellation, as deriving their subsistence from the intelligible monads, 
but generating all the intellectual hebdomads. And because they are 
illuminated indeed with intelligible life, but subsist prior to intellectuals, 
according to a generative cause, we think fit to denominate them in com* 
mon, connecting their names from the extremes, iu the same manner as 
they also are allotted a peculiarity collective of wholes in the divine orders. 

It is evident, therefore, that they subsist according to this medium, and 
that they are proximate to the intelligible Gods, who are both monadic 
and triadic. For the intelligible triads, with reference indeed to the 
highest union and which is exempt from all things, are triads; but with 
reference to the divided essence of triads, they are monads, unfolding into 
light from themselves total triads. Since intelligibles, therefore, in their 
triadic progression, do not depart from a unical hyparxis, the intelligible 
and at the same time intellectual Gods subsist triadically, exhibiting in 
themselves the separation of the monads, and through divine difference, 
proceeding into multitude, and a variety of powers and essences. For 
the natures which subsist more remote from the one principle [of all 
things,] are more multiplied than the natures which are prior to them 
and are diminished indeed in powers, and the comprehensions of second* 

* for ficvnu it it nepemry to read aunty. 

Proc. Vox,. I. 2 F 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



2 2(5 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


ary natures, but are divided into more numbers, and such as are more 
distant from the monad. They likewise relinquish the union which is 
the cause of primarily efficient natures, and variety is assumed by them 
in exchange for the occult hyparxis of those primary essences. According 
to this reasoning, therefore, the intelligible and intellectual separation is 
greater than the separation which is only intelligible. And of these 
again, the partial orders are allotted a much greater division, so as to un- 
fold to us a multitude of Gods which cannot be comprehended in the 
numbers within the decad. Their peculiarities also are indescribable, and 
inexplicable by our conceptions, and are manifest only to the Gods them¬ 
selves, and to the causes of them. Such, therefore, are the intelligible 
and intellectual Gods, and such is the peculiarity which they are allotted, 
a peculiarity connective of extremes, and which unfolds into light prece- 
daneous, but converts secondary natures. For they intellectually per¬ 
ceive the Gods prior to them, but are objects of intellection to the Gods 
posterior to them. Hence also Timaeus establishes all-perfect animal to 
be the most beautiful of intelligibles, because there are intelligibles pos- 
. terior to it, which it surpasses in beauty, as being superior to them, and 
because it is the boundary of the first intelligibles, the natures posterior 
to it subsisting intellectually. According to this reasoning, therefore, 
the first intellectual Gods are also intelligible; and we do not, deriving 
these things from a foreign source, ascribe them to Plato, but they are as¬ 
serted by us in consequence of receiving auxiliaries from him. This, 
however, will be more manifest through what follows. 


CHAPTER II. 

In the next place, therefore, we shall discuss the manner in which the 
Gods who illuminate the breadth of imparticipable life proceed from the 
intelligible Gods. Since then the intelligible Gods establish in themselves 


D itized by LjOOQle 



CHAP. II. 


OF PLATO. 


227 


uniformly things multiplied, occultly such as are divided, and according 
to a certain admirable transcendency of simplicity, the various genera of 
beings,—hence the first intellectual Gods,* unfolding their indistinct 
union, and the unknown nature of their hypostasis, and being filled 
through intelligible power and essential life with the prolific abun¬ 
dance of wholes, are allotted a kingdom which ranks as the second after 
them. And they always indeed produce, perfect, and connect them¬ 
selves, but receive from the intelligible Gods an'occiilt generation; from 
intelligible power indeed, receiving a peculiarity generative of all things; 
but from intelligible life which preexists according to cause in the intelli¬ 
gible, receiving the nature which is spread under them. For life is pri¬ 
marily indeed in intelligibles; but secondarily in intelligibles and intel-' 
lectuals; and in a third degree in intellectuals; existing indeed according 
to cause in the first, but according to essence in the second, and according 
to participation in the last of these. The first intellectual, therefore, pro¬ 
ceed from the intelligible Gods, multiplying indeed their union, and their 
unical powers, unfolding their occult hyparxis, and through prolific, con¬ 
nective, and perfective causes assimilating themselves to the essential, en¬ 
tire, and all-perfect transcendencies of intelligibles. For in intelligibles 
there were three primarily effective powers; one indeed constituting the 
essence of wholes; another measuring things which are multiplied; and 
another being productive of the forms of all generated natures. 

• And conformably to these, the intelligible and intellectual powers sub¬ 
sist; one indeed, by its very essence producing the life of secondary na¬ 
tures, according to a certain intelligible comprehension; but another 
being connective of every thing which is divided, and imparting by illu¬ 
mination the intelligible measure to those natures that relinquish the one 
union [of all things;] and another supplying all things with figure, and 
form and perfection. The intelligible and intellectual orders of the 
Gods, therefore, are generated according to all the intelligible causes. 
From power indeed, being allotted the peculiarity of progression; but 
from life receiving the portion of being which is suspended from them. 
For life is conjoined with power; since life is of itself infinite, all motion 

' It is necessary to supply in this place in the original, ntgoi tm. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



m 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV 


having infinity consubsistent with its nature, and the power of infinity, is 
generative of the whole of things. But from the triadic hypostasis of in* 
telligibles, they receive a distribution into first, middle and last. For it 
is necessary that all things should be detained by a triadic progression, 
and that this should be the case prior to all [other] things with the intelli¬ 
gible and at the same time intellectual genera of Gods. For because they 
subsist as the middle of wholes, and give completion to the bond of the 
-first orders, according to their summit indeed, they are assimilated to in* 
telligibles, but according to their extremity, to intellectuals. And they 
are partly indeed intelligible, and partly intellectual. For every where 
the progressions of the divine genera are effected through continued simi¬ 
litude. And the first of subordinate are united to the ends of preexistent 
causes. As however, the first and the last in the middle of wholes are 
both intelligible and intellectual, it is necessary there should be a connec¬ 
tive medium of these, according to which medium the peculiarity of these 
Gods is principally apparent. For that which is intelligible and at the 
same time intellectual, in one part indeed is more abundant than, but in 
another equally communicates with both these. From these things, 
therefore, the continuity of the progression of the divine orders appears 
to be admirable. For the extremity of intelligibles indeed was intellec¬ 
tual, yet as in intelligibles. But the summit of intelligibles and at the same 
time intellectuals,’ is intelligible indeed, yet it possesses this peculiarity 
vitally. And again, the end of intelligibles and at the same time intel¬ 
lectuals, is intellectual, but it is vitally so. But the beginning of intel¬ 
lectuals, is intelligible, and presides over the intellectual Gods, yet it has 
the intelligible intellectually. And thus all the divine genera are allotted 
an indissoluble connexion and communion, an admirable friendship, and 
well-ordered diminution, and a transcendency, partly coordinate and 
partly exempt. That which proceeds too, is always in continuity with 
its producing cause; and secondary natures together with a firm esta¬ 
blishment in their causes, make a progression from them. There is likewise 
one series and alliance of all things; secondary natures always subsisting 
from those prior to them, through similitude. After what manner, there¬ 
fore, the intelligible and ^t the same time intellectual Gods, unfold them- 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. III. 


OF PLATO. 


£*<> 

selves into light from the intelligible Gods, may through these things be 
recollected. 


CHAPTER III. 

In the next place, let us show how they are divided in their progres¬ 
sions, and what difference the triads of these Gods are allotted with 
respect to the intelligible triads. These Gods, therefore, are also divided 
triply, after the above mentioned manner; being conjoined indeed to the 
intelligible, through their summit; but to the intellectual through their end; 
and through the middle bond of the extremes, being allotted the peculi¬ 
arity of each equally, and extending to both the intelligible and intellec¬ 
tual genera of Gods, as the centre of these two-fold orders, uniformly 
containing the communion of wholes. They are likewise divided triply, 
because in these all things, viz. essence, life, and intellect, are vitally, in 
the same manner as they are intelligibly in the Gods prior to them, and 
intellectually in the Gods that derive their subsistence from these. And 
essence indeed is the intelligible of life; but life is the middle and at the 
same time the peculiarity of this order; and intellect is the extremity, and 
that which is proximately carried in intellectuals as in a vehicle. All 
things therefore subsisting in these Gods, there will be a division of them 
into first, middle, and last genera. And in the third place, they are di¬ 
vided triply, because it is necessary that life should abide, proceed, and 
be converted to its principles; since of beings, the first triad was said to 
establish all things, and prior to other things the second triad. Eternity, 
therefore, abides stably in the first triad. But the triad posterior to this, 
is the supplier to wholes [and therefore to all things,] of progression, mo¬ 
tion, and life according to energy. And the third triad is the supplier of 
conversion to the one, and of perfection which convolves all secondary 
natures to their principles. Hence it is necessary that the intelligible and 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



23a 


ON THE THEOLOGY BOOK IV 

at the same time intellectual Gods, should primarily participate of these 
three powers, and should abide indeed in the summit of themselves; but 
proceeding from thence, and extending themselves to all things, should 
again be converted to the intelligible place of survey, and conjoin to the 
beginning of their generation the end of their whole progression. 

The intelligible and at the same time intellectual Gods therefore are, 
as I have said, triply divided. And essence indeed is that which ranks as 
first in them, but life is the middle, and intellect the extremity of them. 
Since however, each of these three is perfect, and participates of the in¬ 
telligible monads, I mean of the essence which is there, of intelligible life, 
and of intelligible intellect, they are tripled according to the participation 
of primarily efficient causes. And the intelligible of life indeed possesses 
essence, intellect, and life intelligibly; but the intelligible and intellectual 
of it, possesses essence, life and intellect, intelligibly and at the same time 
intellectually; and the intellectual of it possesses these intellectually and 
intelligibly. 1 And every where indeed, there is a triad in each of the sec¬ 
tions, but in conjunction with an appropriate peculiarity. Hence three 
intelligible and at the same time intellectual triads present themselves to 
our view, which are indeed illuminated by the divine unities, but each of 
them contains an all-various multitude. For since in intelligibles, there 
was, an all-powerful and all-perfect multitude, how is it possible that this 
multitude should not in a much greater degree, be evolved and multiplied, 
in the Gods secondary to the intelligible order, according to the prolific 
cause of them P Each triad therefore comprehends in itself a multitude 
of powers, and a variety of forms, producing intelligible multitude into 
energy, and unfolding into light the generative infinity of intelligibles. 
And we indeed, being impelled from the participants, discover the pecu¬ 
liarity of the participated superessential Gods. But according to the 
order of things, the intelligible and intellectual monads generate about 
themselves essences, and all lives, and the intellectual genera. And 
through these, they unfold the unknown transcendency of themselves. 


1 In the original, after xeu vow in this sentence, it is necessary to supply vorjraic xai votga>;, re h 
w«jov. And after voip»f, it is also requisite to supply **« ve»)T»;, as in the above translation. 


Digitized by LjOOQle 



CHAP. III. 


OF PLATO. 


231 


preserving by itself the preexistent cause of the whole of things. There 
are however, as we have said, three intelligible triads. And there are 
also three triads posterior to these, which appear to be tripled from 
them, according to their prolific perfection. 

But it is necessary that the peculiarity of the intelligible, and also of 
the intelligible and at the same time intellectual triad, should be defined 
according to another mode. For in the intelligible order indeed, each 
triad had only the third part of being; for it consisted of bound, and in¬ 
finity, and from both these. But this was essence indeed in the first triad, 
intelligible life in the second, and intelligible intellect in the third. The 
natures however prior to these were unities and superessential powers, 
which give completion to the whole triads. But in the intelligible and at 
the same time intellectual order, each triad .has essence, life and intellect; 
one indeed intelligibly and at the same time intellectually, but more in¬ 
telligibly, so far as it is in continuity with the first intelligibles; but ano¬ 
ther intellectually and intelligibly, but more intellectually, because it is 
proximately carried in intellectuals; and another according to an equal 
part, as it comprehends in itself both the -peculiarities. Hence the first 
triad, that we may speak of each, was in intelligibles, bound, infinity, and 
essence; for essence was that which was primarily mixed. But here the 
first triad is essence, life and intellect, with appropriate unities. For es¬ 
sence is suspended from the first deity [of this triad,] life from the second, 
and intellect from the third. And these three superessential monads, unfold 
the monads of the first triad. But again, the second triad after this, was in 
the intelligible order, a superessential unity, power, and intelligible and oc¬ 
cult life. Here however, essence, life and intellect are all vital, and are sus¬ 
pended from the Gods who contain the one bond of the whole of this or¬ 
der. For as the first unities were allotted a power unific of the middle 
genera, so the second unities after them, exhibit the connective peculia¬ 
rity of primarily efficient causes. After these therefore, succeeds the 
third triad, which in the intelligible order indeed was unity, power, and 
intelligible intellect; but here it consists of three superessential Gods, who 
close the termination of the intelligible and at the same time intellectual 
Gods, and begird all things intellectually, I mean essence, fife and intellect. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



332 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


They are likewise the suppliers of divine perfection, * imitating the all¬ 
perfect intelligible triad, just as the connectedly containing Gods imitate 
the intelligible measure, and the Gods prior to these, the generative cause 
of intelligibles. The three intelligible therefore, and at the same time in¬ 
tellectual triads, are thus generated, and are allotted such a difference as 
this, with respect to the intelligible triads. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Again however, returning to Plato, let us accord with him, and exhi¬ 
bit the science which preexists with him concerning each of these triads. 
And in the first place, let us assume what is written in the Phaedrus, and 
survey from the words themselves of Socrates, how he unfolds to us the 
whole of the orderly distinction of these triads, and the differences which 
it contains. In the Phaedrus therefore, there are said to be twelve lead¬ 
ers who preside over the whole [of mundane concerns,] and who conduct 
all the mundane Gods, and all the herds of daemons, and convert them to 
the intelligible nature. It is also said that Jupiter is the leader of all 
these twelve Gods, that he drives a winged chariot, adorns and takes care 
of all things, and brings all the army of Gods that follow him, first indeed 
to the place of survey within the heaven, and to the blessed spectacles, 
and discursive energies of the intelligibles which are there. But in the 
next place Jupiter brings them to the subcelestial arch which proximate- 
ly begirds the heaven, and is contained in it, and after this to the heaven 
itself, and the back of heaven; where also divine souls stand, and being 
borne along together with the heaven, survey all the essence that is beyond 
it. Socrates further adds, that prior to the heaven there is what is called 
the supercelestial place, in which true and real essence, the plain of truth, 

1 for Tttoifrenroi it is necessary to read nAiwn) ro$. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. V. 


OF PLATO. 


233 


the kingdom of Adrastia, and the divine choir of virtues subsist, and that 
souls being nourished through the intellection of these monads, are hap¬ 
pily affected, following [in their contemplation} the circulation of the 
heaven. 

These things therefore, are asserted in the Phaedrus, Socrates being 
clearly inspired by divinity, and discussing mystic concerns. It is n# 
cess ary however, prior to other things, to consider what the heaven is of 
which Socrates speaks, and in what order of beings it is established. For 
having discovered this, we may also survey the subcelestial arch, and the 
snpercelestial place. 1 For each of these is assumed according to habitude 
towards the heaven; the one indeed being primarily placed above it, but 
the other being primarily arranged under it. 


CHAPTER V. 


What therefore is the heaven to which Jupiter leads the Gods? For 
if we should say that it is the sensible heaven, as certain other persons say 
it is, it will be necessary that the more excellent genera should be con¬ 
verted to things naturally subordinate to themselves. For if Jupiter the 
mighty leader in the heaven proceeds to this sensible heaven, and leads to 
it all the Gods that follow him, he will have a conversion to things sub¬ 
ordinate, and posterior to himself. And together with Jupiter, this will 
also be the case with all the leaders, and the Gods and daemons suspend¬ 
ed from these; though the same Socrates in the Phaedrus says, that even 
a partial soul when perfected is conversant with sublime concerns, and 
governs the whole world. How is it possible therefore, that the leaders 
of whole souls should be converted to the sensible heaven, and exchange 

J After rtfy vwouganav it U obviously necessary to add xat to» vnpovgtzmy tww, 

Proc. Vol. I. 2 G 


Digitized by 


Google 



234 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV- 


the intelligible place of survey for an inferior allotment, when through 
these souls they preside over the universe, in order that they may illumi¬ 
nate mundane natures with a liberated and unrestrained power? In ad¬ 
dition to these things also, what are the blessed intellections of the Gods 
within this sensible heaven, and what are the evolutions of all the know¬ 
ledge of sensiblcs?' For in short the Gods know sensible*, not by a con¬ 
version to them, but by containing in themselves the causes of them. 
Hence intellectually perceiving themselves, they know sensibles causally, 
and rule over them, not by looking to them, and verging to the subjects 
of their government, but by converting through love interior natures to 
themselves- Neither therefore, is it lawful for the Gods who adorn the 
whole of heaven, and think it worthy their providential care, to be ever 
situated under the circulation of this heaven ; nor is there any blessedness 
in the contemplation of the things which exist under it; nor are the souls 
that are converted to this contemplation among the number of those that 
arebappy, and that follow the Gods, but they rank among those that ex¬ 
change intelligible for doxastic nutriment, such as Socrates says, the souls 
are that are lame, that have broken their wings, and are in a merged con¬ 
dition. Since therefore passions of this kind belong to partial souls, and 
these not such as arc happy, how can we refer a conversion to the sensi¬ 
ble heaven to the ruling and leading Gods ? 

Farther still, Socrates says that souls standing on the back of the hea¬ 
ven, are carried round by the circumvolution itself of the heaven; but 
Timaeus, and the Athenian guest say, that souls lead: every thing in the 
heavens by their own motions, externally cover bodies with their motions, 
and living their own life through the whole of time, impart to bodies se¬ 
condarily efficient powers of motion. How therefore do these things ac¬ 
cord with those who make this heaven to be sensible? For souls do not 
contemplate and dance round intelligibles, through the circulation of the? 
heavens; but through the unapparent convolution of souls,, bodies re¬ 
volve in a circle, and about these perform their, circulations. If there¬ 
fore any one should say that the sensible heaven circumvolves souls, and. 

* The sentence that immediately follows this in the original, is so defective, as to be perfectly, 
u nintellig ible. I have not therefore, attempted to translate it. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. V. 


OF PLATO. 


235 

that it is divided according to the back, the profundity, and the subce¬ 
lestial arch, many absurdities must necessarily be admitted. 

But if some one should say that the heaven is intelligible, to which Ju¬ 
piter is the leader, but all the Gods, and together with these, daemons 
follow him, he will unfold the divinely-inspired narrations of Plato con¬ 
sentaneously to the nature of things, and will follow the most celebrated 
of his interpreters. For Plotinus and Jamblichus are of opinion that this 
heaven is a certain intelligible. And prior to these, Plato himself in the 
Cratylus following the Orphic theogonies calls the father indeed of Jupiter, 
Saturn, but of Saturn, Heaven. And he evinces that Jupiter is the de- 
miurgus of the whole of things through the names [by which he is called,] 
investigating for this purpose the truth concerning them. But he shows 
that Saturn is connective of a divine intellect; and that Heaven is the in¬ 
telligence, or intellectual perception of the first intelligibles. For sight, 
says he, looking to the things above, is Heaven. Hence Heaven subsists 
prior to every divine intellect, with which the mighty Saturn is replete; 
burft intellectually perceives the things above, and such as are beyond the 
celestial order. The mighty Heaven therefore, is allotted a kingdom which 
is between the intelligible and intellectual orders. For the circulation 
mentioned in the Phsedrus is intelligence, through which all the Gods and 
souls obtain the contemplation of intelligibles. But intelligence is a me¬ 
dium between intellect and the intelligible. It must be said therefore, 
that the whole of heaven is established according to this medium, and that 
it contains the one bond of the divine orders, being the father indeed of 
the intellectual genus, but being generated from the kings prior to it, 
which also it is said to see. But on one side of it the supercelestial plaice, 
and on the other the subcelestial arch must be arranged. 


1 


♦ 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



236 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 



CHAPTER VI. 


Again therefore, if indeed the snpercelestial place is the imparticipa- 
ble and occult genus of the intelligible Gods, how can we establish so 
great a divine multitude there, and this accompanied with separation, 
viz. truth, science, justice, temperance, the meadow, and Adraslia l For 
neither do the fountains of the virtues, nor the separation and variety of 
forms, pertain to the intelligible Gods. For the first and most unical of 
forms extend the demiurgic intellect of wholes to the intelligible paradigm, 
and the comprehension of forms which is there. But Socrates in the 
Phaedrus says that a partial intellect contemplates the supercelestial 
place. For this intellect is the governor of the soul, as it is well said by 
the philosophers prior to us. If therefore, it be necessary from this 
analogy to investigate the difference of intelligibles, as the demiurgic in¬ 
tellect indeed, is im participate, but a partial intellect is participable, so 
with respect to the intelligible, one indeed which is the first paradigm of 
the demiurgus, pertains to the first intelligibles, but another which is the 
first paradigm of a partial intellect pertains to the second intelligibles, 
which are indeed intelligibles, but are allotted an intelligible transcenden¬ 
cy, as subsisting at the summit of intellectuals. But if the supercelestial 
place is beyond the celestial circulation, but is inferior to those intelligi¬ 
ble triads, because it is more expanded; for it is the plain of truth, and 
is not unknown, is divided according to a multitude of forms, and pos¬ 
sesses a variety of powers, and the meadow which is there nourishes souls, 
and is visible to them, the first intelligibles illuminating souls with ineffa¬ 
ble union, but not being known by them through intelligence;—if this be 
the case, it is certainly necessary that the supercelestial place should sub¬ 
sist between the intelligible nature, and the celestial circulation. If Plato 
himself also admits that essence which truly is, exists in this place, how is it 
possible that he should not also admit it to be intelligible, and to partici- 


D - itized by L.OOQ Le 


OF PLATO, 


CHAP. VII. 


237 


pate of the first intelligible*? For because indeed it is essence it is intel¬ 
ligible ; but because it truly is, it participates of being. 

Moreover, possessing in itself a multitude of in tell igibles, it will not be 
arranged according to the first triad; for the one being is there, and not 
the multitude of beings. But possessing a various life which the meadow 
indicates, it is subordinate to the second triad; for intelligible life is one, 
and without separation. And again, since it shines forth to the view with 
divided forms, all-various orders, and prolific powers, it falls short of the 
all-perfect triad [in intelligibles]. If therefore it is the second to these in 
dignity and power, but is established above the celestial order, it is intel¬ 
ligible indeed, but is the summit of the intellectual Gods. On this ac¬ 
count also, nutriment is derived to souls from thence. For the intelligi¬ 
ble is nutriment, since the first intelligibles also, viz. the beautiful, the 
wise and the good, are said to nourish souls. For by these, says Socrates,, 
the wing of the soul is nourished ; but by the contraries to these it is cor¬ 
rupted and destroyed. These things however, are indeed effected by the 
first intelligibles exemptly, and through union and silence. But the su¬ 
percelestial place is said to nourish through intelligence and energy, and' 
to fill the happy choir of souls with intelligible light, and the prolific rivers, 
of life. 


CHAPTER VII. 


After the supercelestial place however and the heaven itself, is the 
subcelestial arch, which it is obvious to every one ought to be arranged 
under the heaven, and not in the heaven. For it is not called by Plato 
the celestial, but the subcelestial arch. That it is also proximately situ¬ 
ated under the celestial circulation, is evident from what is written con¬ 
cerning it. But if it be necessary to make the subcelestial arch being 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



2SS 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


'such, the same with the summit of intellectuals, and not with the end of 
the intelligible and intellectual Gods, it will be now necessary to contem¬ 
plate what remains. For the summit of intellectuals separates itself from 
the kingdom of the heaven, but the subcelestial arch is on all sides com¬ 
prehended by it And the former indeed constitutes the whole of intel¬ 
lect, intellectual multitude, and as Socrates says, the blessed discursive 
energies of the Gods; but the latter only bounds the celestial series, and 
.supplies the Gods with the means of ascending to the heaven. For when 
the Gods are elevated to the banquet, and the delicious food, and are 
filled with intelligible goods, then they proceed ascending, to the sub¬ 
celestial arch, and through it are raised to the celestial circulation. Hence, 

« 

if you say that the subcelestial arch is perfective of the Gods, and con¬ 
verts them to the whole of the heaven, and the supercelestial place, you 
will not wander from the meaning of Plato. For the Gods are indeed 
nourished by the intelligible, by the meadow, and by the divine forms, 
which the place above the heaven comprehends; but they are filled with 
this nutriment through the subcelestial arch. For through this they also 
participate of the celestial circulation. Hence they are converted in¬ 
deed, through the subcelestial arch; but they receive a vigorous intellec¬ 
tual perception from the celestial order; and they are filled with intelli¬ 
gible goods from the supercelestial place. It is evident therefore, that 
the supercelestial place is allotted an intelligible summit; but the circula¬ 
tion of the heaven, the middle breadth; and the arch, the intelligible ex- 
lremity. For all things are in it. And intellect indeed is convertive, but 
the intelligible is the object of desire. But divine intelligence gives com¬ 
pletion to the middle, perfecting indeed the conversions of divine natures, 
and binding them to such as are first, but unfolding the tendencies to in- 
telligibles, and filling secondary natures with precedaneous goods. I 
think however, that through these tilings we have sufficiently reminded 
the reader of the order of these three. 


i 


Digitized by 


Google 



CH AP. LX. 


OF PLATO. 


239 


✓ 


CHAPTER VIII. 

Perhaps however, some one may ask us, why we here characterize: 
the whole progression of the intelligible and at the same time intellectual 
Gods, according to the middle, and why we call one of the extremes su¬ 
percelestial, but the other subcelestial, from their habitude to the middle, 
indicating the exempt transcendency of the one, but the proximate and. 
connected diminution of the other. Perhaps, therefore, we may concisely 
answer such a one, that this whole genus of the intelligible and at the 
same time intellectual Gods, binds together both the extremes, being to 
the one the cause of conversion, but to the other of becoming unfolded 
into light, and being present with secondary natures. As therefore, we, 
denominate all the intelligible Gods paternal and unical, characterizing, 
them from the summit, and as we say that they are the boundaries of the 
whole of things, viz. those that are effective of essence, those that are the 
causes of perpetuity, and those that are the sources of the production of 
forms, after the same manner we unfold these middle Gods as the leaders 
of all bonds, from the middle which is in them. For the whole of this 
middle order is vivific, connective and perfective. But the summit of it 
indeed, unfolds the impressions of intelligibles, and their ineffable union. 
The termination of it converts intellectuals,, and conjoins them to intelli¬ 
gibles.. And the middle collects into, and fixes in itself as in a centre the. 
whole genefa of the Gods. For to the extremes also through reference 
to the middle we attribute the habitude of transcendency and diminution, 
calling the one above, but the other under the middle.. 


CHAPTER IX. 


Through these things therefore, we may concisely answer him, as I 
have said, who doubts concerning these names. Here however,, it is fit 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



240 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


that we should admire the divine science of Plato, because he has nar¬ 
rated the mode of the ascent of the whole of things to the intelligible con¬ 
formably to the highest of initiators. For in the first place, he elevates 
souls and the Gods themselves to the fountains , through the liberated 
leaders. For the blessed and most abundant spectacles and discursive 
energies are particularly in these fountains, in which also theurgists place 
all their hope of salvation. They are therefore blessed through the un¬ 
polluted monads; but they are most abundant through the cause of di¬ 
vine difference; and they are spectacles and discursive energies, through 
the intellectual and paternal powers. But in the second place, Plato ele¬ 
vates souls and Gods from the fountains, and through the fountains to the 
leaders of perfection. For after many and divided intellections the good 
of the perfective Gods shines forth, being supernally expanded from the 
intellectual Gods themselves, and illuminating us, and prior to our souls, 
whole souls, and prior to these, the Gods themselves. But from the per¬ 
fective Gods Plato elevates souls and Gods to the divinities, who are con¬ 
nective of all the intellectual orders. For the perfective Gods are sus¬ 
pended from these divinities, subsist together with them, and are compre¬ 
hended by them. Such also is the communion and union of these Gods, 
that some of the most celebrated [interpreters of Plato] have supposed 
that there is an all-perfect and indivisible sameness among them, in conse¬ 
quence of not being able to apprehend by a reasoning process the separa¬ 
tion which is in them. For here also, it may appear to some one that 
Plato calls the extremity of the celestial circulation, the arch. This how¬ 
ever is not the case. For he does not denominate the arch celestial, but 
bubcelestial. As therefore, the supercelestial is essentially exempt from 
the heaven, thus also the subcelestial is inferior to the kingdom of the 
heaven. For the former indeed is indicative of transcendency, but the 
latter of a proximately-arranged diminution. 

After this circulation however, which is connective of the whole of 
things, Plato elevates souls and the Gods to the supercelestial place, and 
the intelligible union of intellectuals, where also the Gods abiding, are 
nourished, are in a happy condition, and are filled with ineffable and 
uhical goods. For with theurgists also, the ascent to the ineffable and 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 


CHAP. IX. 


OF PLATO. 


244 

intelligible powers which are the stammitsof all intellectuals) i* through 
the connective Gods. In what manner however, the Gods are here con* 
joined to the first infeettigitdes, Plato no longer unfolds through words; 
for the contact With them is ineffable, and through inefiables, as he also 
teaches in what he sayS about them in ting Pheedrus. And through this 
order, the mystic Union with the intelligible and first-producing Gauges is 
effected. With us therefore, there is also the same mode of conjunction. 
And through this, the vnode of theurgic ascent is more credible. For 
as wholes ascend to exempt principles, through the natures proxitnately 
placed above them, thus abo parts imitating the ascent of wholes, ova 
conjoined through middle steps of ascent, with the most simple and fa* 
etihble causes. For what Plato has delivered in this dialogue concerning 
whole souls, he afterwards unfolds concerning ours. And in the first place 
indeed, he conjoins them with the liberated Gods. Afterwards, through 
these he elevates them to the perfective Gods. Afterwards, through these, 
to the connective Gods, and in a similar manner, as for as to the Intel* 
Kgibta Gods. Socrates therefore, narrating die mode of ascent to mtd- 
ligrble beauty, and how following the Gods, prior to bodies and genata* 
tioo, we were partakers of that blessed spectacle, says: “ For it was then 
lawful to see splendid beauty, when we obtained together with that happy 
choir, this blessed vision and spectacle, we indeed following Jupiter, but 
others hi conjunction with some other God, perceiving, and being initiated 
in those mysteries, which it is lawful to call the most blessed of mysteries." 
How then were we once conjoined with intelligible beauty ? Through 
being initiated, says he, in the most blessed of mysteries. What else 
therefore, does this assert, than that we were conjoined with the perfec¬ 
tive leaders, and were initiated by than, in under to onr being replenished 
with beauty? Of what goods therefore, is the initiation the procurer ? 
** Which orgies," says he, 1 " were celebrated by us, when we were entire and 
impassive, and were initiated in, and became spectators of entire, simple, 
and quietly stable visions.” The entire therefore, is derived to souls from 
the celestial circulation. For this contains, and is connective of all the 
divine genera, and also of our souls. Every thing however, which in the 
whole contains parts, comprehends also that which it divided, Mid col- 
Proc. Voi« I. 2 H 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


24,2 


lects that which is various into union and simplicity. But the entire, 
quietly stable, and simple visions, are unfolded to souls supernally from 
the supercelestial place, through the connectedly-containing Gods. For 
the mystic impressions of intelligibles, shine forth in that place, and also 
the unknown and ineffable beauty of characters. For muesis and epopteia * 
are symbols of ineffable silence, and of union with mystic natures through 
intelligible visions. And that which is the most admirable of all is this, 
that as theurgists order the whole body to be buried, except the head, in 
the most mystic of initiations, Plato also has anticipated this, being 
moved by the Gods themselves. “ For being pure,” says he, “ and liberated 
from this surrounding vestment, which we now denominate body, we ob¬ 
tained this most blessed muesis and epopteia, being full of intelligible 
light.” For the pure splendor [which he mentions] symbolically unfolds 
.to us intelligible light. Hence, when we are situated in the intelligible, 
we shall have a life perfectly liberated from the body. But elevating the 
head of the charioteer to the place beyond the heaven, we shall be filled 
with the mysteries which are there, and with intelligible silence. It also 
appears to me that Plato sufficiently unfolds the three elevating causes, 
love, truth, and faith, to those who do not negligently read what he has 
written. For what besides love conjoins with beauty ? Where is the 
plain of truth, except in this place? And what else than faith is the 
cause of this ineffable muesis ¥ For muesis in short, is neither through 
intelligence nor judgment, but through the unical silence imparted by 
faith, which is better than every gnostic energy, and which establishes 
both whole souls and ours, in the ineffable and unknown nature* of the 


*« The word TiXmj or initiation,” says Hermeas, in his MS. Commentary on the Fhxdrus,« was 
so denominated from rendering the soul perfect. The soul therefore was once perfect. But here 
it is divided, and is not able to energize wholly by itself.” He adds: “ But it is necessary to 
know that telete, muesis, and epopteia , rtkmi, pvyri;, and sioxrna, differ from each other. Telete, 
therefore, is analogous to that which is preparatory to purifications. But muesis, which is so called 
from closing the eyes, is more divine. For to close the eyes in initiation is no longer to receive by 
sense those divine mysteries, but with the pure soul itself. And muxu* epopteia is to be esta¬ 
blished in, and become a spectator of the mysteries.” 

* $uo-<i is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. X. 


OF PLATO. 


245 


Gods. These things however, have proceeded to this length from my 
sympathy about such like concerns. 


CHAPTER X. 


But again returning to the proposed theology, let us unfold the con¬ 
ceptions which Plato indicates to us concerning each order of the intel¬ 
ligible and at the same time intellectual Gods. The supercelestial place 
therefore is intelligible. Hence also Plato says that it is essence which 
truly is, and that it is visible to the intellect of the soul. It is likewise 
the one comprehension and union of the intellectual Gods. For it is not 
intelligible after such a manner as animal itself, nor as the first eternity, 
nor as that which is itself primarily the one being. For as these are pri¬ 
marily intelligibles, they are exempt from all other intelligibles, and pre¬ 
subsist by themselves. But the supercelestial place, is proximately es¬ 
tablished above the celestial circulation, and of this is the intelligible; 
yet it is not simply intelligible. And that we assert these things rightly, 
Socrates also testifies, imparting the intellection of this intelligible to souls 
likewise, through the heaven. For in this period, according to which 
they are carried round together with the circulation of the heaven, they 
behold indeed justice, they behold temperance, and they also behold sci¬ 
ence, and eafch of the beings which have a true and real existence; so that 
if the supercelestial place is intelligible, and real being, yet it is intelligi¬ 
ble, as being above the heaven. The first intelligibles however, are in¬ 
telligible according to their own essence, and according to the exempt 
and first efficient cause of all intellectual natures. For the mighty Saturn 
likewise, though he is an intellectual God, and the fulness of intellect, is 
intelligible as with reference to the demiurgus; for he is the summit of 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON TUP THEOLOGY 


book \r. 


tlie intellectual triad- Thus ttacefore, th© place also which is above the 
heaven, is allotted an intelligible transcendency with respeet to the celes¬ 
tial circulation, and is intelligible as in the first intellectuals. * Hence 
also it subsists analogous to the first triad of intelligibles. That triad 
however, was simply intelligible. For the intelligible which is in intelli- 
gfbles, at once exists prior to all second and third intelligibles. But the 
supercelestial place is not simply intelligible; for it is the summit of intel¬ 
lectuals, and not of intelligibles. Hence Plato calls the first triad of in¬ 
telligibles the one being; but he denominates the supercelestial place, 
truly-existing essence. For the former indeed, antecedes all beings in an 
admirable simplicity, and in the occult unity of being. For that being is 
the intelligible itself, and is not in one respect intelligible, but in another 
intellectual, nor is it that which is passive to [via, participates of] being; 
hut it is the seat, and the most ancient monad of being- This order how¬ 
ever, [via. the supercelestial place] falls short of the union of that triad, 
and participates pf being, but is not simply being. Hence also Plato 
calls it essence, and essence which truly is, as receiving this intelligible 
and essential according to the essence of that which is primarily being. 
And the first triad indeed ofintelligibles was paternalfor it subsists accord¬ 
ing to divine union and bound, and is the occult, and highest boundary of 
all intelligibles. But the supercelestial place is maternal, subsisting ac¬ 
cording to infinity, and the power of infinity. For this order is feminine 
and prolific, and produces all things by intelligible powers. Hence also, 
Plato calls it a place, as being the receptacle of the paternal causes, and 
'bringing forth, and producing the generative powers of the Gods into the 
hypostasis pf secondary natures. For having denominated matter also a 
place, he calls it the mother and nurse of the reasons [i. e. of the produc¬ 
tive principles], which proceed into it from being, and the paternal 
cause- 

According to this analogy, therefore, Plato thus denominates the super- 
qelestial place, as feminine, and as being the cause of those things ma¬ 
ternally, of which the intelligible father is the cause paternally. Matter 

1 Instead of tv tqi$ *patriaTOi$ voyroif yocfo^ it is necessary to read 0$ tv rw$ Ttpvm? toij vctget$ 

vcyjTOf. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. X- 


QF PCATQ, 


m 

however receives forms alone; but the mother and nurse of the Gods, not 
only receives, but also constitutes and generates secondary natures, together 
with the father. Nor does this generative deity produce from herself 
into an external place, her progeny, and separate them from her own com¬ 
prehension, in the same manner as the natures which generate here, 
deliver their offspring into light external to themselves; but she generates, 
comprehends and establishes all things in herself. Hence also she is the 
place of them, as being a seat which on all sides, contains them, and as 
by her prolific, and primarily efficient powers, preoccupying and con* 
taining in herself, all the progressions, multitude and variety of secondary 
natures, for all beings subsist in the Gods, and are comprehended and 
saved by them. For where can they recede from the Gods, and from the 
comprehension which is in them? And how, if they depart from them, 
can. they remain even for the smallest portion of time? In a parricidal: 
manner however the powers which are generative of divine natures* are, 
said to comprehend their progeny, so far as they are the proximate causes 
of them, and constitute their essence with a more abundant division, and 
a more particular providence. For paternal causes produce secondary 
natures uniformly* exemptly, and without coordination, and comprehend; 
hut unically their own progeny. And in simplicity indeed, they preoccu¬ 
py the variety of them; but in union their multitude. It is evident 
therefore, from what has been said, that the supercelestial place is intel¬ 
ligible, and after what manner it is intelligible. In addition to these 
things also it is evident, how it is feminine; for place is adapted to the 
generative Gods through the above-mentioned causes, And the meadow is 
the fountain of a vivific nature, as will be shortly demonstrated. Socrates 
likewise assumes all the divine natures that are in this place, to be of this 
kind, [viz to be of the feminine genus] I mean science herself, justice her¬ 
self temperance herself, truth herself, and Adrastia; which may especi¬ 
ally be considered as a certain indication, that Plato particularly attri¬ 
butes the feminine to this order, and not only other theologists. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



*46 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IY. 


CHAPTER XI. 

What therefore is the cause through which Plato in the first place ce¬ 
lebrates this deity negatively, analogous to the one t And what are I he 
negations ? For he denominates it, without colour, without figure, and 
without contact. And he takes away from it these three hyparxes, colour, 
figure, and contact. I say therefore, that this order being the summit of 
the intellectual Gods, is unknown and ineffable, according to its peculi¬ 
arity, and is [only] to be known through intelligible impressions. For 
being the summit of intellectuals, it conjoins itself with intelligibles. For 
how could intellectuals be conjoined with intelligibles, unless they ante¬ 
cedently constituted an intelligible transcendency of themselves ? But 
what connexion and communion could be surveyed of the whole orders 
of things, unless the extremities of such as are first possessed a certain 
Similitude to the beginnings of such as are second ? For on account of 
this similitude, these are connascent with each other, and all things sub¬ 
sist according to one series. As therefore, the end of intelligibles was 
intellectual, so likewise the beginning of intellectuals is allotted an in¬ 
telligible hyparx is. A nd each of these indeed is intelligible ; but the one 
is intelligible simply; and the other is not intelligible without the addi¬ 
tion of the intellectual. These therefore, are consubsistent with each 
other. And the one indeed, is the paternal cause of the whole of things, 
so far as it is intelligible, and the intellectual which is in it is extended in¬ 
telligibly. But the other is generatively constitutive of the same things, 
because it is intellectual, and intelligible good presides in the intellectual 
genus. All things therefore, are from both, exemptly indeed, from the 
intellectual of intelligibles, but coordinately, from the intelligible of in¬ 
tellectuals. And both indeed, rejoice in unknown hyparxes; and are 
alone, as Pjato says, known by intelligible, mystic, and ineffable impres¬ 
sions. Hence also he calls the attempt boldness which endeavours to 
unfold the arcana concerning them, and to explain by words their un¬ 
known union. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XI. 


OF PLATO. 


247 


From the end of the intelligible order however, the summit of intel- 
lectuals possesses its unknown peculiarity. For so far as it conjoins 
itself to the first intelligibles, and is filled with their unical, ineffable, and 
paternal hyparxis, so far also it exists in an unknown manner prior to 
intellectuals. Hence it is incomprehensible by the natures posterior to it; 
but it is known by those prior to it, being super-expanded into a continued 
union with them. 1 It likewise knows the natures prior to itself intelligibly; 
but this does not at all differ from uniform and ineffable knowledge. 
For intelligible knowledge is the union, cause, summit, and unknown and 
occult hyparxis of all knowledge. Since therefore, the one and united 
triad is, if it be lawful so to speak, the intellectual image of the unknown 
union of intelligibles, and presides over the same uniform and unknown 
power in intellectuals, as its own cause does, hence Plato mystically 
unfolds it through negations. For every where that which is highest, 
and that which is unknown, are analogous to the unical God. As 
therefore, we are taught to celebrate this God through negations, after 
the same manner we endeavour to unfold negatively the uniform and 
.unknown summits of secondary orders. And in short, since Socrates 
in the Phaedrus makes the ascent as far as to the supercelestial place, 
arranging it analogous to the first, as in this order, and in the ascent of 
souls, he celebrates it by negations. For in the Timaeus, Plato contends 
that the one demiurgus through whom everjr demiurgic genus of Gods 
subsists, is ineffable and unknown; and every where that which is highest 
has this transcendency with respect to secondary natures. For it imi¬ 
tates the cause which is at once unically exempt from all beings. We 
celebrate this cause however,, through negations alone, as existing prior 
to all things; but we unfold the summits which proceed analogous to It, 
affirmatively and at the same time negatively. As participating indeed, 
the natures prior to themselves, we celebrate them affirmatively. For 
Plath calls the supercelestial place essence which truly is, the plain of 
truth, the meadow, and the intelligible place of survey of the Gods, and 
he does not only call it without colour, without figure, and without 

* For atmjy, it is necessary to read wroiy. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



on the Theology 


book IV. 


*48 

contact, thus mingling affirmations with negations. For this order is a 
medium between the intelligible Gods and the first intellectual divine 
Orders, containing the bond of both. And it guards indeed intellectually, 
according to a uniform and unknown transcendency, but transmits 
the plenitudes of intelligibles as fiar as to the last of things. It likewise 
elevates all things at once, according to one common union, as far as to 
the intelligible father, and generates and produces them as far as to matter. 
Being therefore established between the tmical and the multiplied Gods, 
it is unfolded, negatively indeed, through the unknown manner in which 
it transcends secondary -natures, but affirmatively through its partici¬ 
pation of the first natures. For the first demiurgus is called in the 
TitHtMrs fabricator and fatlrer, and good, and all such names, So far as.he 
participates of preexistent causes; but so ihr as he is the monad of all 
fabrication, Plato leaves him unknown and ineffiible, exempt from all 
the fabricators of things. For he says, “ it is difficult to discover him, 
wad when found, k is impossible to speak of him to all men." Thus 
therefore Plato unfblds the supencelestial (dace, affirmatively indeed, as 
being filled from the first causes, at one time indeed calling it essence* 
which truly is, at another the plain of truth, and at another, something 
Che of this kind; but* so far as it transcends the intellectual Gods, and 
so for as it is supreme and unical, he celebrates it negatively, in the 
same manner as the principle which is exempt from ail things. 


CHAPTER XII. 


It follows therefore, in the next place, that we should consider what 
the negations are, and from what orders they are generated. In the 
Parmenides then, the negations of the one are produced from alt the 

* St is omitted in die original, which the lease evidently requires to be inserted. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CftAfc Ml. 


<0F PlAtO. 


249 

dfvFrib Ordfeik, beeattse iht Me is 'cause of all of them. And every 
tiifog diVJhe afe<?Or<Stog to ttie hyphtxis of itself participates of the first 
pWtftiptos; and Hftb oni rh C(hi$e<piencedftrahscendmg these is hi a much 
greater degree exempt from ¥be nattfres posterior to these. For from 
these all things pfrOofeeA; sfcfte they fcecefre pattibly tfoe peculiarities of 
thdSC. Thfe ttotrever is ‘CvidCrii from the other hypotheses, in which the 
safrib cOhchWiohS J afe agate Circulated, at Ohe time 'being 'connected 
ttfgethdr 'hegSJtiydy, and at another affifttrativdly. For what is itherh 
iVKidh COhlci ! be able'to'subsist, tirflCSs it Was antecedently Comprehended 
hcJCOrdlir^^b'chtifefe'lh aThbles ? ©at in’the ©liaedrus, the things which are 
ddnlbd ; df the ! ibtfeliigifcJ!e srtrtrrtriit df'afl intelleCtualsare ‘the natures Which 
hiOptokinidtdy'dstdbli'SIfed aftCr 'this Sutnmlt, vie. ’-the 'sacred -gehera, rite 
CBHnb'dtfVe, the pferfCctiVe, and the ’paternal ‘Of What are 'properly (colled 
WtdWedtualS. rdr 'this ‘srirhrtlit being eaetttpt from tbcoe, )it also 
fritnS’dbhHs 'all the'fritCltectual (jods. *F0r What'every genus of: the'Gods 
is tb fhe 'arie, 'ihat ’the three Orders'posterior to this ‘Summit, are-t© it. 
©into therefore idenohrinates’the celestial order which connectedly con- 
fhihs’ 1 Whbles, and 1 illdniinates them ■with i iritelligible light, cdlour; -because 
likewise the apparCiit beauty Of this sensible heaven is resplendent with 
all various colours, and with light. Hence he calls that heavendntel- 
leitual colour, arid light, tor tile light proceeding ‘from ike gtod is -[in 
the orders] above [tHe heaVeri] Unknown 'arid occult,'abiding in the 
adyta Of the Gods; biit it shlnes forth in this order, and from ‘being 
u nap parent becomes manifest. Hence it is assimilated to colour the 
offspring of light. 

Farther still, if the heaven is sight beholding the things above,?the 
intelligible' of it may 1 very' properly be called colour which is conjoined 
’with 1 the sight. The cduie thbrfefore Of 1 the 1 intelligibles in the heaven-is 
'Without 1 Colour, "brit is'esetnptfrdtn them; for sensible colour is:the 
Offspring Of the Solar light. But Plato denominates the orderwhich proxi- 
rriritely subsets after the 'celestial Order, and which' we have called the 
subedfestial arbh, figure. "For'the'arch itself is the name of a^gure. 
Arid in Sh6rt,'in this ofdbr, PartnCnidfcs also' places intellectual' figure. 

1 But Pl£to v first^attributes 'contact ’to' the’stwimit Of intellectuals, as is 
Proc. Vol. I. 21 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



250 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


evideut from the conclusions of the Parmenides. For in the first hypo¬ 
thesis taking away figure from the one, he uses this as a medium, viz. 
that the one does not touch itself. “ But the one” says he, ** does hot 
touch itself.” - And the conclusion is evident. Here therefore contact 
first subsists, and subsists according to cause. For of those things of 
•which the demiurgus is proximately the cause, the father who is prior to 
him is paradigmalically the cause. In this order therefore, contact is 
the paradigm of the liberated Gods. Hence these three orders are 
successive, viz. colour, figure, and contact. And fromt hese the super¬ 
celestial place is essentially exempt. Hence it is without colour, without 
figure, and without contact. Nor does it transcend these three priva- 
tively, but according to causal excellence. For it imparts to colour 
from intelligibles the participation of light; on figure it confers by illu¬ 
mination intellectual bound ; and in contact it supernally inserts union 
and continuity, and perfects all things by its power, things which are 
touched; indeed, through union, those that are figured, through the par¬ 
ticipation of bound, and those that are coloured, through the illumination 
of light. But it draws upward, and allures to itself every thing ineffably, 
and through intelligible impressions, and fills every thing with unical 
goods. 

If therefore, we assert these things rightly, we must not admit the 
interpretation of those who are busily occupied in sensible colours, and 
contacts, and figures, and who assert that the supercelestial place is 
exempt from these. For these are trifling, and by no means adapted 
to that place. For even nature, not only that which exists as a whole, 
but that also which is partial, is exempt from sensible colours, from 
apparent figures, and from corporeal contact. What therefore is there 
venerable in this, if it is also present to natures themselves? But it jus 
necessary to extend colours, and figures, and contacts, from on high as 
• far as to the last of things, and to evince that the supercelestial place, is 
similarly exempt from all these. For soul also and intellect participate 
of figure; and contact is frequently in incorporeal natures, according to 
the communion of first with secondary beings, and it is usual to call 
these communications contacts, and Xo denominate the touching* of 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XIII. 


OF PLATO. 


25 V 

intellectual perceptions adhesions. We should not therefore be carried 
from things first to things last, nor compare the highest order of intel¬ 
lectuals with the last of beings, above which both soul and nature are 
established. For in so doing we shall err, and shall not attend to Plato, 
who exclaims that it is boldness to assert these things concerning it. For 
where is the boldness, and what the unknown power transcending our 
conceptions, in contemplating the truth of sensible colours, figures, and 
contacts. For an hypostasis of this kind is known by physiologists, and 
not by the sons of theologists. Such therefore is the power possessed by 
the negations through which Plato celebrates the supercelestial place. 


CHAFFER XIII. 


Again then, let us in the next place survey the affirmations, how they 
exist according to the participation of the first intelligibles themselves. 
The supercelestial place therefore, is said to be essence which truly is, 
because it participates of that which is primarily being. For to be, and 
truly to be are present to all things, as the progeny of the intelligible 
essence. For as the one is from the first principle which is prior to 
intelligibles, so the nature of being is from intelligibles. For there the 
one being subsists, as Parmenides a little before taught us. But the 
supercelestial place is beheld by the governor of the soul, because it is 
allotted an intelligible transcendency with respect to the other intel¬ 
lectual Gods. Hence the intelligible good of it is rendered manifest from 
its being known by intellect. This intelligible therefore, in the same 
manner as that which is truly being, arrives to it from the unical Gods. 
For they are primarily and imparticipably intelligibles, and the first 
efficient causes of all intelligibles. These things also concur with each 
other, viz. that which is truly being, and the intelligible. For every 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



SS9 


ON THE TH£QI,OGY 


$OQ£ JY- 


intelligible is truly being, and every thing wbieb is indy b<?i£g is 
intelligible. For intellect is intelligible according tp the being wbipb 
is in it; but according tp its gnostic power it is iptpHppit* ffienpe ?1 &q 
every intellect is the supplier of knowledge; but every intelligible is the 
supplier of essence. For the* which each is primarily, it ifloparjts by 
illumination to the secondary orders. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


In the third place therefore, the genus of true science is said to be 
established about the supercelestial place. For these two things ascend 
to the contemplation of that essence, viz. intellect the governor of the 
soul (but this is a partial intellect established indeed above souls, and 
elevating them to their paternal port) and true science which is the 
perfection of the soul. This therefore /energies about that .plage, as 
transitively revolving in harmonic measures ; about being. But intellect 
contemplates it, as employing simple intellection. Farther ,still, the 
science which is in us is one thipg, but-that which is in the,superqejestiul 
place another. And the former indeed is true, but the latter ,is truth 
itself. What therefore is it, and whenqe does jt /subsist ? It ,is indeed a 
..deity which is the fountain of all intellectual ^knowledge, and the first 
.efficient cause of undefiled and stable intelligence.' But it .shines forth 
in. the first triad of intellectuals, because this is perfqqtive ofall other 
things,and likewise of divine souls. For these ascending-to this uniform 
,power of all knowledge, perfect their own knowledge. iFpr each of the 
jwdefiled souls, says Socrates, revolving together with Jupiter and the 
heaven, surveys justice, temperance and science. Henqe, tfie$e three 
-fountains;are there, -being intelligible deities,;and f the (fountains.pf the 

* -For vwftios it is necessary to read 


Digitized by LjOO Le 



OJA?. $IV. 


°f W?* 




intellectual virtues, and not being, as some think they are, intellectual 
forms. For Plato is accustomed to characterize these by the term itself, 
as for instance science itself and justice itself ; and this Socrates says 
somewhere in the Phaedo. B^t here when he says justice herself, 
temperance herself, and science herself, he appears to unfold to us certain 
self-perfect and intelligible deities, which have a triadic subsistence. And 
of these science indeed is the monad; but temperance has the second 

*■» 1 *' s '* # U J * V, r < , 1 ini / f| » 

order; and iustice the third. And science irideed is the supplied of 

\ ** y ; , i r. * * j # ,r> i } e, t * • > # . *« *. r • < ,* - • < *. . j , ^ ^ (\ 

u^ndefiled, firm and immutable intelligence; but temperance imparts to 
all the Gods the cause of conversion to themselves; and iustice imparts 

' ■ f ' c • . * • ' i t . * • ", f * f \ ’ I '* ** * (> l r if * f 

to them the cause of the distribution of the whole of good according to 

1 : f ' ’ ' V " ' ' ' ' < ' i ' 1 2? ;• .»r ( | jP jt 

desert. And through science indeed, each of the Gods intellectuallv 
perceives the natures prior to himself, and is filled with intelligible intel¬ 
ligence but through temperance he is converted to himself, and enjoys 
a second union, and a good coordinate to the conversion to Himself; and 
through justice he rules ovcjr the natures posterior to himself, in a silent 
path, as tl^ey say, measures their desert, ana supplies a distribution adapted 
to each. These three fountains therefore contain all the energies cjf 'tiie 
Gpds. And science indeed proceeds analogous to the jirst triad of 
intelligibles. And as that triad imparts essence to qll things, so this 
illuminates the Gofls with knowledge. but temperance proceeds 
analogous to the second triad of intelligibles. For temperance imitates 
the connective and measuring power or that triad ; since it measures pie 
energies of the Gods, and converts each of them to itself. And justice 
proceeds analogous to the third .triad of intelligibles. l^or it also 
separates secondary natures according to appropriate desert,* jn the 
same manner as that triad separates them intelligibly by the first' para¬ 
digms. 


* Here also it is requisite to adopt the same reading as before, p. 252 . 

* Instead of xara njv irgov^xovrav $xuvy, it seems requisite to read x*t« ti)v xgomjxowav nfiaw, 
wtrxtg (xinn), as in the translation. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



254 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK nr. 


CHAPTER XV. 


After these things therefore, we may survey another triad 
preexisting in this place, which also Socrates celebrates, viz. the plain of 
truth, the meadow, and the nutriment of the Gods. The plain of truth 
therefore, is intellectually expanded to intelligible light, and is splendid 
with the illuminations that proceed from thence. For as the one emits 
by illumination intelligible light, so the intelligible imparts to secondary 
natures a participation productive of essence. But the meadow is the 
prolific power of life, and of all-various reasons, is the comprehension of 
the first efficient causes of life, and is the cause of the variety, and 
generation of forms. For the meadows also which are here are pro¬ 
ductive of all-various forms and reasons, and bear water which is tire 
symbol of vivification. And the nourishing cause of the Gods, is a 
certain intelligible union, comprehending in itself the whole perfection 
of the Gods, and filling the Gods with acme and power, in order that 
they may bestow a providential attention to secondary natures, and may 
possess an immutable intellectual perception of such natures as are first. 
Above however, the Gods participate of these uniformly; but in a 
divided manner in their progressions. 

With respect to the nutriment likewise, one kind is called by Plato 
ambrosia, but the other nectar. “ For the charioteer,” says he, ** stopping 
the horses at the manger, places before them ambrosia, and afterwards 
gives them nectar to drink.” The charioteer therefore, being nourished 
with intelligibles, unically participates of the perfection which is 
imparted through illumination by the Gods. But the horses participate of 
this divisibly; first indeed of ambrosia, and afterwards of nectar. For it 
is necessary that from ambrosia, they should stably and undeviatingly 
abide in more excellent natures; but that through nectar they should 
immutably provide for secondary natures. For they say that ambrosia 


Digitized by LjOoq le 



CHAP. XV. 


OF PLATO. 



is solid, but nectar liquid nutriment; which Plato also indicates when he 
says that the charioteer places before the horses ambrosia and afterwards 
gives them nectar to drink. Hence the nutriment of nectar manifests 
the unrestrained and indissoluble nature of providence, and its pro¬ 
ceeding to all things in an unpolluted manner. But the nutriment of 
ambrosia manifests stability, and a firm settlement in more excellent 
natures. From both these however, it is evident that the Gods both 
abide and proceed to all things, and that neither their undeviating 
nature, and which is without conversion to subordinate beings, is unpro- 
lific, nor their prolific power and progression is unstable; but abiding 
they proceed, and being established in the divinities prior to themselves* 
they provide for secondary natures without being contaminated. Nectar 
and ambrosia therefore, are the perfections of the Gods, so far as they 
are Gods; but other things are the perfections of intellect, nature, and 
bodies. Hence Plato having assumed these in souls, calls the souls* 
[[which are nourished with these,] Gods. For so far as they also parti, 
cipate of the Gods, so far they are filled with nectar and ambrosia,. 
These however in their progressions have a bipartite division; the one 
indeed, being the supplier to the Gods of stable and firm perfection; but 
the other, of undeviating providence, of liberated administration, and of 
an unenvying and abundant communication of good, according to tile- 
two principles of the whole of things, which preside over a distribution 
of this kind. For it must be admitted that ambrosia is indeed analogous 
to bound, but nectar to infinity. Hence the one is as it were hnmid, and 
not bounded from itself; but the other is as it were solid, and lias a 
boundary from itself. Nectar therefore is prolific, and is perfective of 
the secondary presence of the Gods, and is the cause of power; of a 
vigour which provides for the whole of things, and of infinite and never- 
failing supply. But ambrosia is stable perfection, is similar to bound,, 
is the cause to the Gods of an establishment in themselves, and is the 
supplier of firm and undeviating intellection. Prior to both these how¬ 
ever, is the one fountain of perfection, and seat to all the Gods, which 
Plato calls nutriment, and the banquet, and delicious food, as unically 
perfecting indeed the divided multitude of the Gods, but converting aHi 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



lift on the Geology Bobk h\ 

J&^t# mto pwi 

niapifests the. divided distributaon ot divine ( nutriment j blit &iVij 
^delicious iood^j the united conversion of the wftote of things to it. jftir 
it is the intellectual perception of the Gods, so far as ’they are ! G6#s. 
tSttk-PV. 1 ”? 1 ? 6 ® 1 . connectedly contains froth these powers', freftte the 
plenitude of intelligible goods, and the (in 


self-sufficiency 


(infrorm perfection 6 f divine 



'• i j >. it^j o ' )•• 

CHAPTER XVI. 


Coif9ERNING these things therefore, &us /nuchinay suffcbe as to the 
present theory., But it follows that we should discuss the division Of the 
sppjsrcelestial place into three parts. For the intelligible summit of 
intellectuals is, as we have before observed, J a triad. Immediately there¬ 
fore, according to the first conception of this place, Plato unfolds its 
triadic nature, assuming indeed, three negatives, the uncoloured, ‘the 
unfigured, aud the untansible r having likewise established three 
divinities in it, viz. science, temperance, and justice, our preceptor and 
leader [Syrianus] thinks fit to divide this triad Into three monads, and 
also demonstrates this conformably to the Orphic theologies. If, however, 
f it be requisite to discover the definite peculiarities of these three God¬ 
desses, from what has been already laid down, we must understand, 1 that 
the plain of truth, the meadow, and the nourishing cause of the Gods are 
posited there. To nourish therefore is the province of intelligible perfec¬ 
tion. Hence the elevating impulse is given to tlie wing of the soul, and 
also intellectual perfection, according to the nourishment which nows 
from thence into the soul. Bu^ the peculiarity’ of^ the^meadow, Is to 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 





CHAP. XVI. 


OF PLATO. 


2o7 


possess a power generative of reasons and forms; and of the causes' of 
the production of animals. Hence also souls are fed about the meadow; 
and the pabulum (*>/«.)]) is indeed nutriment, but in a divided manner. 

The plain however of truth is the expansion and manifestation of 
intelligible light, the evolution of inward reasons, and perfection pro¬ 
ceeding every where. This therefore' is the peculiarity of the third 
monad. But fecundity is the peculiarity of the second ; and intelligible 
plenitude of the first For all the supercelestial place is indeed illumi¬ 
nated with the light of truth. Hence all the natures that are contained 
in it are called true. And Socrates says, (< that whatever soul attending 
on divinity has beheld any thing of reality shall be free from damage, 
till another period takes place.” For every thing in that place is truly 
bang and intelligible, and is full of divine union. In the first monads 
however [i. e. in the plain of truth and the meadow,] this intelligible 
light subsists contractedly, and is occultly established as it were in the 
adyta; but in the third monad [viz. in the nourishing cause of the Gods] 
it shines forth, and is co-expanded, and is co-divided with the multitude 
of powers. We may therefore from these things survey the differences of 
the three monads, in a manner conformable to the Platonic hypotheses. 
But if indeed science pertains to the first monad, temperance to the 
second, and justice to the third, from these things also the triad will be 
perfectly apparent. And does not science which is stable, and the uni¬ 
form intelligence of wholes, and which at the same time is consubsistent 
with intelligibles, pertain to the power which is united to the intelligible 
father, and which does not proceed, nor separate its union from the deity 
of that father ? but does not the genus of justice pertain to the power 
which is divided, which separates the intellectual genera, leads the 
intelligible multitude into order, and imparts by illumination distribution 
according to desert ? And does not the genus of temperance pertain to 
the power which is the medium of both these, which is converted to 
itself, and possesses the common bond of this triad P For the harmonic, 

• For «x«y I read «m on. 1 i. e. Perfection proceeding every where. 

Proc. Vox.. I. 2 K 


% 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



258 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


and a communication with the extremes according to reason, are the 
illustrious good of this middle power. 

That we may not therefore be prolix, what has been said being suffi¬ 
cient to remind us of the meaning of Plato, those three deities are 
celebrated by us, which dividing the supercelestial place, are indeed all 
of them intelligible as in intellectuals, and are. likewise summits, and 
collective of all things into one intelligible union. One of these however 
is so stably; another generatively; and another convertively, possessing 
a primary effective power in intellectuals. For one of them indeed, 
unites the monads of all the Gods and collects them about the intelli¬ 
gible ; bui another effects this about the progressions of the Gods; and 
another about their conversions. All of them however at the same time 
collect into one the whole of an hyparxis which always abides, proceeds, 
and returns. Hence also Plato elevates the Gods that are distributed in 
the world, to this one place, and converts them energizing about this as 
collective of the whole orders of the Gods to the participation of intelli- 
gibles. These monads, therefore, educe intelligible forms, fill them with 
the participation of divine union, and again recall the natures that have 
proceeded, and conjoin them to intelligibles. Concerning this whole 
triad however, what has been said may suffice. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


It remains therefore, that we should pass to the discussion of Adrastia, 
Socrates indicating that she possesses her kingdom in this place. For that 
which defines the measures of a blameless life to souls from the vision of 
these intelligible goods, is certainly there allotted its first evolution into 
light. For the elevating cause, being secondary to the objects of desire, 


Digitized by VjOOQie 



CHAP. XVII. 


OF PLATO. 


259 


may be able to raise both itself and other things to the supercelestial 
place, through conversion. But that which defines and measures the 
fruits of the vision of the intelligible to souls, since it has its hyparxis in 
the intelligible, imparts by illumination beatitude to them from thence. 
It is established therefore, as I have said, in that place. But it rules 
over all the divine laws uniformly, from on high, as far as to the last of 
things. It likewise binds to the one sacred law of itself, all the sacred 
laws, viz. the intellectual, the supermundane, and the mundane. Whe¬ 
ther therefore, there are certain Saturnian laws, as Socrates in the Gorgies 
indicates there are, when he says, “ The law therefore which was in the 
time of Saturn is now also among the Godsor whether there are Jovian 
laws, as the Athenian guest asserts there are, when he says, “ But 
justice follows Jupiter, which is the avenger of those that desert the 
divine law ” or whether there are fatal laws, as Timaeus teaches there 
are, when he says, “ That the demiurgus announced to souls the 
laws of fate—of all these the sacred law of Adrastia is connective 
according to one intelligible simplicity, and at the same time imparts ex¬ 
istence to all of them, and the measures of power. And if it be requisite 
to relate my own opinion, the inevitable guardian power of this triad, and 
the immutable comprehension of order pervading every where, presubsist 
in this goddess. For these three deities not only unfold and collect all 
things, but they are also guardians according to the Oracle of the works of 
the father, and of one intelligible intellect. 

This guardian power therefore, the sacred law of Adrastia indicates, 
which nothing is able to escape. For with respect to the laws of Fate, 
not only the Gods are superior to them, but also partial souls, when they 
live according to intellect, and give themselves up to the light of provi¬ 
dence. And the Saturnian Gods are essentially exempt from the Jovian 
laws, and the connective and perfective Gods from the Saturnian laws; 
but all things are obedient to the sacred law of Adrastia, and all the dis¬ 
tributions of the Gods, and all measures and guardianships subsist on 
account of this. By Orpheus also, she is said to guard the demiurgus of 
the universe, and receiving brazen drumsticks, and a drum made from the 
skin of a goat, to produce so loud a sound as to convert all the Gods to 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



260 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


herself. And Socrates imitating this fabulous sound which extends a 
certain proclamation 1 to all things, in a similar manner produces the sa¬ 
cred law of Adrastia to all souls. For he says, “ This is the sacred law 
of Adrastia, that whatever soul has perceived any thing of truth, shall be 
free from harm till another period/’ all but expressing the Orphic sound 
through this proclamation, and uttering this as a certain hymn of Adras¬ 
tia. For in the first place indeed, he calls it dto-p/if, a sacred law , and not 
yqttof, a law , as he does the Saturnian and Jovian laws. For is con¬ 
nected with deity, and pertains more to intelligibles [than to the intellec¬ 
tuals] ; but yquof indicating intellectual distribution, is adapted to the in¬ 
tellectual fathers. And in the second place, he speaks of it in the singular 
and not in the plural number, as Timaeus does of the fatal laws. In the 
third place therefore, he extends it to all the genera of souls, and evinces 
that it is the common measure of their happy and blessed life, and the 
true guard of those souls that are able to abide on high free from all 
passivity. For such is the meaning of the words, “ And the soul that is 
able to do this always, shall always be free from harm." This sacred law 
therefore, comprehends all the undefiled life of divine souls, and the tem¬ 
poral blessedness of partial souls. And it guards the former indeed in¬ 
telligibly, but measures the latter by the vision of intelligible goods. And 
thus much concerning Adrastia. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


With respect to what remain? therefore, we shall summarily say, that 
the supercelestial place is the first triad of the intelligible and at the same 
time intellectual Gods, possessing three peculiarities, the unfolding into 

* For xripvyfutTt, it U requisite to read xypuyiut ti . 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XIX. 


OF PLATO. 


m 


light, the collective, and the defensive. It likewise comprehends all these 
intelligibly, and in an unknown manner, conjoining indeed intellectuals to 
intelligibles, but calling forth the prolific powers of intelligibles, re¬ 
ceiving in itself the plenitude of forms from the intelligible paradigms, and 
producing its own meadow from the fontal summit which is there. But 
from the one intellect it gives subsistence to the three virtues, perfects all 
itself by intelligible impressions, and in its ineffable bosoms receives the 
whole of intelligible light. At one and the same time also it abides in the 
occult nature of the intelligible Gods, and proceeds intelligibly from 
thence, shines forth to the view of intellectuals, and converts and draws 
upward by ineffable powers all the images of its proper union which it has 
disseminated in every thing. To this place likewise it is necessary that 
we should mystically approach, leaving in the earth all the generation- 
producing life, and the corporeal nature, with which on coming hither we 
were surrounded as with a wall, but exciting alone the summit of the soul 
to the participation of total truth, and the plenitude of intelligible nutri¬ 
ment. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


After this intelligible, and unknown triad however, which presides 
over all the intellectual * genera, let us survey the triad which connectedly 
contains the bond of them, intelligibly and at the same time intellectually. 
For it is necessary that prior to intellect and the intellectual Gods, the 
cause of connectedly containing should be in these Gods; and that this 
being established in the middle of the intelligible and intellectual order, 
should extend to all the divine multitudes, all the genera of beings, and 

1 For wijra w, it is necessary to read votpwv. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



262 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


all the divisions of the world. For what is it which primarily connects 
things ? If, as some say, the nature of spirit and local motion, body it¬ 
self which is connective of other things will require connexion. For every 
body according to its own composition is dissipable and divisible; which 
also the Elean guest indicating to those who make corporeal principles, 
says that the essence which is so much celebrated by them, is broken and 
dissipated. Body therefore, is not naturally adapted to be connective of 
other things, nor even if a power of this kind pertained to bodies, would 
spirit be able to afford us this power, because it is always defiuous and 
dissipated, and diffusing itself beyond that which bounds it. But if we 
suppose that habits and connective forms which are divided about bodies 
illuminate their subjects with connexion, it is perfectly necessary that they 
should effect this by being present with them ; but how will these habits 
and forms connect themselves ? For it is difficult to devise how this can 
be effected. For these being distributed about material bulks, and di¬ 
vided together with their subjects, require a boundary and connexion. 
But they are not naturally adapted to be bounded or connected from 
themselves; because they have not an essence self-begotten and self- 
subsistent. That however, which neither produces nor perfects itself, 
cannot connect itself. And moreover, every habit, and every material 
form is alter-motive, and depends on another more ancient cause, and on 
this account is inseparable from subjects, not being able to verge to itself. 

But if abandoning these, we should assert that souls which are incor¬ 
poreal and self-begotten, are the first efficient causes of connexion, where 
shall we place the partible and at the same time impartible nature of souls, 
that which is mixed from the partible and impartible, that which partici¬ 
pates of the genera of being, and that which is divided into harmonic 
reasons? For souls indeed, connect bodies and natures, because they 
participate of an impartible peculiarity; but they are in want of another 
connective nature which may impart the first principle of mixture to the 
genera, and of connexion to divided reasons. For the self-motive nature 
of souls being transitive, and extended to time, requires that which may 
connect its one life, and may render it total and indivisible. For the 
whole which is connective of parts, exists prior to parts; since the whole 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XIX. 


OF PLATO. 


263 


which consists of parts receives connexion introduced from something 
different from itself. But if proceeding with the reasoning power beyond 
souls, we survey intellect, whether the intellect which is participated, or if 
you are willing, that which is iraparticipable and divine, and in short, if 
we survey at once the intellectual genus of the Gods, if this is primarily 
connective of beings, we shall find also in this all-various multitude, divi¬ 
sions of genera, and as Socrates says, many and blessed visions, and dis- 
cussive energies. For the separation of divine natures, and the variety 
of forms, present themselves to the view in intellectuals, and also fabulous 
sections and generative powers. How therefore, can that which connects 
be primarily here, where the divisive genus shines forth? And how is it 
possible that intellectual multitude should not refer to another more an¬ 
cient cause the'participation of its proper connexion ? For intellectual 
multitude is that which is primarily connected (since it is that which is 
primarily divided, and that which requires connexion is divisible, but the 
indivisible itself is beyond the connective hyparxis), but it is not that 
which primarily connects. For every thing which is connected, is con* 
nected by another thing which primarily possesses the power of con¬ 
nexion. It is evident therefore, from what has been said, that the con¬ 
nective order of beings is established prior to the intellectual Gods. 

The intelligible indeed, and occult hyparxis, is the supplier of union 
to all things, as proximately subsisting after the one , and being indivisible 
and uniform. But connexion is the contraction of multitude into impar¬ 
tible communion ; on which account it subsists as secondary to intelligi- 
bles. For the medium which was there was intelligible, and the united 
primarily-effieient cause of connexion. The connective however, of in- 
telligibles and intellectuals, imitates the unific power of intelligibles. For 
there the three triadic monads were the unions of wholes; one of them 
indeed according to transcendency; another according to the middle 
centre; and another according to conversion. But in the intelligible and 
at the same time intellectual orders, these three triads are the second after 
those unions, and are connascent with multitude. Hence one of 
these triads is collective; another is connective of multitude; and another 
is of a perfective nature. For that which is collected, that which is con- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



364 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


nected, 1 and that which is perfected, is multitude. Whether therefore it 
is intellectual, or supermundane, or mundane, or any other multitude, it 
is collected, connected, and perfected through these three triads. And 
when collected indeed, it is elevated to the union of intelligibles, and is 
firmly established in them. When it is connected, it abides impartible 
and undissipated in its progeny. And when it is perfected, it receives 
completion from its proper parts or powers. 

Since however, it is necessary that beings abiding, proceeding and 
returning should enjoy this triple providence, there are indeed three 
preexistent collective monads, three connective, and three perfective , 
monads. And we do not say this, that on account of the good of 
secondary natures, first natures are thus divided, and preside over so 
many orders and powers; but they indeed are always the primary 
causes of good to things subordinate, while we from inferior natures recur 
to the causes of wholes. The intelligible therefore, and intellectual 
triads, perfect things triadically, and always connect and collect them 
into union. But the intelligible monads generate without separation and 
unically, their permanencies, progressions and conversions. With respect 
to other things however, we have partly spoken, and shall again partly 
speak concerning them. 


CHAPTER XX, 


Let us therefore speak at present concerning the connective triad. 
This then, Socrates, in the Phaedrus, calls the celestial circulation. 
Because indeed, it possesses the middle centre of imparticipable life, and 


' ' For <rvvi%ov, it is necessary to read rvv 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 


CHAP. XX. 


OF PLATO. 


265 


is that which is jnost vital itself of life, he calls it circulation, as compre¬ 
hending circularly, and on all sides all other lives, and divine intellections. 
For on account of this, souls also which are elevated to it, are perfected 
according to intellection, and are conjoined with intelligible spectacles. 
The circulation of the heaven, however, is always established after the same 
manner. For it is an eternal, whole, one, and united intelligence. But 
the circulation of souls is effected through time, subsists in a more 
partial manner, and is not an at-oncq-collected comprehension of intel- 
ligibles. Souls, therefore, are carried round in a circle, and are restored 
to their pristine state, the celestial circulation always remaining the same. 
Because, however, it gives completion to the bond of the intelligible and 
intellectual Gods, and connects all the orders in their abiding, pro¬ 
ceeding, and returning, Socrates calls it celestial. For Timaeus says, 
that this [sensible] heaven also, compresses on all sides the elements that 
are under it, and that on this account, no place is left for a vacuum. 
As, therefore, the apparent heaven is connective of all things that are 
under it, and is the cause of continuity, coherence and sympathy, (for 
the intervention of a vacuum would interrupt the continuity of things, 
and the subversion of this continuity would destroy the sympathy of 
bodies) thus also that intellectual heaven, binds all the multitudes of 
beings into an impartible communion, illuminating each with an appro¬ 
priate portion of connexion. For intellect participates of the connective 
cause in one way, the nature'of soul in another, and a corporeal state of 
being in another. For through the highest participation of connexion, 
intellect is impartible; but through second measures of participation, 
soul is partible and impartible, according to one mixture; and through 
an ultimate diminution, bodies possessing a partible hypostasis, at the 
same time remain connected, and do not in consequence of being dissi¬ 
pated perish, but enjoy their own division and imbecility. The whole 
of the connective triad therefore, is denominated heaven according to the 
hyparxes of itself; but the breadth of life which is spread under it is 
called circulation. For in things apparent to sense, the period of the 
heavens is motion, and is as it were the life of body. 


Proc. 


Vol. J. 


2 L 


Digitized by 


Google 



266 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


CHAPTER XXL 


If however it be requisite to discover the triadic nature of it from 
what has been laid down, we must employ the mode of analogy. Since 
therefore Plato himself calls the back of the heaven one thing, and its 
profundity another, it is evident that the celestial arch is the third thing; 
for the arch which is under this, he directly calls subcelestial. But as 
we say that the supercelestial place is established above the back of the 
heaven, so likewise we must grant that the subcelestial is different from 
the celestial arch. For the heaven is bounded, supernally indeed by the 
back, but beneath by the arch. And it is comprehended indeed by the 
supercelestial place, but it comprehends the subcelestial arch. It is 
evident therefore from these things, that the heaven presents itself to our 
view as triadic, according to its back indeed, connectedly containing all 
things in one simplicity; but according to its arch bounding the whole 
triad; and according to its profundity, itself proceeding into itself, and 
constituting the middle breadth of connexion and coherence. The back 
however, of the whole celestial order, is an intelligible deity, being 
perhaps allotted from hence this appellation. But it is intelligible as in 
the connective triad, externally compressing, and connectedly compre¬ 
hending all the kingdom of the heaven. It likewise imparts to all the 
Gods by illumination a uniform and simple comprehension of secondary 
natures, and is supernally filled with intelligible union. Hence also, 
divine souls being led through all the celestial profundity, stand indeed 
on the back of the heaven, but the circulation carries them round as they 
stand; and thus they survey what is called the supercelestial place. 
The station therefore, is the establishment of souls in the intelligible 
watch tower of the heaven, extending to souls sameness, undefiled power, 
and undeviating intellection. But the circumduction is the participation 
of a life full of vigour, and the most acute energy. And the common 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXI. 


OF PLATO. 


267 


presence of both these, comprehends the prolific energy, the quiet mo¬ 
tion, and the stable intellection of intelligibles. But the celestial pro¬ 
fundity, is the one continuity of the whole triad, and the middle deity 
which conjoins the whole* celestial order, proceeding indeed from the 
intelligible comprehension, but ending in the celestial arch, which defines 
the boundary of the whole of the heaven. There is therefore, one union 
and connexion of all this triad, and an indissoluble progression from the 
bacjc as far as to the arch, through this middle deity which is connascent 
with both the extremes, and which unfolds indeed the connective mul¬ 
titude, but on each side is bounded by the extremes; one of which 
comprehends it supernally, but the other from beneath bounds its pro¬ 
gression. 

The celestial arch therefore remains, which is the boundary beneath 
of the triad, and this is also the case with the intellect which is in it, 
being filled indeed by life, but united by the intelligible, and converting 
all the triad to its principle. For the arch also is similar to the back of 
the heaven, though according to interval it is less. Through subjection 
therefore it is diminished ; but through similitude it is converted to the 
. celestial summit. And this is the celestial intellect which is the proxi¬ 
mate sunocheus * of the subcelestial arch. Hence each* arch is called the 
intellectual boundary of the intelligible and intellectual Gods. The 
whole connective triad therefore, is allotted such a division as this; the 
back (to varov) according to the intelligible (xara to wijtov) ; the profun¬ 
dity according to life; and the arch according to intellect. But the 
whole of it is one and continued, because that which connects all other 
things, ought much .more to be connective of itself. For each 
peculiarity of the Gods begins its energy from itself; the peculiarity 
indeed, which is collective, fixing itself collectively in the highest union; 
that which is convertive of wholes, converting itself to the principle; 
and that which is undefiled preserving itself prior to other things pure 
from matter. Hence the connective peculiarity also, prior to its parti- 

' For t am oXao it is necessary to read njv oAijv. 

1 i. e. That which connectedly contains. 

* For execrtgoy I read txxrig*, in order that it may agree with 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



I 


368 ON THE THEOLOGY BOOK IV. 

cipants, connects itself intelligibly and intellectually, and through this 
connexion the nature of the heaven is asserted to be one and continued. 
For all the triad converges to itself, and preserves its proper wholeness 
united, and most similar to itself according to nature. And the arch 
indeed, proximately connects all intellectuals, and compresses them on 
all sides. But prior to this, the celestial profundity itself, which also 
comprehends the arch, binds together the whole orders. And prior to 
these, the celestial back uniformly comprehends according to one ambit 
of simplicity, all the celestial kingdom itself, and all things that are con¬ 
tained under it, and binds them to themselves, by connective power and 
hyparxis. For in the things also that are apparent to sense, the concave 
circumference of the heavens, proximately compresses the elements, and 
does not suffer them in their indefinite motions on all sides, to be 
dissipated and blown away. And still prior to these, the celestial bulk 
strongly compresses and impels all things to the middle, and leaves no 
void place. But there is one comprehension of all these, viz. the back 
of the heavens, which is the cause to the heavens of similitude, and to 
the elements of contact with the heavens. For the smooth and equable 
nature of the back of the heavens as Timaeus says, makes the whole of 
heaven similar to itself; and always the natures which comprehend 
are connective of the natures that are comprehended. It is necessary 
therefore from things that art; apparent, to transfer the similitude to the 
father of the intellectual Gods, Heaven, and to survey how he is both 
one and triple, supernally indeed, and beneath, possessing the intelligible 
and intellect; but according to the middle possessing life, which being 
the cause of progressions and intervals, and generative powers, we have 
properly arranged according to interval under the celestial profundity ;' 
since Plato himself also calls the summit the back. “ For those,” says 
he, “ that are called immortals, when proceeding beyond the heaven 
they arrive at the summit, stand on the back of the heaven.” He calls 
therefore, the summit of the celestial order, and beyond, the back of the 
heaven; which things are in a remarkable manner the prerogatives of 

1 Viz. a* forming the celetdal profundity. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXII. 


OF PLATO. 


269 


the first of the Synoches. For connectedly containing all things in the 
one summit of his hyparxis, according to the Oracle, he wholly exists 
beyond, and is united to the supercelestial place, and to the ineffable 
power of it, being enclosed on all sides by it, and shutting himself in the 
uniform comprehension of intelligibles. For what difference is there 
between saj ing that the first of the Synoches is shut in the intelligible 
place of survey, and evincing that it is proximately comprehended by 
the supercelestial place, which was intelligible, but expanded in intel¬ 
lectuals ? If however, that which is beyond is the first, the summit is 
evidently coarranged with the rest, and is exempt from them. But if 
the first is a thing of this kind, being established according to the 
intelligible summit, and imparting by illumination to the other Gods, 
contact with the intelligible, and with the paternal port, it is indeed 
necessary that there should be a middle and an extremity, the one 
according to the celestial profundity, but the other according to the 
termination of the whole circulation. If however the circulation of the 
whole of the heaven is one and continued, the peculiarity of this order 
must be assigned as the cause of this. For being connective of the whole 
orders of the Gods, and prior to other things of itself, and being as it 
were the centre and bond of the divine genera, it in the first place binds 
and connects itself, and extends itself to one life. The heaven therefore t 
is one and at the same time triple, and proceeds into three monads, 
being both unapparent and apparent, and that which is between these, 
and imitating the intelligible Gods who subside into intelligible triads. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


If you are willing however from what is written in the Cratylus, to 
see the peculiarity of this order, in the first place, let this be considered 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



270 ON THE THEOLOGY BOOK IV. 

by you as an argument of the Synoche established in the middle, that a 
twofold habitude of it is delivered, one, towards intelligibles, but the 
other towards intellectuals. For it is said to see the things above, and 
to generate a pure intellect. Hence, of intelligibles it is the intelligence, 
but of intellectuals the intelligible. For the cause of intellect subsists 
prior to an intellectual cause, and that which is at once both these, 
especially gives completion to the middle order of intelligibles and 
intellectuals. For the collective deity, perceiving intelligibles, or rather 
being united to them, does not primarily give subsistence to a divine 
intellect. And the perfective deity, producing together with the middle 
divinity intellectuals, proximately perceives intellectually the celestial 
order, and not the intelligibles prior to the heaven. But the middle 
divinity alone, occupying the intelligible and intellectual centre, equally 
indeed extends to both, but perceiving intelligibles intellectually, it is 
the cause of intellectuals intelligibly. Since however, habitude to its 
causes precedes the power' in it which is generative of intellectuals, 
Socrates beginning from this habitude, delivers also a second power as 
suspended from it. But sight directed to things above is very properly 
assigned the appellation of celestial , as seeing the things above. Thi^ 
therefore, perfectly defines for us a habitude more ancient than the 
connectedly-containing order, jointly assuming it to be intellectual as 
with reference to intelligibles, and sight as with reference to the objects 
of sight, though it intellectually perceives itself, and is intelligible in 
itself. But the intelligible of it, as with reference to that which is primarily 
intelligible, is allotted an intellectual order. What follows however, 
unfolds the habitude of this middle to intellectuals. (For Socrates adds,) 
“ Whence also, O Hermogenes, those who are conversant with things on 
high say that Heaven generates a pure intellect, and that this name is 
properly assigned to it.” The order therefore, of the Heaven is expanded 
as a middle in the middle intellectual and intelligible Gods, compre¬ 
hending at once the intelligible and intellectual in one impartible 
connexion, subsisting similarly with respect to each of these, and being 

1 for 8u»af «m it is necessary to read iwetfitaf. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXII. 


OF PLATO. 


27.1 


equally distant from the first intellectuals, and the unical intelligibles. 
Hence it is said to perceive intellectually the things above, and thus to 
produce (a pure) intellect. 

Assuming this therefore, in the first place from what has been laid 
down, in the next place we should attend to this, that the celestial order 
being triple, and the whole of it intellectually perceiving intelligibles, 
and producing intellectuals, the first monad indeed in an eminent 
manner intellectually perceives intelligibles. For it mingles itself with 
intelligibles, knows intelligible intellect, is united to the natures prior to 
itself, and is impartible as in impartibles, super-expanding itself towards 
intelligible simplicity. But the third monad is especially generative of 
intellectuals; since it is the intellect of the whole connective triad. 
And with the Orphic theologists also, Heaven the father of Saturn is the 
third. But the middle monad produces together with the third the 
intellectual order of the Gods; but is conjoined together with the first 
to intelligibles, and is filled indeed with intelligible union from the first, 
but fills the third * with prolific powers. Do you not see therefore, how 
Plato through the peculiarity of the extremes, unfolds to us the whole 
celestial order? Conjoining indeed, the intelligible hyparxis of it to 
intelligibles; but its intellectual hyparxis to intellectuals; and affording 
us the means of collecting its hyparxis which is the middle of both these, 
and which proceeds according to a common peculiarity. For if you 
likewise wish to assume this from what has been said, the celestial light 
is conjoined to the light of intelligibles. For sight is nothing else than 
light. The middle order therefore, by its own light, and by the divine 
summit of itself is conjoined to the first natures ; but by an intellectual 
nature, and the boundary of the whole triad, it generates intellect, 
and all the unpolluted deity of intellectuals. For it does not produce 
intellect by itself, but in conjunction with purity. For this Socrates 
himself asserts: “ Whence also, they say, that a pure intellect is gene¬ 
rated by it.” Hence the celestial order is the first-efficient cause of the 
intellectual hyparxis, and of undefiled power. If however it is necessary 


* For Tgcor>jv it is necessary to read rgijT)y. 


Digitized by LjOOQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


27 « 


that purity should not be inherent in intellect from accident, it is the 
deity of those beings that are exempt from secondary natures, and is the 
supplier of immutable power, which the mighty Heaven producing in 
conjunction with intellect, is at the same time the efficient cause of the 
Gods who are the sources of purity, and of the intellectual fathers. 
These indications therefore of the truth concerning the connective Gods, 
may also be assumed from the Cratylus. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


It remains therefore that in conformity to what is written in the 
Phaedrus, we should survey the subcelestial arch, and the peculiarity of 
the Gods that are there. Before however we begin the doctrine con¬ 
cerning it, I wish to premise thus much, that some of the most celebrated 
of the interpreters prior to us, conceiving that this subcelestial arch is a 
divine order arranged under the heaven, have thought fit to rank it 
immediately after the first God, calling the first God Heaven. But 
others have arranged both the heaven, and the subcelestial arch in the 
breadth of intelligibles. For the Asinaean philosopher indeed [Theodoras] 
being persuaded by Plotinus, calls that which proximately proceeds from 
the ineffable, the subcelestial arch, as in his treatise concerning names he 
philosophizes about these things. But the great Iamblichus conceiving 
the mighty heaven to be a certain order of the intelligible Gods, (and in 
one place he considers it to be the same with the demiurgus,) asserts 
that the order proximately established under the heaven, and as it were 
begirding it, is the subcelestial arch. And these things he has written in 
his Commentaries on the Phaedrus^ Let no one therefore think that we 
make any innovation concerning the theology of this order, and that we 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXIII. 


OF PLATO. 


273 


are the first who divide the subceleBtial arch from the heaven; but that 
we are principally persuaded by Plato, who -distinguishes these three 
orders, the supercelestial place, the celestial circulation, and the subce¬ 
lestial arch; and that after Plato, we are persuaded by those who 
investigate his theory in a divinely-inspired manner, viz. by Iamblichus 
and Theodorus. For why is it necessary to speak of our leader 
{Syrianus,] who was truly a Bacchus, [i. e. one agitated with divine fury,] 
and who in a remarkable manner was full of deity about Plato, and 
caused as far as to us the admirable nature of the Platonic theory, and 
the astonishment with which it is attended, to shine forth? 

He therefore in his treatise on the concord [of Orpheus, Pythagoras, 
and Plato, has most perfectly unfolded the peculiarity of this order, the 
suboelestial arch.] The two above-mentioned wise men, however, differ 
very much from each other in their theory. For Theodorus, in calling 
the first cause Heaven, does not any longer permit Heaven to be sight 
perceiving the things above, as Socrates in the Cratylus etymologizes it 
to be. For die first God neither sees, nor is sight, nor is inferior to any 
thing. Neither therefore does Theodorus admit this explanation of the 
name, nor does he celebrate the supercelestial place, as Socrates does 
under the influence of divine inspiration. For there is neither any place, 
nor intelligible of the one , nor any multitude of forms, nor does the genus 
of souls ascend beyond the first God; since there is not any thing beyond 
him. But the divine Ikmblichus, as he supposes that Heaven subsists 
indefinitely after the first cause, and as he has not delivered the peculiarity 
of its hyparxis, he is indeed pure from the above-mentioned doubts, but 
he should teach us what the celestial order is, hosv it subsists, and what 
genus of Gods prior to the desnrargus gives completion to it. He 
however who has perfected every thing [on this subject,] and has 
confirmed all that' he has said by invincible arguments, is our preceptor 
[Syriaous,] who has surveyed all the orders between the first God, 
and the kingdom of the heaven, and who has intellectually beheld the 
peculiarity of this order, and has delivered to us his mystics the accurate 
truth concerning it. In this way therefore, our fathers and grandfathers 
Proc. Vol. I. 2 M 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



f 


2 74 ON THE THEOLOGY * BOOK IV. 

differ from each other; but all of them in common distinguish the 
subcelestial arch from the celestial circulation. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


This therefore must also be supposed by us, and likewise in addition 
to this, that this order of Gods (the subcclestial arch,) is proximately 
arranged under the heaven. Hence, since the heaven being one and 
triple, is allotted the connective order, but the supercelestial place 
is allotted the highest order of the intelligible and at the same time 
intellectual Gods, it is undoubtedly necessary that the subcelestial 
arch should terminate the middle progression of the Gods, should close 
this whole order, and convert it to its principle, and that it should 
receive an order which is secondary indeed to the heaven, but which it 
convolves to the highest union, and should be connascently conjoined 
with the middle genera, but exist prior to intellectuals. For these 
indeed separate their kingdom from the celestial power; but the 
subcelestial arch is united to the heaven, and is comprehended by the 
celestial order. Whence also it is denominated subcelestial. As it is 
conjoined therefore, to the celestial circulation, and subsists proximately 
from it, it converts all secondary natures to intelligibles, and perfects 
them according to the intellectual place of survey. For since the 
intellectual Gods are generated according to conversion, and are con¬ 
volved to themselves according to one spherical union, it is necessary 
that the perfective empire should be proximately established above 
them. 

Hence, I am led to wonder at those who are ignorant of this divine 
order, and do not maintain the whole fountain of perfection; but some 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


275 


of them betake themselves to entelechias , of whom we admit thus much 
alone, that they also conjoin the perfect with the form of connexion. 
They are ignorant therefore, of the perfection which is Separate from 
subjects, willingly embrace the resemblances of true perfections, and are 
conversant with these. Others again assign soul as the cause of per¬ 
fection, who are ignorant that they do not vindicate to themselves a 
perfection preexisting in eternity, and who begin from the life which 
energizes according to time, and possesses its perfection in periods. It. 
is necessary, however, that a perfection the whole of which subsists at 
once, should be prior to that which is divided, and that stable perfection 
should be prior to that which is moved. For the motion itself which is 
according to time, is indigent of end, and of the desirable, and is evolved 
about it according to parts. In the third place, after these, others recur to 
intellect, and suppose the first perfection to be intellectual. For intellect 
indeed, is energy and intellectual perfection; but it aspires after divine 
perfection, subsists about it, and is converted to itself through it. It is 
necessary therefore, that the cause of conversion should exist prior to the 
intellectual genera which are converted to divine perfection, and that 
the leader of the perfection which is one, should be expanded above the 
natures which are perfected. 

Deservedly therefore, does the subcelestial arch prior to all intellectual 
natures, preestablish an order of Gods convertive and perfective of all 
the secondary divine genera. And on this account, Plato elevates the 
Gods and daemons that follow Jupiter, to this arch, and through this to 
the heaven, and the supercelestial place. For when they proceed to the 
banquet, and delicious food, they ascend to the subcelestial arch. Hence 
through this they are perfected, participate of the circulation of the 
heaven, and are extended to the intelligible. For the intelligible is that 
which nourishes and fills all things. The perfective therefore is esta¬ 
blished under the connective order. And it perfects indeed all the 
natures that ascend to the intelligible, dilates souls to the reception of 
divine goods, and illuminates intellectual light. But comprehending in 
the bosoms of itself, the second genera of the Gods, it establishes all 
things in the connective circulation of wholes. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



mb 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IT. 


Through these tilings therefore, Socrates also shortly after says, that 
the souk that are elevated together with the twelve Gods, to intelligible 
beauty, are initiated [viz. rendered perfect] in the most blessed of the 
mysteries, and through this initiation, receive the mysteries with a pure 
soul, and become established in, and spectators of things ineffable. 
Hence the initiation of the Gods is there; the first mysteries are there. 
Nor is it at all wonderful, if Plato also tolerates us in calling the Gods 
[of this order] Tcletarch*, since he says, that the souls that are there are 
initiated , the Gods themselves indeed initiating them. But bow is it 
possible otherwise to denominate those who are the primary sources of 
telete or initiation, than Teletarchst For I indeed, perceiving so great an 
energy even as far as to the names themselves, do not see how they can 
be called differently. Initiation however, being one and triple, (for the 
perfective are co-divided with the connective Gods,) Plato calls the one 
union of it the subcelestial arch, in the same manner as he calls the 
connective order Heaven. But the depth which is in it is indicated by 
his admitting that there is in it an extreme subjection, and a steep path 
to the summit of the arch. As therefore, in the order prior to this, we 
thought it proper to arrange the intelligible according to the summit, the 
vital according to the profundity, and the intellectual according to the 
extremity, which defines the whole celestial circulation, so likewise in 
this perfective order, we must consider the intelligible of the arch as its 
summit, denominating it after the same manner as the back of the 
heaven, because these are coordinate to each other; but we must 
consider the profundity as coordinate to life, through which souls proceed 
to the summit; and the extremity which closes the whole arch, as 
coordinate to intellect. 


Digitized by LjC ne 



CHAP. XXV. 


or PLATO. 


317 


CHAPTER XXV. 


This whole order however, which is united to the order prior to if, 
we must analogously divide. For the perfective Gods are spread under 
all the connective triad. And one of these indeed, is the supplier to the 
Gods of stable 1 perfection, establishing ail the Gods in, and uniting them 
to themselves. But another is the primary source of a perfection 
generative of wholes, exciting things which precede according to essence, 
to the providence of secondary natures. And a third is the leader of 
conversion to causes, convolving every thing which has proceeded, to its 
proper principle. For through this triad every thing which is perfect is 
self-sufficient, and subsists in itself; every thing which generates, is 
perfect, and generates full of vigour; and every thing which aspires after 
its proper principle, is conjoined to it, through its own perfection. 
Whether therefore, you assume the power of nature which is perfective 
of things that are generated, or the perfect number of the restitutions of 
the soul to its pristine state, or the perfection of intellect which is 
established according to energy in one, all these are suspended from the 
one perfection of the Gods, and being referred to it, some are allotted a 
greater, but others a less portion of a perfect hyparxis; and every 
perfection proceeds from thence. But in short, perfection is triple; one 
indeed being prior to parts, such as is the perfection of the Gods. For 
this has its subsistence in unity, preexisting self-perfectly, prior to all 
multitude. For such indeed is the me of the Gods, not being such as 
the one of souls, or of bodies; since these indeed are in a kindred manner 
conjoined with multitude, and are commingled with essences. But the 
unities of the Gods are self-perfect, and subsist prior to essences. 


r For yowfHv it it necessary to read jmki/mu. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



878 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


generating multitudes, and not being generated together with them. 
But another perfection is that which consists of parts, and which derives 
its completion through parts, such as is the perfection of the world; 
for it possesses the all-perfect from its plenitudes. And a third other 
perfection, is that which is in parts. But thus also each part of the 
world is perfect. For as this universe is a whole consisting of wholes, 
so likewise it is perfect from the perfect parts that are in it, according to 
Timaeus. And in short, perfection is divided after the same manner as 
wholeness; for, as Timaeus says, they are conjoined with each other. 

Hence also the perfective genus is connascent with the connective, 
and the perfective monad is arranged under all the connective genera. 
And as the wholeness of the heaven which connectedly contains parts is 
triple, so likewise perfection is triple. And if it be requisite to deliver 
my own opinion, all the perfections are derived from all the leaders; but 
the perfection which is prior to parts, pertains in a greater degree to the 
first leader; that which consists of parts, to the middle; and that which 
is in a part, to the third leader. But prior to this triad, is the intelligible 
triad, which is uniform perfection, and an all-perfect hyparxis, and 
which Timaeus also denominates perfect according to all things. There, 
however, the three perfections pre-existed unitedly, or rather, there was 
one fountain of every perfection. As therefore the connective' triad, is 
the evolution of the intelligible connexion, and the collective triad of the 
unific, and that which is the first in intelligibles, so likewise the per¬ 
fective triad is the image of the all-perfect triad. For the intelligible 
and intellectual proceed analogous to the intelligible triads. Perfection 
therefore is triple, prior to parts, from parts, in a part. According to 
another mode also, perfection is stable, generative, convertive. And 
according to another conception, there is one perfection of intellectual 
and impartible essences, another of psychical essences, and another of 
the natures which are. divisible about bodies. Very properly therefore, 
there are three leaders of perfection prior to the intellectual Gods, who 
constitute one order under the celestial circulation, who elevate through 

* F<?r ixnng it is accessary to read nwnriM|. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXVI. 


OF PLATO. 


279 


themselves all secondary natures to the intelligible, perfect them by 
intelligible light, convert and conjoin them to the kingdom of the heaven^ 
impart an unsluggish energy to the natures that are perfected, and are 
the guardians of their undefiled perfection. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 


Such are the conceptions which may be assumed from Plato con¬ 
cerning the third triad of the intelligible, and at the same time intellectual 
orders, which at one time he denominates the subcelestial arch, possessing 
a summit, middle, and extremity, but at another a blessed mystery, and of 
all mysteries the most ancient and august, through which he elevates souls 
and conjoins them to the mystic plenitude of intelligibles. For this tri^d 
opens the celestial paths, being established under the celestial circulation, 
and exhibits the self-splendid appearances of the Gods, which are both 
entire and firm, and expand to the mystic inspection of intelligible 
spectacles, as Socrates says in the Phaedrus. For telete precedes muesis, 
and muesis , epopteia. Hence we are initiated [jeleioumeiha] in ascending, 
by the perfective Gods. But we view with closed eyes [i. e. with the 
pure soul itself, muaumetha] entire and stable appearances, through the 
connective Gods, with whom there is the intellectual wholeness, and the 
firm establishment of souls. And we become fixed in, and spectators of 
[ epopteuomen ] the intelligible watch tower, through the Gods who are 
the collectors of wholes. We speak indeed of all these things as with 
reference to the intelligible, but we obtain a different thing according to 
a different order. For the perfective Gods initiate us in the intelligible 
through themselves. And the collective monads are through themselves 
the leaders of the inspection of intelligibles. And there are indeed many 


Digitized by 


Google 



260 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


steps of ascent, but all of them extend to the paternal port, and the 
paternal initiation, in which may the teletarchs, who are the leaders of 
all good, likewise establish us, illuminating us not by words, but by 
deeds. May they also think us worthy of being filled with intelligible 
beauty under the mighty Jupiter, and perfectly free us from those evils 
about generation with which we are now surrounded as with a wall. 
May they likewise impart to us by illumination this most beautiful fruit 
of the present theory, which, following the divine Plato, we have 
sufficiently delivered to those who love the contemplation of truth. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


• Let os now therefore again follow Parmenides in another way, who 
after the intelligible triads generates the intelligible, and at the same 
time, intellectual orders, and unfolds the continued progression of divine 
natures, through successive conclusions. For the connexion of the 
words, and thear dependance on each other, imitates the indissoluble 
order of things, which always conjoins middles to extremes, and proceeds 
through middle genera to the last progressions of beings. ’Phis therefore 
we must survey prior to the several intellectual conceptions, how the 
intelligible, and at the same time, intellectual triads, proceed analogous 
to the intelligible triads, that we may comprehend by a reasoning process 
the well-arranged order of things. There were three intelligible triads 
therefore, viz. the one being, whole, and infinite multitude. And three 
intelligible, and at the same time, intellectual triads, have also presented 
themselves to our view, viz. number, whole, and the perfect. Hence from 
the one being, number is derived; from tlie intelligible whole, the whole 
that is in these; and from infinite multitude, the perfect. For the 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



■CHAP. XXVII. 


OF PLATO. 


2S1 

infinite which id theTe was all-powerfol, and all-perfect, comprehending 
indeed all things, but being itself incomprehensible. To the all*powerful 
therefore and all-perfect, the perfect is analogous, possessing a perfection 
which is intellectual, and secondary to the first effective and intelligible 
perfection. The tfhole also which is both intelligible and intellectual is 
allied to the intelligible whole, but it differs from it, so far as the latter 
possesses wholeness according to the one union of the one being; but 
the one of the former appears to be itself by itself a whole, consisting of 
unical parts, and being appears to consist of many beings. These 
wholenesses therefore, being divided, differ from the wholeness which 
precedes according to union and is intelligible. For the wholenesses of 
this whole are parts of the intelligible wholeness. 

In the third place therefore, we must consider number as analogous 
to the one being. For the one being is there indeed occultly, intelligibly, 
and paternally; but here in conjunction with difference it generates 
number, which constitutes the separation of forms and reasons. 1 For 
difference, itself first shines forth in this order, being power indeed, and 
the duad in intelligibles;"but here it is maternal, and a prolific fountain. 
For there power was collective of the one , and the one being; on which 
account also it was ineffable, as existing occultly in the one and in 
hyparxis. But here difference separates indeed being and the One. 
After this likewise, it multiplies the one proceeding generatively, and 
calls forth being into second and third progressions; breaking indeed 
being into many beings, and dividing the one into more partial unities. 
But according to each of these completing the decrements, the wholes 
remaining. Very properly therefore does Plato make the negations of 
the one from this. For here the many subsist, through difference which 
divides being and the one; since the whole also which is denied of the 
one , is intellectual and not intelligible. The negation therefore says that 
the one is not a whole, so that the affirmation is, the one is a whole. 
This whole however is intellectual and hot intelligible. Parmenides also 
denies the many as follows; “ The one is not many ;” but the opposite 

* For Xeyov it is necessary to read Aoywv. 

Proc. , Vol. I. 2 N 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


382 

to this is, the one is many. Tlie multitude of intelligibles, however, does 
not make the one to be many, but causes the one being to be many. 
And in short, every intelligible is characterized by the one being. For 
in the intelligible being and the one are complicated, and are connascent 
with each other; and being is most unical. But when each of these 
proceeds into multitude, they are separated from each other, and evince 
a greater difference with respect to each other. Each of these also is 
divided into multitude through the prolific nature of difference. From, 
these things therefore, it is evident that the intelligible and intellectual 
orders, being analogous to the intelligible orders, proceed in conjunction 
with diminution.. 


CHAPTER XXVIIL 


Afteb this however, let us discuss each of them, beginning according: 
to nature. First, therefore, the intelligible, and at the same time, intel¬ 
lectual number presents itself to our view; and which is connected with 
multitude. For every number is multitude. But with respect to 
multitude, one kind subsists unitedly, and another kind with separation. 
Number, however, is separate multitude; for there is difference in it. 
For in the intelligible there was power, and not difference, and this 
power generated multitude, and conjoined it to the monads. Number 
therefore is in continuity with intelligible multitude; and this is neces¬ 
sary. For the monad was there, and also the duad; since whole also 
was there, and was always monadic; and becoming to be two, has no 
cessation. Hence the monad and the duad were there, which are the 
first and exempt principles of numbers. And in these multitude was 
unitedly; since the monad which is the fountain of numbers, and the 


Digitized by v^ooQie 



6HAP. XXVIir. 


OF PLATO. 


S83 


duad possess all multitude according to cause; the former paternally, but 
the latter maternally. And on this account intelligible multitude is not 
yet number, but is intelligibly established in the uniform principles, I 
mean the monad and the duad; generatively indeed, in the duad, but 
paternally in the monad. For the third God was father and mother; 
since if animal itself is in it, it is also necessary that the cause of the 
male and the female should there primarily preexist. For these are id 
animals. Hence according to Timaeus, and according to Parmenides, the 
maternal and the paternal cause are there. And in these, intelligible 
animals, and intelligible multitudes are comprehended. From these first 
principles also number together with difference proceed, and they generate 
the monads and the duads which are in number, and all numbers. For 
both the generative and the paternal subsist in these in a feminine 
manner. 

All the monads likewise of this triad are paternal. Hence prior to 
other things they participate of the monadic cause, but according to the 
power of difference. For there indeed, I mean in the intelligible, the 
maternal was paternally; but here the paternal subsists maternally; just 
as there, the intellectual subsists intelligibly, but here the intelligible, in* 
tellectually. From that order therefore, the first number subsists proxi- 
mately, but being generated analogous to the first triad of intelligibles, it 
also evidently proceeds from it. Hence also, Parmenides beginning his 
discourse about number, reminds us of the first hypothesis through which 
he generates the one being, asserting that the one participates of essence, 
and essence of the one, in consequence of this subsisting according to that 
triad. And this very properly. For being intelligible and intellectual, 
so far indeed, as it is allotted an intelligible order in intellectuals, it pro¬ 
ceeds from the summit of intelligibles, but so far as it precedes the intel¬ 
lectual orders, it proceeds from the intellectual of intelligibles. In that 
intelligible triad, however, the one was of being, and being of the one, 
through the ineffable and occult union of these two, and their subsistence 
in each other. But in the intelligible and at the same time intellectual 
triad, difference presenting itself to the view, which is the image of the 
concealed and ineffable power in the first triad of intelligibles, and lumi- 



Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



284 • 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV.. 


nously exerting its own energy, separates the one from being, and being 
from the one , leads each into divided multitude, and thus generates total 
number. For number, as we have frequently said, is divided and not 
united multitude, and subsists from the principles according to a second 
progression, but is not occultly established in the principles. Hence also, 
it is simply different from multitude. And in intelligibles indeed, there 
is multitude; but in intellectuals number. For there indeed, number is 
according to cause; but here multitude is according to participation. 
For there indeed, division subsists intelligibly; but here union has an in¬ 
tellectual subsistence. If therefore number proceeds from these, and is 
allotted such an order, Parmenides very properly especially mentions 
these triads, asserting that the one participates of essence, and essence of 
the one , * and that through these the many become apparent. For one 
of these indeed, is the illustrious property of the first triad, but the other, 
of the third triad. And in the first triad indeed, participation * was the 
presubsistence of the union of the one and being; but in the third triad 
Many intelligibles present themselves to the view, Plato all but proclaim¬ 
ing that the most splendid of intelligibles subsists according to intelligible 
multitude, though multitude is there occult, and uniformly. For accord¬ 
ing to each order of divine natures, multitude is appropriately generate*} 
in the extremities. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


^jie intelligible number therefore of the intellectual genera, proceeds 
from these, and through these. And it possesses indeed properties in- 

1 It is here necessary to supply xa» rtjy ownav row e?of. 

* Instead of t I read ij /jufel-is- 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXIX. 


OF PLATO; 


285 


comprehensible by human reasonings, but which are.divided into two first 
effective powers, viz. the power generative of wholes, and the power 
which collects into union all progressions. For according to the monad 
indeed, it collects intellectual multitude, and conjoins it to intelligibles; 
but according to the duad it produces multitude, and separates it accord¬ 
ing to difference. And according to the odd number indeed, it collects 
the many orders into indivisible union; but according to the even num¬ 
ber, it prolifically produces into light all the genera of the Gods. For 
being established as the middle of the intelligible and intellectual Gods, 
and giving completion to the one bond of them, it is carried in its summit 
indeed, in intellectuals as in a vehicle, but being united to intelligibles, it 
evolves intelligible multitude, and calls forth its occult and unical nature 
into separation, and prolific generation. It also collects that which is in¬ 
tellectual into union and impartible communion. And not this only, but 
generating all things as far as to the last of things, according to the in¬ 
comprehensible cause of the duad and the nature of the even number, it 
again unites the proceeding natures and convolves them according to the 
monad, and the sameness of the odd number. Through unity indeed, and 
the duad, it produces,' collects and binds all things intelligibly, occultly, - 
and in an unknown manner to the intelligible, and effects this even in the 
last matter and the vestigies of forms which it contains. But through the 
even and odd number it constitutes the two coordinations, viz. the 
vivific and the immutable, the prolifib and the effective, all the impartible 
genera of fabricating and animal-producing powers, those powers that 
preside over a partible life, or partible production, the more intellectual 
and singular mundane natures, and which belong to the better coordina¬ 
tion, and those natures that are more irrational and multiplied, and which 
give completion to the subordinate series. And again, through this 
divided generation we may see that each of the proceeding natures, is 
united and at the same time multiplied, is indivisible and divided in its 
causes, and through diminution is separated from them. And we attri¬ 
bute indeed things that are more excellent and more simple to the nature 

1 It appears to me that the word *pt>ayu is wanting in the original, and I have therefore supplied 
it in the translation. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



QN THE - THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


296 

of the odd number, but things that are less excellent and more various, to 
the nature of the even number. For every where indeed, the odd number 
is the leader of impartible, simple, and unical goods; but the even num¬ 
ber is the cause of divided, various, and generative progressions. And 
thus we may see all the orders of beings woven together according to di¬ 
vine number which is most ancient, intellectual, and exempt from all < 
the dinumerated genera. For it is necessary that 'number should exist 
prior to the things that are numbered, and that prior to things which are 
separated there should be the cause of all separation, according to which 
the genera of the Gods are divided, and are distinguished in an orderly 
manner by appropriate numbers. 

If therefore in intellectuals there are divisions, contacts, and separa¬ 
tions of the proceeding natures, and likewise communications of coordi¬ 
nate natures, it is necessary that number should be prior to intellectuals, 
which divides and collects all things intelligibly by the powers of itself. 
And if all things subsist occultly, intelligibly, in an unknown manner and 
exemptly in this summit, 1 there is a number of them, and a peculiarity 
unical and without separation. Number therefore subsists according to 
the middle bond of intelligibles and intellectuals, being indeed expanded 
above intellectuals through intelligible goods, but subordinate to intelligi¬ 
bles through intellectual separations. And it is assimilated indeed to 
intelligibles according to the power which is collective of many things 
into union, but to intellectuals according to the power which is generative 
of the many from the one. But from this highest place of survey of the 
intellectual Gods, it constitutes the first intellectual numbers themselves 
which have the nature of forms, are universal, and preside over the whole 
of generation and production. It likewise constitutes the second num¬ 
bers, which are supermundane, and vivific, and measure the Gods that 
are in the world. But it constitutes as the third numbers, these celestial 
governors of the perpetual circulations, and who convolve all the orbs 
according to the intellectual causes of them. And it constitutes as the 
last numbers those powers that in the sublunary region connect and 

1 It is requisite to supply in this place tv vq axjonjn raviy. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


287 


bound the infinity and unstable nature of matter by forms, and numbers 
and reasons, through which both the wholes and parts of aH mortal na¬ 
tures are variegated with proper numbers. But it every where connects 
the precedaneous and more perfect genera of the Gods by the odd num¬ 
ber, but the subordinate and secondary genera, by the even number. 
Thus for instance, in the intellectual orders, it produces the female and 
the prolific according to the even number, but the male and the paternal 
according to the odd number. But in the supermundane orders, it cha¬ 
racterizes similitude and the immutable according to the odd number, 
but dissimilitude and a progression into secondary natures, according to 
the even number. For thus the Athenian guest also, orders that in sacred 
worship odd things should be distributed to the celestial, but even to the 
terrestrial powers. And according to each of these genera that which i» 
of a more ruling nature must be referred to the odd number, but that 
which is subordinate, to the even number. 

The nature of number, therefore, pervades from on high, as far as to the 
last of things, adorning all things, and connecting them by appropriate 
forms. For how could a perfect number comprehend the period of Jhe 
whole world, as tire Muses in Plato assert that it does? Or how could 
numbers, some of which are productive of fertility, and others of sterility, 
comprehend the descents of souls? Or how could some of them define 
the ascents of souls in less, but others in greater periods, as Socrates says 
in the Plwedrus, where he delivers to us restitutions consisting of three 
thousand and ten thousand years ? Or how could time itself which is 
nnically comprehensive of the psychical measures, proceed according to- 
number, as Timteus says it does, unless divine number exists prior to all 
these, which imparts to all things a principal cause of order according to 
numbers? Since all things therefore subsist through numbers and forms, 
numbers are allotted a progression, from the intellectual summit. But 
forms have their generation from intelligible'forms. For forms subsist 
primarily in the third triad of intelligibles. But numbers are primarily 
in the first triad 1 of intellectuals; since also in the effects of these, every 
number indeed is form, but not every form is number. 

* Vbr votftw, it is necessary to read xojrav. 


Digitized by i^ooQle 



888 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


If, however, it be. requisite clearly to unfold the truth, numbers are also 
prior to forms. For there are indeed superessential numbers, but there 
1 are not superessential forms. And according to this reasoning every form 
is number, as also the Pythagoreans said. For Timaeus being a Pytha¬ 
gorean, not only asserts that there are intelligible forms, but also intelli¬ 
gible numbers; for he says that the intelligible forms are four. There 
however, number is intelligibly, and monadically according to cause. For 
intelligible animal is a monad, occultly containing the whole of number. 
But in the summit of intellectuals, number subsists separately, evolving 
the number which preexists in the monad according to cause and uni¬ 
formly. For there is a difference, I think, between saying multitude in 
its cause, and multitude from its cause, and between saying united, and 
saying separated multitude. And the one indeed is prior to number, 
but the other is number. So that according to Timaeus there are intelli¬ 
gible numbers together with forms, and prior to forms. And according 
to Parmenides, number is after multitude. For Timaeus calls uniform 
and occult multitude the number of forms. But since number is prima¬ 
rily in the Gods, but forms participate of the divine unities, he denomi¬ 
nates the first ideas four. For monad and triad, were primarily indeed in 
the Gods themselves, but secondarily in intellectuals; and superessentially 
indeed in the former, but formally in the latter. In intelligibles therefore, 
multitude was unically; but in intellectuals it subsists separately. But 
where there is separation there also there is number, as we have frequently 
observed. Hence likewise all the genera of the Gods are from hence 
generated. And they are divided, the paternal indeed and generative, 
among intelligibles and intellectuals; but the demiurgic and vivific, 
among intellectuals. And the genera indeed, that bind through simili¬ 
tude, are divided among supermundane natures; but those that are 
both exempt and distributed, are divided among the liberated Gods. 
And the celestial' and sublunary genera, are divided among the mundane 
Gods. And in short, all the coordinations of beings receive their dis¬ 
tinction and separation from this order. From these things therefore, it 
is evident what the peculiarities are which intelligible and at the same 

* For vwovpxviet, it seems to be necessary that we should read o 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXX. 


OF PLATO. 


269 

time intellectual number possesses, and of what it is the cause to the 
Gods. 


CHAPTER XXX. 


In the next place, we must likewise assert that the first number ' is of 
a feminine nature. For in this, difference first shines forth, separating the 
one from being, and dividing the one into many unities, and being into 
many beings. What therefore is the difference which is the cause of these 
tilings to the Gods ? For if we should call it a genus of being, in the first 
place indeed, how is it prior to being? For separating being and the one, 
it is arranged between both of them. But existing as a middle, it calls 
forth indeed the one into generations, but it fills being with generative cause. 
If therefore, it is prior to being, how will it be one certain genus of being ? 
And [in the second place, after this, the different which is a genus of 
being, is every where essential, and is by no means inherent in superes¬ 
sential natures. But difference itself is primarily present with the uni¬ 
ties themselves, and separates and produces many unities from one. How 
therefore, can superessential difference ever come to be the same with 
the difference which gives completion to essences ? 

In the third place, that different {[which is a genus of being,] presents 
itself to the view in intellectuals, according to the demiurgic order. But 
' difference itself is the intelligible summit of intellectuals. And the for¬ 
mer indeed, subsists together with sameness; but the latter has by itself 
a subsistence in the intclligibles of intellectuals. To which also may be 
added, that in what follows, Plato as he proceeds makes mention of dif¬ 
ference, and generates it in conjunction with sameness. How therefore, 
does he effect the same conclusion twice ? For he does not employ such 

4 In the origihal agitp ,if omitted. 

Proc. Voi.I. 2 0 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



290 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


a repetition as this in any one of die other conchtsioes, For whole,, 
which he seems to assume twice, is not the same whole, via. the intel¬ 
lectual is not the same with the intelligible; but these, as we have said,, 
differ from each other. For how could he unfold to us the different 
progressions of divine natures, if he collected the same conclusions ? 
According to all these conceptions, therefore, we must separate the- 
difference which is generative of numbers from the genus of beings* 

' But if difference itself is not the nature of the different, but a power 
generative of beings, it will be collective of being and the one. For 
every where power is allotted an hyparxis of this kind. For through 
power the one participates of being, and being of the one. Power 
therefore was the cause, not of division, but of communion, of contact 
without separation, and of the habitude of the one to being, and of being 
to the one. Hence it is necessary that it should neither be arranged 
according to intelligible power, nor according to the intellectual differ¬ 
ence of beings; but that being the middle of both, it should subsist 
analogous to intelligible power, but should generate in the extremities of. 
intellectuals the portion of the different. What else therefore is it than* 
the feminine nature of the Gods? Hence also it imitates intelligible- 
power, and is prolific of many unities, and of many beings. And how 
could it otherwise separate number from itself, and the forms and powers- 
of number, unless it was the cause of the divine progressions in a 
feminine manner. Multitude therefore is paternally in intelligibles, but 
maternally in intellectuals. Hence, in the former indeed, it subsists 
monadically, but in the latter according to number. Very properly 
therefore, in the second genera of the Gods also, union is derived from 1 
the male, but separation from the female divinities. And bound indeed 
proceeds from the males, but infinity from the females. For the male is 
analogous to bound, but the female to infinity. The female, however, 
differs from infinite power, so far as power indeed, is united to the father, 
and is in him ; but the female is divided from the paternal cause. For 
power is not only in the female divinities, but is also prior to them, since 
the intelligible powers are in the male divinities, according to Timaeus, 
who says that the power of the demiufjgus is the cause of the generation 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXXL 


OP PLATO. 


$91 


of perpetual natures. For [the deraiurgus says to the junior Gods] 
“ imitating my power, produce and generate animals." Power therefore, 
is prior to the male and the female, and is in both, and posterior to both. 
For it pervades through all beings, and every being participates of 
power, as the Elean guest says. For power is every where. But the 
female participates in a greater degree of its peculiarity, and the-male 
of union according to bound. That the first number therefore, which 
presents itself to the view from intelligibles, is of a feminine nature, is 
through these things evident 



CHAPTER XXXL 


It remains then, that we should speak concerning the triadic division 
of it, following Parmenides. These three things therefore, have appeared 
to us from the beginning, according to the separation of the one from 
being, viz. the one , difference, and being; difference not being the same 
either with the one or being. For though the one and being were in 
intelligibles, yet difference first subsists here. Since however power 
above [i. e. in intelligibles] was collective, but here is the separator of the 
extremes, there are not only three monads, but also three duads, viz. the 
one in conjunction with difference, difference in conjunction with being, 
and the one in conjunction with being. For difference also is the cause 
of a separation of this kind, not preserving the union of the one being 
with genuine purity. There are therefore three monads, and three 
duads. But these likewise may become three triads, when we begin, at 
one time. from the one , at another time from being, and at another from 
difference. Hence this triad subsists monadically, and triadically. But 
this is the same thing as to assert that difference and the first feminine 
nature generates in itself, monad#, duads, and triads. For the divided 


Digitized by VjOQQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK lY- 


m 

assumption, generates for us different monads; but the conjoined 
assumption, duads, and triads, some indeed being vanquished by the one, 
others by difference, and others by being. And thus far the first deity 
presents itself to the view, being prolific of the first numbers; according 
to the one indeed, of unical numbers, but according to difference of 
generative, and according to being, of essential numbers. 

Since however, from this deity which is intelligible, that which is 
posterior to it proceeds, it is evidently necessary that the monad, duad, 
and triad, should severally have prolific power. These powers therefore; 
Parmenides calls onee, twice, thrice. For each of these is a power 
which is the cause of the above-mentioned essences that produce either 
separately, or connectedly. For there with respect to the generations of 
them, some of them are entirely peculiar, but others are common to* 
secondary natures. The progeny therefore of these are, the oddly-odd, 
the evenly-even and the evenly-odd.* And of these, the oddly-odd 
indeed, as we have before observed, is collective into union of The divine- 
progressions. But the evenly-even is generative of wholes, and proceeds 
as far as to the last of things. The evenly-odd however, is mixed, having 
its subsistence from both the even and the odd. Hence we must 
establish the first as analogous to bound, but the second as analogous to 
power, and the third as analogous to being. And you may see, how 
indeed in the first order all things had a primary subsistence, viz. monad, 
duad, triad ; but how in this order, all things are secondarily and subordi¬ 
nate^. And the mixture which is the triad, subsisted there indeed in 
one way, but here the evenly-odd subsists in another way. For there 
the extremes were odd, because they were intelligible; but here the even 
is more abundant, and the intelligible summit only is odd. For the 
middle of the triad is analogous to power. And there indeed, is the 
monad, which has all the forms of odd numbers according to cause, and 
the duad is there, which is occultly all the forms of even numbers, 
and also the triad, which is number primarily. But here both the odd 
and the even number now subsist in a twofold respect, in one place in 

* t# aqrm *gwov is omitted in the original*. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXXI. 


OF PLATO, 


' 293 


an unmingled, and in another in a mingled manner. All things there¬ 
fore, are here prolifically, but there, paternally and intelligibly. But that 
monad does not proceed from intelligibles, but subsists- in them in 
unproceeding union. Hence, after these, and from these, we may survey 
the whole of number subsisting according to a third progression. “For 
these things,” says Parmenides, “ preexisting, no number will be absent.** 
Every number therefore, is generated through these in the third monad, 
and both the one and being become many, difference separating each of 
them. And every part indeed of being participates of the one; but 
every unity is carried as in a vehicle in a certain portion of being. 
Each of these however, is multiplied, intellectually separated, divided 
into minute parts, and proceeds to infinity. For as in intelligibles, we 
attribute infinite multitude to the third triad, so here, in this triad we 
assign infinite number to the third part of the triad. For in short every 
where, the infinite is the extremity, as proceeding, in an all-perfect 
manner, and comprehending indeed all secondary natures, but being 
itself participated by none of them. In \the first monad therefore, there 
were powers, but intelligibly. In the second, there were progressions 
and generations* but both intelligibly and intellectually. And in the 
third, there was all-powerful number, unfolding the whole of itself into 
light; and which also Parmenides denominates infinite. It is likewise 
especially manifest that it is not proper to transfer this infinity to 
quantity. For how can there be an infinite number, since infinity is- 
hostile to the nature of number? And how are the parts of the one equal 
to the minute parts of being? For in infinites there is not the equal. But 
this indeed has been thought worthy of attention by those who were 
prior to us.. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



$94 


ON THE THEOLOGV 


BOOK IV. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


The division therefore into three, having been demonstrated by us, we 
shall briefly observe, that the one appears to be many according to this 
Order, the one itself proceeding into a multitude of unities, and being in 
A similar manner becoming generated in conjunction with the one. For 
those three monads are the intelligible comprehensions of all orders, and 
they at once preside over all the progressions front intelligibles, produce 
all df them in an exempt manner, and collect them to the intelligible 
causes. Since however, Plotinus admits that number is prior to animal 
itself, and says that the first being produces from itself number, and that 
this is established as a medium between the one being, and animal itselfj 
but is the basis and place of beings, it is worth while to speak likewise 
concisely about this. For if he says that animal itself has intelligible 
and occult number, as comprehended in the monad, he speaks rightly, 
and accords with Plato. But if he says that animal itself comprehends 
number, now separated, or which has a multiform subsistence, and is the 
progeny of difference, intelligible multitude is not a thing of this kind. 
For there indeed, the one is being, and being is the one. Hence animal 
itself is according to all things perfect. But in number, the one is 
separated from being, and being from the one , and each of the parts is no 
longer an intelligible whole, as an animal itself. For that is a whole of 
wholes ■; and every where the one was with being in the parts of it, and 
animal itself was only-begotten. But number proceeded after the two¬ 
fold coordinations, I mean the monad and duad, the odd and the even 
number. How therefore, can we place in animal itself the first number ? 
If however, some one should say that number exists there, it is according 
to cause and intelligibly. But it is intellectually separated by difference. 
And farther still, in addition to these things, if anipial itself is surveyed 
by some one in the demiurgic order, and he denominates it the plenitude 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



€KAP. XXXII. 


OF PLATO, 


295 


of forms, and the intelligible of the demiurgic intellect, it will thus have 
intellectual number, as being arranged near the intellectual end. But if 
he should call intelligible animal number, in this case there will foe 
separation and difference in the Gods, whom we have asserted to be 
established above the whole of things, according to supreme union. For' 
all section and division originate from the intellectual Gods; since here- 
difference proceeds, adorning things in conjunction with the one and* 
being. How therefore, does the division of the unities into minute parts,, 
©r the multiform nature of beings pertain to intelligibles? And how can 
the multitude of all forms accord with the first animal itself? For the - 
tetrad was there, divided by the monad and triad, a division of this kind: 
being adapted to the third order of intelligible forms. For as the one- 
being is a monad, but eternity is a monad and duad, (for to be is con¬ 
joined with the ever) so animal itself is a monad and triads Since' 
however, it comprehends in itself the cause of all number, Timseue> 
denominates it the tetrad which is comprehensive of the four first* 
effective causes. For the tetrad itself preexists as the fountain of all the 
production of forms. But in intelligibles the monad, duad and triads 
subsist unically; but in intellectuals in a divided manner. 

Difference therefore necessarily generates all these for us with sepa-- 
ration. For every where, the first of subordinate natures have the peculiar- 
form of the natures that exist prior to therm 1 Hence, the first multitudes' 
proceed indeed from the one, but they are unical, without separation,, 
and without number, imitating the one principle of the whole of things. - 
Very properly therefore, does Parmenides constitute multitude in intelli¬ 
gibles, according to the end [of the intelligible order]; but number in« 
intellectuals according to the beginning [of the intelligible and at the - 
same time intellectual order.] And these are conjoined with each other.- 
Parmenides also pre-establishes unical and intelligible multitude, as the 
cause of intellectual .numbers. And Timaeus shows that animal itself is' 
only-begotten, because it was monadically the cause of the whole of* 


‘ Instead of yog xx xgwxtxxx ran vQirrctfumv, t>jv thxv u fiogfyv, it is necessary to read I 

xanx^ou yxg xx xgmtrrx xw» vfitfinm, xm xgovQtrrafiwm, t»jv iSixy t%tt fugf^y. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



296 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


things, and not dyadically, nor according to divine difference. That 
number however, is the first thing in intellectuals, we have abundantly 
shown. 


CHAPTER XXXHL 


But Parmenides begins to speak about it as follows: “ Proceed 
therefore, and still farther consider this. What? We have said that 
the one participates of essence, so far as it is being. We have said so. 
And on this account the one being appears to be many." But he 
completes his discourse about the first monad thus : “ Are not three 
things odd, and two even ? How should they not T And about the 
second monad, as follows: “ Hence there will be the evenly-even, and 
-the oddly-odd, and the oddly-even, and the evenly-odd.” But he 
completes his discourse about the third and all the succeeding triad, as 
follows : “ The one being therefore, is not only many, but it is likewise 
necessary that the one which is distributed by being should be many. 
Entirely so.” The first triad, therefore, of the intelligible, and at the 
6ame time, intellectual Gods, is through these things unfolded to us by 
Plato, and which possesses indeed, according to the first monad 'the 
first powers of numbers, I mean the odd and the even, and is completed 
through these principles which were in intelligibles occultly, viz. monad, 
duad, triad. But according to the second monad it possesses the second 
powers of numbers which subsist from these [i. e. from the first powers]. 
For the section of the forms of the even number, is allotted a second 
order. And the oddly-odd is subordinate to the first odd numbers. 
But according to the third monad, it possesses the more partial causes of 
divine numbers. Hence also, a separation into minute parts, infinity. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXXTY. 


OF PLATO. 


297 


^all*perfect division, and unical and essential number are here; receiving 
indeed, the unical and the essential from unity and being, but the sepa¬ 
ration of number from difference. For every where difference is in the 
three monads, but it particularly unfolds the multitudes of numbers, 
according to the third monad, generates more partial Gods, and divides 
being in conjunction with the Gods. For neither is deity in these 
imparticipable, because unity is not separate from being, nor is essence 
destitute of deity, because neither is being deprived of the one . 

Since however, all things are in each of the monads, but unically and 
intelligibly in the first, generative!}', and according to the peculiarity of 
difference in the second, and intellectually, and according to being in the 
third;—this beiug the case, Plato when unfolding to us the first monad, 
very properly begins from the monad, and proceeds as far as to the triad; 
but when teaching about the second, he begins from evenly-even num¬ 
bers, and proceeds as far as to those that are evenly-odd, both which 
belong to the nature of the even number. And when he adds the third 
monad, he begins from being, and recurs through difference to the one . 
For having shown that being participates of number, he from hence leads 
us round to unical number, employing the mode of conversion in the 
conception of this monad. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


If, however, it be requisite to survey the unknown peculiarity of divine 
numbers, and how the first order of intelligibles and intellectuals, and 
number which subsists according to this order, is the most ancient of all 
numbers, in the first place, we should consider the infinity mentioned by 
Parmenides, and see whether he does not say that intelligible multitude 
is infinite on account of this number, in consequence of its being unknown 
Proc. Vol. I. 2 P 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



298 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


and incomprehensible by partial conceptions. For the all-perfect, and 
all-powerful peculiarity of divine numbers is exempt from the compre¬ 
hension of partible natures, [such as ours]. They are therefore unknown, 
and on this account are said to be inexplicable, and not to be investigated. 

, For number also in the last of things, and multitude, together with the 
known have likewise the unknown. And we are notable to comprehend 
the progression of every number in consequence of being vanquished by 
infinity. The incomprehensibility therefore, of thjs power which is un¬ 
known according to a discursive energy, is comprehended according to 
cause, in intelligible numbers and multitudes. For there would not be a 
thing of this kind in the last of numbers, unless the unknown preexisted 
in intelligible numbers, and unless the former were ultimate imitations of 
the exempt incomprehensibility of the latter. 

In the second place, after this, we may also add, that unical numbers 
are likewise of themselves unknown. For they are more ancient than 
beings, more single than forms, and being generative of, exist prior to the 
forms which we call intelligible. But the most venerable of divine ope¬ 
rations manifest this, since they employ numbers, as possessing an ineffa¬ 
ble efficacy, and through these effect the greatest, and most arcane of 
works. And prior to these nature ineffably, according to sympathy, im¬ 
parts different powers to different * things, to some solar, but to others 
lunar powers, and renders the productions of these concordant with 
numbers. For in these-monadic numbers also, the forms of numbers, 
such as the triad, the pentad, and the heptad, are one thing, but the 
unions of the forms another thing. For each of these forms is both one, 
and multitude. Hence form is unknown according to the highest union. 

If therefore, monadic number participates of a certain unknown power, 
much more must the first number possess thb peculiarity unically exempt 
from the whole of things. And besides this, we may also assume the 
anagogic power of numbers, not only because they define the periods of the 
physical restitutions, circumscribing our indefinite lation by appropriate 
measures, perfecting us according to these measures, and conjoining us 

stead of aMqAo*;, I read . 


% 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



CHAP. XXXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


299 


to our first causes, but because likewise/number in a remarkable manner 
possesses a certain power of attracting to truth, as Socrates says in the 
Republic, leading us to intelligibles from a sensible nature. 1 As there¬ 
fore, the last number is allotted this peculiarity, what ought we to say 
about the first number ? Is it not this, that it unfolds intelligible light, 
especially persuades to an establishment in intelligibles, and through its 
own order announces, to us the uniform power of principles? If there¬ 
fore, we rightly assert these things, we shall in a greater degree admire 
Timseus, who having placed time over the perfections of souls, and the 
whole world, through which it would become more similar to animal 
itself says, that time proceeds according to number, and by number mea¬ 
sures the existence of total 6ouls. And as in intellectuals, number is 
established above the celestial circulation, collecting and causing it to be 
one, thus also in eensibles Timseus says, that time being number measures 
•the celestial periods, and comprehends in itself the fiat causes of the per¬ 
fection of tbe periods. If also, Socrates in the Republic, in the speech of 
the Muses, speaks about the one and entire period of the universe, which 
he says a perfect number comprehends, does it not through these things 
appear that divine number is perfective of wholes, and restores them to 
their pristine state, and that it measures all periods? The power likewise 
of collecting things imperfect to the perfect, accedes to all things from 
number, which elevates souls from things apparent to those that are un- 
appanent, illuminates the whole world with the perfection of motion, and 
defines to all things measures, and the order of periods. But if not only 
a perfect number contains the period of a divine generated * nature, but; 
another second-number after this is the lord of better and worse genera¬ 
tions, as the s&me Socrates says, number will not only restore things to 
their pristine state,but wiU also be of a generative nature* And it is evident 
that these things subsist in a divided manner, Recording to the second and 
third periods of numbers; but at once, and coutractedly in the first of 

1 Instead of mmteym t/futf tun raw wijr m ori to* |nj* fuvw, it is necessary to Bead twymv 

m rm *oijt®* tun nj; eurhfrtK Quvtwf. 

* .Every perpetually circulating body is called by Plato, a divine geaeoated nature. 


Digitized by 


Google 



300 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


numbers. The first number therefore, is generative, mensurative, and! 
perfective of generated natures. 


CHAPTER, XXXV. 


The first order therefore of intelligibles and intellectuals is thus sur~ 
▼eyed by Parmenides. But after this the order which possesses the 1 
middle place of intelligibles and intellectuals* and which k tittle before we 
called connective, presents itself to the view. It is however denominated 
in a three-fold respect, viz. one, many, whole, parts, finite, infinite. For 
since the separation' of unities and beings from number, extends to it, the 
me and being, which we have said difference divides, become wholes; 
But the things proceeding from these, are the parts of these: And 
wholeness indeed connectedly contains parts, but these are contained by 
their wholeness, in one way indeed, by the one , but in another by being. 
For there indeed, I mean in the summit of the intellectual Gods, unity 
was the cause of multitude, at the same time being exempt from multi¬ 
tude, and generative of the many. But here unity is coarranged with 
multitude. Hence also it is a whole which has reference to many unities 
as to parts. Since however, the connective order is triple, one division 
of it being intelligible, another intelligible and intellectual, and another 
intellectual, the first monad indeed subsists according to the one and the 
many ; but the second, according to whole and parts; and the third, ac¬ 
cording to the finite and the infinite. For where the first triad ends, 
there the second has its beginning. Hence, in the triad prior to this, 
Parmenides infers that the one is many. And in this triad, he concludes 
the same thing together with what remains. There however, the one was 
generative of infinites; but here the one is comprehensive of many, the 
whole of parts, and the finite of infinites. Hence, there indeed, unity is 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 


CHAP. XXXV. 


OF PLATO. 


SOI 

exempt from the many; but here it is coarranged with multitude. Hence 
also, the first coarrangement generates whole together with parts; but the 
subsistence of whole and parts produces the finite and at the same time 
infinite. For these are successive to each other, viz. the one, the whple, 
the finite, and the things which are as it were in an opposite arrangement 
to these, the many, parts, infinites. And the one itself is indeed the prin¬ 
ciple of the rest. But whole has now a habitude with respect to parts, 
and a representation of the duad, and proceeds into a coarrangement with 
reference to the parts. The finite however, is now multitude, participating 
of bound and the one , and is as it; were a triad. For it is neither bound 
alone, as the monad, nor infinite alone, as the duad, but it participates of 
bound, which is primarily a triad. Every thing finite therefore, is a 
whole, but not every whole is finite. For the infinite is a whole, whether 
it is multitude, or magnitude. And every whole indeed, is one, but not 
every one is a whole. For that which is without habitude to multitude' 
is not a whole. The one therefore, is beyond whole; but whole is beyond 
the finite: 

After the same manner also, infinite parts are said to be the parts of 
that which is finite. For the infinite of itself has no subsistence; by 
which also it is evident that the infinite is not in quantity in energy , 1 but 
in capacity. All parts however are not infinite. For according to bound 
they are characterized by one of the parts. And again, parts indeed are 
many, but the many are not entirely parts. The many therefore, are 
prior to parts: and parts are prior to 1 infinites. Hence, as the many are 
to tf/ie one, so are parts to whole, and-so'are infinites to the finite. And 
these three connectedly-containing monads, give completion to the middle 
order of intelligibles and intellectuals. For unity indeed, is the supplier 
of stable and intelligible connection to all the secondary orders. But 
wholeness connects the progressions of divine natures, and produces one 
habitude of the orderly, distribution of wholes. And the finite monad 
imparts by illu min ation to the conversions of second natures, connection 
with the natures prior to them. And one of these indeed is analogous^ 

’ iy tj) mgy tif is omitted in -the original.. 


Digitized by LjOOQle 



SOS 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV. 


to the one being, on which account also it is intelligible. But another is 
analogous to the third order, in which there was the one, and the duad 
which generates infinite multitude. Such is the connective triad, winch 
Parmenides exhibits to us through these things. The one therefore, is 
one and many, whole and parts, finite and infinite multitude. Let no 
one however, be disturbed that Plato calls the one or being infinite mul¬ 
titude. For he calls the one and being when they have proceeded and 
are divided, infinite in multitude. For all multitude indeed, is referred 
to the intelligible infinity. But divided multitude, and which has pro¬ 
ceeded perfectly, is most signally infinite. 

Sinoe therefore, all the primary causes of intellectuals are in this triad, 
and all things are disseminated in its bosoms, the first Synooheus indeed, 
comprehends these causes as multitude, being himself an intelligible unity, 
mid the flower as it were of the triad. But the second comprehends 
indeed secondarily these causes, but co-arranged and oo-multiplied with 
them. And the third, together with all-perfect division, connects the 
multitude comprehended in himself. Each of them also is connective, 
but one as bounding, another as giving completion to a whole, and ano¬ 
ther as uniting. Plato therefore made, and makes as he proceeds his 
demonstrations of the one. For the whole theory is concerning the one. 
But it is evident that being is co-divided with the one. For universally, 
it has been before observed, that every deity proceeding thence is parti¬ 
cipate, and that every portion of being participates of deity. It is ne¬ 
cessary however, not to stop in the one alone, but to consider the same 
peculiarity 1 as imparted to being in a secondary degree, since Plato also 
produces the one itself by itself according to the differences of the divine 
orders; which occasions me to wonder at those who think that all the 
conclusions of the second hypothesis are concerning intellect, and do not 
perceive that Plato omitting being surveys the one itself by itself, as pro¬ 
ceeding and generated, and receiving different peculiarities. For how in 
discoursing concerning intellect could he omit being, according to which 
intellect has its subsistence, power, and energy. For the one is beyond 

* For dUmTrfTtf, it ts neccuary to nod iSwnjro*. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXXVI. 


OF PLATO. 


303 

the nature of intellect; but being gives hyparxis to' intellect, and intellect 
is nothing else than being. This opinion however of these men may be 
confuted by many other arguments. But if the three connective Gods 
are divided after the above-mentioned manner, and the intelligible con¬ 
nective deity is one many, but the intelligible and at the same time intel¬ 
lectual deity is whole and parts, and the intellectual is finite and infinite, 
each of them is very properly called much. For each of the Synoches 
according to his own peculiarity is a multitude. For the first about the 
many, receives many Synoches of a more partial nature. The second 
receives these according to parts. And the third, according to infinites. 
If therefore, there are certain partial Gods who are allotted this peculia¬ 
rity, they are comprehended in this first triad. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Moreover, it is easy for every one to see how these things accord 
with what is written in the Phsedrus. For the connective one accords 
with the back of the heaven that comprehends these. For the one and 
the back are the same, comprehending according to one simplicity the 
whole circulation. But whole is the same with the profundity of the 
heaven, and with as it were the bulk of it. For the celestial profundity 
is a whole extended from the back as far as to the arch. And end is 
the same with the arch. This therefore, is evident beyond every thing, 
and each of the other conclusions, is to be referred to the same concep¬ 
tions. Hence from what has been said, it may be collected, that these 
three things pertain in a remarkable degree to the Synoches, viz. the one , 
whole, and the end [or the finite]. For what is so able to connect multi¬ 
tude as the one which is co-arranged with it ? What is so connectedly- 
comprehensive of parts as whole ? And how is it possible that the end 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



304 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK I Y. 


[or bound,] should not be the cause of binding together things which are 
borne along to infinity. It terminates therefore, their progression, and 
brings bade their dispersed section to the one essence of connection. And 
thus much concerning the connective triad. 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


But the third, as they say, to the saviour, and let us also following 
Plato in what remains celebrate the perfective order of the Gods. 
Because, therefore, the end of the connective order was the finite, [or the 
bounded] the perfective order has extremes. For the end [or bound] is 
the extremity. There however indeed the one was said to be the finite, 
but here it is said to have an extremity, as receiving according to 
participation that which has the power of terminating many things. And 
there indeed, the one was end or bound, which also connectedly contains 
the infinite; but here having an extremity, it will also have a middle 
and beginning, and will be perfect. For that which receives its com¬ 
pletion from all these, is perfect. Here, therefore, the perfection which 
consists of parts is apparent. For the consummation of the parts, 
produces the perfect. Moreover, because such a one as this has a 
middle and extremes, it will have the figure of a circumference, or it' will 
be rectilinear, or it will be mixed Qfrom the right and circular line]. 
For all these require a middle and extremes ; some indeed with sim¬ 
plicity, but others with connexion. Three peculiarities, therefore, again 
present themselves to our view; the first, indeed, being that which we 
said was to have extremes; the second, being according to the perfect; 
and the third, according to figure. And there are also three perfective 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXXVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


305 


leaders of wholes; one indeed being intelligible; another, intelligible and 
intellectual; and the third, intellectual. 

The intelligible leader, therefore, is said to have extremes, as being 
directly arranged under the end of the connective Gods, and in the 
boundaries of himself intelligibly comprehending all the intellectual 
orders. But the intelligible and intellectual leader, is defined according 
to the perfect, comprehending in himself the beginnings, middles, and 
ends of beings, and giving completion to the middle bond of the whole 
perfective triad. And the intellectual leader proceeds according to 
.triadic figure, being the cause of bound and divine perfection; and 
imparting termination to things indefinite, but intellectual perfection to 
things imperfect. And this triad indeed is produced according to the 
connective triad. For the end in them is the cause of the possession of 
the extremity. But it is also produced from itself. For that which has 
extremes, having become a whole, constitutes the perfect through end 
tor bound]. But the perfect comprehending beginnings, middles and 
ends, unfolds figure. And thus the perfective triad proceeds supemally, 
as far as to the last of things, pervading to all things, and perfecting 
both whole and partial causes. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


And do you not see how each of the triads conjoins the summit of 
itself with the ends placed above it? For the one many was the end of 
the collective and unknown triad; and the same is the beginning of the 
connective triad. The end of the connective triad was the finite; and 
this again is the beginning of the perfective triad. For to have extremes 
manifests that which consists of ends or bounds. And thus the whole 
Proc. Vol. I. 2 Q 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



306 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK IV.. 


middle order is connected with and united to itself, and is truly the bond 
of total orders, itself establishing an admirable communion with itself,, 
but conjoining intellectuals to intelligibles, and convolving them to one 
impartible union; above indeed, having the intelligible and unknown 
triad, but in the middle producing the triad which is connective of 
progressions, and at the end, the convertive empire, through which it 
proximately converts the intellectual to the intelligible Gods. 

For on what account does intellect look to itself, and is in itself? Is 
it not because it is on all sides finite or bounded, converges to itself, and 
convolves its appropriate energies about itself? But why is it perfect, 
and full of intellectual goods ? Is it not because it first participates of 
the perfection [of the above mentioned] leaders, and subsists according 
to them, possessing a self-perfect essence and intellectual perception ? 
After what manner likewise, is it said to be a sphere, both by Plato,, 
and other theologists P Is it not because it is the first participant of 
figure, and is intellectually figured according to it? All conversion, 
therefore, all perfection, and every intellectual figure, accede to the 
intellectual Gods, from the perfective triad. For the intelligible leader 
of perfection, gives perfection to the ends and summits and hyparxes of. 
wholes. But the intelligible and intellectual leader terminates their 
progressions which extend from on high as far as to the last of things.. 
And the intellectual leader comprehends in his own perfection, the 
conversions of all the Gods, and bounds and perfects through figures 
their progressions to infinity. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


Looking therefore to this division, we may be able to survey causally 
many thiDgs which are to be found among other theologists. For why 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 


CHAP. XXXIX. 


OF PLATO.' 


307 


ig one of the deities of the unknown triad carried in the first of the 
worlds, but another in the middle breadth, and another in the extremity ? 
It is hecsuse the first of these was uniform, but the second proceeded 
according to difference, and the third, according to the infinite number 
of beings. But why of the three connective Gods, is the first empyrean, 
the second etberia), and the third material ? It is because the first indeed 
subsists according to the one, and connectedly contains the one world. 
But the seeond subsists according to whole, and divides the etherial 
world. And the third according to the finite, and rules over material 
infinity. But why again, are the Teietarchs co-divided with the 
Synoches ? Because the first having extremes governs like a charioteer 
the wing of fire. But the middle comprehending beginnings, ends and 
middles, perfects other, which is, also itself triple. And the third, which 
com prebends according to one union, the orbicular, the rectilinear, and the 
mixed 1 figure, perfects unfigured and formless matter; giving form indeed 
(fMfiQoHTtnf) to the inerratic sphere, and the first matter, by the orbicular; 
but to the planetary sphere, and the second matter, by the mixed figure. 
For the spiral is there. And it gives form to the sublunary region, and 
the last matter by the rectilinear. For the motions according to a right 
line are in this region. Hence, the first triad is uniformly the cause of 
the division of the worlds. But the second has a more abundant 
representation of section, and of progression into parts; yet does not 
exhibit to us the multitude of the worlds. And the third unfolds the 
seven worlds, and the monad together with two triads. So great is the 
divine conception of Plato, that from these things we may survey the 
causes of what after his time became apparent. 

For this, indeed, from what has been said appears to be very admir¬ 
able, that according to each of the triads, the middle is characteristic of 
the whole triad. Thus for instance, in the unknown triad, difference 
is established as the middle between the one and boing. But in the 
connective triad whole is the characteristic, which is the middle of 
the one, and the finite. And in the perfective triad, the perfect is the 


' r« piKTov is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



308 


BOOK IV. 


ON THE THEOLOGY 

elmracteristic, which is itself established as the middle of that which has 
extremes, and of figure. For difference is the feminine itself, and the 
prolific nature of the Gods. And whole is itself the form of connected 
comprehension, binding together many parts. And the perfect is itself 
the good of perfection, possessing a beginning, middle, and end, and 
conjoining the end to the beginning, according to the peculiarity of 
conversion. Being also nothing else than a perfect governor it is the 
cause of the peculiarity of these Gods subsisting every where according 
to the middle centres. Hence the whole order of the intelligible, and 
at the same time, intellectual Gods, may be surveyed as having its 
subsistence in the middle. For the intelligible Gods, indeed, are 
especially defined according to hyparxes and summits; on which account 
also, they are called fathers, and unical Gods. For the one and father 
are in them the same. But the intellectual Gods are defined according 
to ends or extremities; and on this account, all of them are denominated 
intellects and intellectual. The intelligible, and at the same time, 
intellectual Gods, however, being middles, especially present themselves 
to the view according to the middles of the triads. 

Farther still, this also may be considered in common about all these 
triads, that each according to the end proceeds to infinity. For the 
end of the first triad is number ; of the second, th,e infinite in multitude; 
and of the third, the rectilinear, which itself participates of the nature of 
the infinite. And of this the cause is, that each of the triads according 
to its extremity is carried as in a vehicle in the material worlds, and 
comprehends according to one cause the infinity of the natures that are 
generated in them. In addition, likewise, to what has been said, we 
may survey the order of the triads, from the ends that are in them. For 
the end of the first triad is number; but of the second, the finite and the 
infinite; and of the third, the orbicular, the mixed figure, and the 
rectilinear. It is evident, therefore, that the first triad is monadic; but 
the second dyadic; and the third triadic. And the first of these indeed 
is analogous to the one being; but the second to the intelligible whole ; 
and the third, to the all-perfect whole. But that these have this order 
with respect to each other, has been before observed. In short, there- 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


309 

fore, every intelligible, and at the same time intellectual triad, is according 
to its summit indeed conjoined to the intelligible; but according to its 
middle, unfolds its proper power; and according to its termination* 
comprehends the infinity of secondary natures. And here we shall aid 
the doctrine concerning the intelligible and intellectual Gods. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



S10 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


BOOK V. 



CHAPTER I. 


In the next place, let us survey another order of Gods, which is called 
intellectual, being indeed conjoined to the orders prior to it, but termi¬ 
nating the total progressions of the Gods, converting them to their 
principle, and producing one circle of the primarily-efficient and all¬ 
perfect orders. Let us also extend the intellect that is in us to the 
imparticipable and divine intellect, and distinguish the orders and 
diminutions of essence that are in it,' according to the narration of 
Plato. 

This intellectual hypostasis therefore of the Gods, is suspended indeed 
from more ancient causes, and is filled from them with total goodness 
and self-sufficiency. But after these causes, it establishes an illustrious 
empire over all secondary natures, binding to its dominion all the partial 
progressions of the Gods. And it is denominated indeed intellectual, 
because it generates an impartible and divine intellect. But it is filled 
from intelligibles, not as from those intelligibles which are co-arranged 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



eiiAP. r.. 


OF PLATO. 


311 


with intellect, nor as with those which are alone divided from intellect' 
by the conception of the mind, but as establishing in itself unically all 
multitudes* and occultly containing the evolutions of the Gods into light,- 
and the hyparxes of intelligibles. It is likewise allotted the total intellect 
of intellectuals, the variety of beings, and the multiform orders of divine 
natures; and it convolves the end- of the whole progression 1 [of the 
Gods] to the one intelligible principle. For intellectuals are converted 
to intelligibles. And some intellectuals indeed are united and 1 firmly 
established prior to the divided Gods; but others are multiplied and 
through conversion are conjoined to primarily-efficient causes. The 
intellectual Gods however proceed from all the Gods prior to them,, 
receiving indeed unions from the one that is prior to intelligibles; but 
essences from intelligibles; and being allotted lives all-perfect, connective 
and generative of divine natures, from the intelligible and at the same 
time intellectual Gods; but the intellectual peculiarity from themselves. 
They likewise convert to themselves all the divided orders, but establish 
themselves in intelligibles, existing wholly through the whole, pure and 
unknown knowledges, and fervid lives. Besides these things also, they 
are all*perfect essences, producing all secondary natures through sub¬ 
sisting from themselves, and being neither diminished by their progres¬ 
sion, nor receiving an addition by their progeny ; but through their own> 
never-failing and infinite powers, being the fathers, causes, and leaders of 
all things* Nor are they co-divided with their progeny, nor do they 
depart from themselves in their progressions; but at once, and according; 
to union they govern total multitudes, and all orders,.and convolve them 
to the intelligible, and to occult good. 

Whether therefore I may speak of life, it is not proper to think that it 
is such a life as we surveyed a little before. For that was impartici- 
pable, but this is participated. And that indeed, was generative, but 
this is vivific. But it is not immanifest that these differ from each other. • 
For the vivific cause indeed, is also evidently generative; but the 
generative cause is not entirely vivific. For it imparts figure to things 

* For ngioiou it is necessary to read *goo8ev. 

* After xat it is necessary to supply t« /wv mvrtu xvu. - 


Digitized by 


Google 



312 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


unfigured, bound to things indefinite, and perfection to things imperfect. 
Or whether I may denominate the cause in intellectuals, intelligible, it 
must not immediately be conceived to be such an intelligible, as that of 
which we have before spoken. For that was imparticipable, and prior 
to intellectuals, itself pre-existing by itself, and exempt from wholes; not 
being denominated intelligible, as the plenitude of intellect, but as the 
prior-cause of it, and the object of desire and love to it, subsisting 
uniformly uncoordinated with it. The intelligible however which is now 
the subject of consideration, is participated, and co-arranged with 
intellect, is multiform, and contains in itself the divided causes of all 
things. Or whether we may call the Gods in this order fathers and 
fabricators, it must be admitted that this paternal and fabricative 
characteristic, is different from the hyparxis of the intelligible' fathers. 
For they indeed were generative of whole essences; but these pre-exist 
as the causes of divisible emanations, and of definite productions of form. 
And they indeed contained in themselves powers fabricative of the divine 
progressions; but these separate from themselves prolific causes, and are 
not conjoined to them according to union, but according to a commu¬ 
nion subordinate to union. For the marriages which are celebrated by 
fables, and the concordant conjunction of divine natures, are in the 
intellectual Gods. But the demiurgic being mingled with the vivific 
effluxions, every genus of the Gods is unfolded into light, both the 
supermundane, and the mundane. This, however, will be hereafter 
(discussed. 

* For vofffwy, it is necessary to read vo^tov. 




Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. II. 


OF PLATO. 


313 


CHAPTER II. 


Since however, we have, in short, surveyed the peculiarity of the 
intellectual Gods, it remains that we should deliver an appropriate theory 
concerning the division of them. For the intellectual order is not pne 
and indivisible, but is allotted progressions more various than those of 
the more elevated genera. There will therefore be here also three 
fathers, who divide the whole intellectual essence; one indeed, being 
arranged according to the intelligible, but another according to life, and 
another according to intellect- They also imitate the intelligible fathers, 
' who divide the intelligible breadth in a threefold manner, and who are 
allotted a difference of this kind with respect to each other. For one of 
these intellectual fathers proceeds analogous to the first [intelligible^ 
father, and is intelligible. But another proceeds analogous to the second 
[intelligible] father, and binds to himself the whole of intellectual life. 
And another proceeds analogous to the third father, and closes the 
whole intellectual, in the same manner as he closes the intelligible 
order. 

But these fathers being three, and the first indeed, abiding in himself, 
but the second proceeding and vivifying all things, and the third glit¬ 
tering with fabricative productions, it js evidently necessary, that other 
triple Gods should be conjoined with them; of which, one indeed will 
be the source to the first intellectual God, of stable purity; but another^ 
of undefiled progression, to the second God; and another of exempt 
fabrication, to the third. For in the Gods prior to these, the undefijecL 
deities were according to cause, through union without separation, and a 
sameness collective of powers which are not in want of the communion 
of these. But in the intellectual Gods, where there is an all-perfect. 
Proc. Vo l. L 2 R 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



314 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


separation, as in total orders, and a greater habitude to secondary 
natures, unpolluted deity or power is necessary, which has the ratio of 
sameness, and undeviating subsistence, to the paternal cause, and which 
is eo-divided with the fathers, so that each of the undefiled Gods is 
conjoined with a peculiar father. 

These two triads therefore have presented themselves to our view, one 
indeed, of the intellectual fathers, but the other of the undefiled Gods. 
There is however, besides these two, a third other triadic monad, which 
is the cause of separation to intellectuals, and which subsists together 
with the above mentioned triads. For the fathers indeed are the 
suppliers of all essence; but the inflexible Gods, of sameness. But it is 
evidently fit that there should be also the cause of separation, and that 
this should be one and at the same time triple, separating the intellectual 
Gods from the above mentioned orders, from themselves, and from 
inferior natures. For why are they the leaders of another order, if they 
are not divided from the first orders? Why are they multiplied, and why 
Ao they differ from each other in their kingdoms, unless they are 
separated? Why also do they transcend the partial [Gods] unless they 
are also separated from these? The cause of separation therefore, will be 
for us one and a triple monad. But the paternal and undefiled causes will 
be each of them a uniform triad. And what is most paradoxical of all, 
the separative cause is more monadic; but the paternal and also the 
undefiled cause, are each of them more triadic. For the separative 
monad indeed, is the cause of separation to the other monads; but 
the others are the sources of communion and union to it. Hence each 
of these, being separated, becomes triadic; but the separative monad is 
monadic, in consequence of being united by these. For all intellectuals 
pervade through each other, and are in each other, according to a certain 
admirable communion, imitating the union of intelligibles, through being 
present and mingled with each other. The sphere also which is thefe, is 
the intellectual order, energizing in and about itself, and proceeding into 
itself hebdomatically, being a monad and a hebdomad, the image, if it 
be lawful so to speak, of the all-perfect intelligible monad, and unfolding 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. n. 


OF PLATO. 


315 


its occult union, through progression and separation. This first pro¬ 
gression therefore of the intellectual Gods, which is separated by us into- 
a heptad, we have perfectly celebrated. 

Other secondary seven hebdomads, however, are to be considered 
under this, which produce as far as to the last of things, the monads of 
this heptad. For each monad is the leader of an intellectual hebdomad 
conjoined with it, and extends this hebdomad from on high, from the 
summit of Olympus, as far as to the last, and terrestrial orders. I say, 
for instance, the first paternal monad, indeed, constitutes seven such 
monads. But the second again constitutes seven vivific monads. And 
the third, seven demiurgic monads. Each likewise of the undefiled 
monads constitutes a number equal to that produced by the fathers. 
And the monad of separation constitutes seven {^separative monads]. 

For all these causes proceed in conjunction with each other. And as 
the first triad of the fathers subsists together with the uudefiled triad,. 

, and the divisive monad, after the same manner also, the second triads 
are allotted seven coordinate undefiled triads, and separative monads. 
Whence, therefore, does so great a number of intellectual Gods present 
itself to our view ? It is evident, indeed, from what has been said. For 
the first hebdomad, indeed, the cause^of the second hebdomads, and 
which has the relation of a monad to them, and which a little before we 
denominated an intellectual sphere, subsists according to the intelligible * 
breadth, imitating the paternal nature of it through the paternal triad 
but the eternity of its power, through undefiled sameness; and the 
multitude shining forth in its extremities, through the monad which is 
divisive of wholes. The remaining hebdomads, however, which are 
derived from this, proceed according to the intelligible and intellectual; 
genera. For each monad, conformably to the summits of those genera,, 
constitutes a monad co-arranged with the multitude proceeding from it; 
since every summit is uniform [i. e. has the form of the one,] as we 
have before demonstrated. But according to the middle and third 
progressions of those genera, each monad generates two triads. For 
the separation of them was apparent in the middle and ultimate 
progressions, as we have before observed. As,, therefore, the intelligible. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 




<316 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


and at the same time, intellectual genera, produced the intelligible 
.breadth, which is of a unical natare, into a triadic multitude, after the 
same manner also the intellectual monads call forth the intelligible, and 
at the same time intellectual triads, into intellectual hebdomads. And 
they constitute indeed the monads which are coarranged with the 
hebdomads, according to the summits of the triads; but the two triads, 
according to the second and third decrements of those triads. Hence 
every hebdomad has the first monad indeed intelligible; but the second 
after this, and which is triadic, intelligible and intellectual; and the 
third triad, which is the next in order, intellectual. All these likewise 
subsist as in intellectuals. For they are characterized according to the 
peculiarity of the constitutive monad. 

In short, the intellectual powers proceed according to the intelligible 
orders; but they constitute these seven hebdomads according to the first 
intellectual orders. For it is indeed necessary that exempt causes should 
he assimilated to the intelligible Gods; but that co-arranged causes, and 
which proceed every where, should be assimilated to the intelligible, and 
at the same time, intellectual Gods; since these also are the first that 
divide the worlds triadically, and pervade as far as to the last of things, 
Gounectedly containing and perfecting all things. But the intelligible 
Gods contain the causes of wholes uniformly, and occultly. You may 
also say, that the intelligible Gods produce all things uniformly; for 
numbers subsist in them monadically. But the intelligible and intel¬ 
lectual Gods produce all things triadically. For the monads in these are 
divided according to number. And what the monad was in the former, 
that number is in the latter. And the intellectual Gods produce all 
thiugs hebdomadically. For they evolve the intelligible, and at the 
same time, intellectual triads, into intellectual hebdomads, and expand 
their contracted powers into intellectual variety; since they define 
multitude itself and variety by numbers which are nearest to the monad. 
For the numbers of the partial are different from the numbers of the 
total orders in the Gods. And the whole of this intellectual number is 
indeed more expanded than the natures prior to it, and is divided into 
more various progressions, yet it does not desert its alliance with the 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. III. 


OF PLATO. 


317 


monad. For hebdomad ic multitude has an abundant affinity with the 
nature of the monad ; since it is measured according to it, and primarily 
subsists from it. And the Pythagoreans, when they denominate the 
heptad light according to intellect , evidently admit its hyparxis to Be 
intellectual, and on this account suspended from the monad. For the 
unical, which light manifests, is inherent from this in all the divine 
numbers. And thus much concerning the division of these intellectual 
Gods'. 


CHAPTER III. 


It follows in the next place, that we should adapt the theory of Plato 
to this order, and show that he does not dissent from any of the theological 
dogmas concerning it. Since, therefore, we have demonstrated, that the 
celestial order, which we find in the Cratylus perfectly celebrated, 
possesses the middle bond of the intellectual, and at the same time, 
intelligible Gods, but that under this another order of Gods is imme¬ 
diately arranged, as Socrates shows in the Phaedrus, called the subce¬ 
lestial arch, and which we have considered as not divided from the 
heaven,—this being the case, what order is it which divides itself from 
the kingdom of the heaven, but is the leader of the intellectual order of 
the Gods, and is primarily the supplier of intellect, according to the 
doctrine of Plato, as Socrates says in the Cratylus, except that which 
the mighty Saturn comprehends? For he calls this God the first and 
most pure intellect. This God, therefore, is the summit of a divine 
iutellect, and, as he says, the purest part of it; separating himself indeed 
from the celestial order, but reigning over all the intellectual Gods ; 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



318 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK4T, 


because be is full of intellect, but of a pure intellect, and is a God 
extended to the summit of the intellectual hypostasis. Hence also, he 
is the father of the mighty Jupiter, and is simply father. For he who is 
die father of the father of all things, is evidently allotted in a much 
greater degree the paternal dignity. Saturn, therefore, is the first 
intellect; but the mighty Jupiter is also an intellect, containing, as 
Socrates says in the Philebus, a royal soul, and a royal intellect. 

And these Gods are two intellects, and intellectual fathers; the one,, 
indeed, being intellectual; but the other intelligible, in intellectuals. 
For the Saturnian bonds which Socrates mentions in the Cratylus, are 
unific of the intelligence of Jupiter about the intelligible of his hither, 
and fill the Jovian intellect with the all-perfect intelligence of the 
Saturnian intellect. And this I think is likewise evident from the 
analogy of souls to Pluto. For as he binds souls about himself, filling 
them with wisdom and intelligence, thus also Saturn being the object of 
desire and love to Jupiter, contains him in himself by indissoluble bonds.. 
And these things Socrates indicates in the Cratylus, jesting, and at the- 
same time being serious in what he says. The object of desire therefore*, 
and the intelligible to Jupiter, is Saturn. But the mighty Jupiter 
himself is a divine and demiurgic intellect. Hence, it is necessary that 
there should be a third other intellectual cause, generative of life. For 
Jupiter indeed is the cause of life, as Socrates says, but intellectually 
and secondarily. But we say that life is every where arranged prior to 
intellect. Hence, we must say that the queen Rhea, being the mother 
of Jupiter, but subordinate to the father Saturn, gives completion to this 
middle, existing as a vivific world, and .establishing in herself the causes 
of the whole of life. These three paternal orders, therefore, have 
appeared to us in intellectuals: one of them indeed subsisting according 
to the intelligible power of intellectuals;. 1 but another according to 
divine and intellectual life; and another according to intellectual 
intellect. For we celebrate the middle deity, herself by herself, as the 
mother of the demiurgus, and of wholes. When, however, we survey 

' It appears from the version of Portus, that the words o /mv k»t* rtjy vaynp Huvafut row yotgmy, 
are omitted in the original. Indeed, the sense requires that they should be inserted. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. III. 


OF PLATO. 


319 


her together with the extremes, we denominate her a paternal cause, 
as being comprehended in the fathers; and as generating some things 
together with Saturn, but others in conjunction with Jupiter. 

Moreover, Plato following Orpheus, calls the indexible and undefiled 
triad of the intellectual Gods Curetic, as is evident from what the Athe¬ 
nian guest says in the Laws, celebrating the armed sports of the Curetes, 
and their rythmical dance. For Orpheus represents the Curetes who are 
three, as the guards of Jupiter. And the sacred laws of the Cretans, 
and all the Grecian theology, refer a pure and undefiled life and energy 
to this order. For to ttopo* to koron, indicates nothing else than the pore 
and incorruptible. Hence, we have before said, that the mighty Saturn, 
as being essentially united to the cause of undefiled purity, is a puq* 
intellect. The paternal Gods therefore are three, and the undefiled Gods 
also are three. Hence it remains that we should survey the seventh 
monad. 

If, therefore, we consider the fabulous elections, both the Saturnian 
and the Celestial, of which Plato makes mention, and thinks that such 
like narrations should always be concealed in silence, that the arcane truth 
of them should be surveyed, and that they are indicative of mystic con*, 
ceptions, because these things are not fit for young men to hear,—[if we 
consider these] we may obtain from them what the separative deity is, 
who accomplishes the divisions, and segregates the Saturnian genera 
indeed from the Celestial, and the Jovian from the Saturnian, and who 
separates the whole intellectual order from the natures prior and posterior 
to it, disjoins the different causes in it from each other, and always im¬ 
parts to secondary natures, secondary measures of dominion. And let 
not any one be disturbed, or oppose me on hearing these things. How 
therefore does Plato reject exections, bonds, and the tragical apparatus 
of fables ? For he thinks that all such particulars will be condemned by 
the multitude and the stupid, through ignorance of the arcana they con¬ 
tain ; but that they will exhibit to the wise certain admirable opinions. 
Hence, he indeed does not admit such a mode of fiction, but thinks it 
proper to be persuaded by the ancients who were the offspring of the 
Gods, and to investigate their arcane conceptions. As therefore he 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


320 

rejects the Saturnian fables, when they are narrated to Euthyprhon, andi 
the auditors of the Republic, yet at the same time* admits them in the 
Cratylus, placing about the mighty Saturn and Pluto, other secondary 
bonds,—thus also, I think he forbids exections to be introduced to those 
who know only the apparent meaning of what is said, and does not admit 
that there is illegal conduct in the Gods, and nefarious aggressions of 
children against their parents, but he opposes, and confutes as much as 
possible such like opinions. He assents however to their being narrated 
to those who are able to penetrate into the mystic truth, and investigate 
the concealed meaning of fables, and admits the separation of wholes,, 
whether [mythologists] are willing to denominate them exections for the 
purpose of concealment, or in whatever other way they may think fit to 
call them. For bonds and exections are symbols of communion and se¬ 
paration, and each is the progeny of the same divine mythology. Nor is 
there any occasion to wonder, if from these things we endeavour to confirm, 
the opinion of Plato; but it is requisite to know how the philosophy of 
Plato admits all such particulars, and how it rejects them, and in what 
manner he apprehends they may be the causes of the greatest evils, and 
of an impious life to those that hear them. The seven intellectual Gods 
therefore, will through these conceptions appear to have been thought 
worthy of being mentioned by Plato. 


CHAPTER IV. 


It is, however, I think, necessary syllogistically to collect the progres¬ 
sion of them according to hebdomads, from images. The demiurgus 
therefore, [jn the Timaeus] fabricates the soul of the universe an image or 
all the divine orders, in the same manner as he fabricates this sensible 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. IV. 


OF PLATO. 


S21 


world an image of intelligibles. And in the first ' place indeed, he consti¬ 
tutes the whole essence of the soul, and afterwards divides it into numbers, 
binds it by harmonies, and adorns it with figures, I mean the rectilinear and 
the circular. After this also, he divides it into one circle and seven circles. 
Whence therefore, are this monad and hebdomad derived, except from 
the intellectual Gods? For figure, number, and true being, are prior to 
them. And as in the fabrication of the soul, after the subsistence of the 
psychical figure, the division of the circles according to the monad and 
hebdomad follows, thus also in the Gods, after intellectual and intelligible 
figure, the intellectual breadth, and that sphere of the Gods succeed. 
The multitude therefore of the seven hebdomads subsist from the divine 
intellectual hebdomad entering into itself. And on this account, the 
demiurgus thus divides the circles in the soul, because he, and every 
intellectual order, produce an intellectual hebdomad from each monad. 
I do not however assert, and now contend, that the seven circles are 
allotted an hyparxis similar to the seven Gods that proceed from the 
demiurgus, but that the demiurgus dividing the soul according to circles, 
introduces number to the sections from the intellectual Gods, I mean the 
monadic and the hebdomadic number. For the monad indeed subsists 
according to the circle of sameness, but the division, according to the 
circle of difference. Shorly after however, it will appear that same and 
different belong to the demiurgic order. 

Farther still, after the division of the circles, the demiurgus assumes some 
things which are symbols of the assimilative, and others which are sym¬ 
bols of the liberated Gods, and through these, he refers the soul to these 
orders of the Gods. If therefore figure is prior to the intellectual Gods, 
but the similar and dissimilar are posterior to them, it is evidently neces¬ 
sary that the monadic and at the same time hebdomadic, should be 
referred to this order, and that the progression from the monad to the 
hebdomad should pertain to this order. Each therefore of the seven 
intellectual Gods, is the leader of an intellectual hebdomad, as we may 

1 For TTgconjvj it is necessary to read vpoor cog. It was also requisite to alter the punctuation in 
the preceding sentence, 

Proc. Vol. I. 2 S 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



322 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOO* V\ 


learn from images. There however indeed, the hebdomad is one, and 
allied to itself. But in souls, the circles differ from each other, according 
to the divine peculiarities. \For they receive number in such a manner 
as to preserve the proper nature which they are allotted, connectedly 
containing mundane natures, and convolving the apparent by their own 
circles. And thus much concerning these particulars, which afford argu<* 
ments that are not obscure of the arrangement of them by Plato. 



CHAPTER V. 


Again however, making another beginning, let us speak about each 
[of the intellectual Gods,3 as much as is sufficient to the present theology. 
Let Saturn therefore, the first king of the intellectual Gods, be now cele¬ 
brated by us, who according to Socrates in the Cratylus illuminates the 
pure and incorruptible nature of intellect, and establishing his own alb 
perfect power in his own summit of intellectuals, abides in, and at the 
same time proceeds from his father [Heaven]. He likewise divides the 
intellectual government from the connective, and establishes the tran¬ 
scendency of the other intellectual Gods in connexion with his own; 
but comprehends in himself the intelligible of the demiurgic intellect, 
and the plenitude of beings. Hence the Saturnian bonds, mystically, 
and obscurely signify the comprehension of this intelligible, and a union 
with it. For the intelligible is comprehended in intellect. 

As therefore, the intelligible is indeed exempt from intellect, but intel¬ 
lect is said to comprehend it, thus also Jupiter is said to bind his father. 
And in placing bonds about his father, he at the same time binds himself 
[to him]. For a bond is the comprehension of the things that are bound. 
But the truth is as follows: Saturn is indeed an all-perfect intellect; and 


/ 


Digitized by LjOO Le 



CHAP. V. 


OF PLATO. 


325 


the mighty Jupiter is likewise an intellect. Each therefore being an 
intellect, each is also evidently an intelligible. For every intellect is 
converted to itself; but being converted to it energizes towards itself. 
Energizing however towards itself, and not towards externals, it is intel* 
ligible and at the same time intellectual; being indeed intellectual, so 
far as it intellectually perceives, but intelligible, so far as it is intellectu-* 
ally perceived. Hence also the Jovian intellect is to itself intellect, and 
to itself intelligible. And in a similar manner the Saturnian intellect is 
to itself intelligible, and to itself intellect. But Jupiter indeed is more 
intellect, and Saturn is more intelligible. For the latter is established 
according to the intellectual summit, but the former according to the 
intellectual end. And the one indeed is the object of desire, but the 
other desires. And the one fills, but the other is filled. 

Saturn therefore being intellect and intelligible, Jupitet also is in the 
second place intellect and intelligible. The intellectual however of Sa¬ 
turn is intelligible; but the intelligible of Jupiter is intellectual. Jupiter 
therefore, being at the same time intellectual and intelligible, intellectu¬ 
ally perceives-and comprehends himself, and binds the intelligible in 
himself. But binding this in himself, he is said to bind the intelligible 
prior to himself, and to comprehend it on all sides. For entering into 
himself, he proceeds into the intelligible prior to himself, and by the 
intelligible which is in himself, intellectually perceives that which is prior 
to himself. And thus the intelligible is not external to intellect. For 
every intellect possesses that which is in itself without any difference 
with respect to itself. But again, it intellectually perceives in itself that 
which is prior to itself. For every thing which is external to intellect, is 
foreign and adventitious, and pertains to an inferior nature. But that 
which is pre-established in the order of cause, and which pre-exists as the 
object of desire, is in the desiring natures themselves. For being con¬ 
verted to, and verging to themselves, they discover the causes of them¬ 
selves, and all more ancient natures. And by how much more perfect 
and uniform the conversion of the desiring natures is about the objects of 
desire, by so much the more are they present with their own desirables. 
Hence every intellect, by intellectually perceiving itself, intellectually 


✓ 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



324 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


perceives likewise, all the natures prior to itself. And by how much the 
more it is united to itself, in a so much greater degree it is established in 
the intelligibles prior to itaelf. For the cause of any being, and which 
is the source of essence or of perfection to it, is not external to that 
being; but that which is subordinate to any being, is external to it, and 
is not the intelligible. On this account also, each of the divine natures is 
unconverted to that which is inferior to itself, but is converted to itself, 
and through itself reverts to that which is ‘more excellent. And the in¬ 
telligible indeed is not inferior to any intellect; but every intellect ener¬ 
gizing towards itself, and comprehending the intelligibles prior to itself, 
intellectually perceives them. 

Some intelligibles likewise are such as are conjoined with intellect. 
But others are such as are proximately participated by it. And others 
are such as it sees more remotely, and which are more exempt from its 
nature. On this account, the demiurgic intellect is indeed at the same 
time intelligible and intellect, but has the intelligible of his father,, which 
he binds as the fable says. He sees however animal itself, which is, 
according to Timaeus, the most beautiful of all intelligibles. And if the 
illustrious Amelius, forming such conceptions as these, said that in¬ 
tellect is threefold, one being that which is, another that which has, and 
another that which sees, he rightly apprehends the conception of Plato, 
according to my opinion. For it is necessary that the second intellect 
should not only have the intelligible, but that it should be and have the 
intelligible; that it should be indeed the intelligible coordinate with 
itself, but have the intelligible prior to itself, so far as it participates of it. 
And it is necessary that the third intellect should see the intelligible, and 
should also be and hate it; that it should see indeed the first intelligible; 
but have that which is proximately beyond itself; and that it should be 
the intelligible which is in itself, and which is conjoined with its own in¬ 
telligence, and should be inseparable from it. 

If therefore, as we said from the beginning, Jupitet intellectually per¬ 
ceives his father Saturn, Saturn is indeed intelligible, but Jupiter is 
intellect; being one intelligible himself, but participating of another. 
Hence also Plato does not simply call Saturn intellect, but a pure and 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



V 


CHAP. VI. OF PLATO. 335 

incorruptible intellect. For he * in the intellectual is intelligible. Since 
however, he is not simply intelligible, but as in' intellectuals, he is 
intellect, and is himself paternally so, being both father and intellect, and 
having the paternal intellectually. In intelligibles therefore, intellect is 
also father; but in intellectuals father is intellect. Hence Saturn is a 
pure, immaterial and perfect intellect, established above fabrication in 
the order of the desirable. But possessing such a peculiarity as this, he 
is full of all intelligibles intellectually, is as it were exuberant with 
intellections, and establishes twofold genera of Gods, some indeed in 
himself, but others posterior to himself. And he leads forth, indeed, the 
prolific powers of his father Heaven as far as to the last of things; but 
fills the demiurgic order with generative goods. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Saturn however is the only one of the Gods who is said both to 
receive and give the royal dignity with a certain necessity, and as it 
were violence, cutting off the genitals of his father, and being himself 
castrated by the mighty Jupiter. For he bounds the kingdom of his 
father, and is bounded by the God posterior to himself. He is also filled 
from the natures placed above him, but fills the whole fabrication [of the 
universe] with prolific perfection. But separating himself from his father, 
he is exempt from his progeny. Being however one all-perfect intel¬ 
lect, he contains in himself the multitude of total intelligibles. And as 
he deifies the intellectual summit, he illuminates all things with intelli¬ 
gible light. 

1 For to yag it is necessary to read iximg yag. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V„ 


32^ 


CHAPTER VII. 


Very properly therefore, has this universe twofold lives, periods, and 
convolutions; the one being Saturnian, but the other Jovian, as the 
fable in the Politicus says. And according to one of the periods indeed, 
it produces all goods spontaneously, and possesses an innoxious and 
unwearied life. But according to the other it participates of material 
error, and a very mutable nature. For the life in the world being 
twofold, the one unapparent, and more intellectual, but the other more 
physical and apparent, and the one being defined according to provi¬ 
dence, but the other proceeding in a disorderly manner according to 
fate ;—this being the case, the second life indeed, which is multiform, 
and perfected through nature, is suspended from the Jovian order; but 
the more simple, intellectual, and unapparent life, is suspended from the 
Saturnian order. * And these things the Elean guest clearly teaches, 
calling one of the circulations Jovian, but the other, Saturnian; though 
Jupiter also is the cause of the unapparent life of the universe, is the 
supplier of intellect, and the leader of intellectual perfection; but he 
elevates all things to the kingdom of Saturn, and being a leader in 
conjunction with his father^ constitutes the whole mundane intellect. 
And if it be requisite to speak the truth clearly, each of the periods 
indeed, I mean the apparent, and the unapparent, participates of both 
these Gods; but the one indeed is more Saturnian, and the other is 
perfected under the kingdom of Jupiter. 

That the mighty Saturn therefore is allotted a kingdom different from 
that of the Gods prior to him, the Elean guest clearly manifests in what 
he asserts prior to the fable. For he says, ** We have heard from many 
respecting the kingdom of which Saturn was the founder. ” According 
to this wise man therefore, Saturn is one of the royal Gods. Hence also 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. VII. 


OF PLATO. 


327 


he presides over a kingdom different from that of his father. And while 
his father connectedly contains the middle centres of the intelligible and 
intellectual Gods, he is the leader of the intellectual orders and supplies 
all intellectual life, first indeed, to the Gods, but secondarily to - the 
natures more excellent than ours, and in the last place to partial souls, 
when they are able to be extended to the Saturnian place of survey. 
For this universe, and all the mundane Gods, always possess this two¬ 
fold life, and imitate the Saturnian intelligence indeed through unapparent 
and intellectual energy, but the demiurgic intellect of Jupiter, through 
a providential attention to secondary natures, and in short, through the 
visible fabrication. But partial souls at one time energize intellectually, 
and consecrate themselves lo Saturn, but at another time after a Jovian 
manner, and pay a providential attention to secondary natures, without 
restraint. When however they revolve analogous to those’ deities 
[Saturn and Jupiter] they intellectually perceive intelligibles, and dispose 
sensibles in an orderly manner, and live both these lives, in the same 
manner as the Gods and the more excellent genera. For their periods 
are twofold ; one being intellectual, but the other providential. Their 
paradigms also are twofold; the Saturnian intellect being the paradigm 
of the one, but the Jovian intellect of the other. For the mighty Jupiter 
himself has a twofold energy, containing indeed intelligibles in intellect, 
but adorning sensibles by demiurgic production. 

Since however the circulations are twofold, not only in wholes, but 
also in partial souls, the Elean guest says that in the Saturnian period, . 
the generation of these souls is not from each other, as in men which are 
the objects of sensible inspection, nor as the first man with us is alone 
earth-begotten, so in partial souls one first soul is the offspring of man, 
but all of them are earth-begotten. For they are elevated from ultimate 
and terrestrial bodies, and embrace an unapparent,' relinquishing a sen¬ 
sible life. He also says that neither do they verge to old age, and change 
from being younger to becoming older; but on the contrary, they are 

* For txineus, it is necessary to read txtivsi;. , 

* For is necessary to read 


Digitized by V^.OOQLe 



328 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


rendered more vigorous, proceed intellectually in a way contrary to 
generation, and as it were, divest themselves of the variety of life with 
which in descending they became invested. Hence likewise all the 
symbols which are adapted to youth are present with these souls, when 
they pass into this condition, such as a privation of hair, and a smooth¬ 
ness of the cheek instead of hoariness and beards. For they lay aside 
every thing which adheres to them from generation. But being situated 
there with Saturn, and living the life which is there, he says that there 
are abundance of fruits from trees, and many other [vegetable] sub¬ 
stances, which the earth spontaneously produces. Being likewise naked, 
and without coverlets, they are for the most part fed in the open air; for 
they have a temperament of the seasons which is always the same. But 
they make use of soft beds, grass in abundance being produced for them 
from the earth. Souls therefore derive these and such like goods from 
this mighty God, in the Saturnian period. For they are thence filled 
indeed with vivific goods, and gather intellectual fruits from wholes; but 
do not procure for themselves perfection and blessedness, from partial 
energies. For doxastic nutriment indeed has divisible and material 
conceptions; but intellectual nutriment has pure, impartible, and native 
conceptions, which the spontaneous obscurely signifies. 

The production from the earth also signifies the prolific intellect of the 
Gods, which imparts to souls by illumination perfection and self- 
sufficiency. For on account of the exuberant abundance of good, they 
are able to impart an influx of it, according to the measure of felicity 
adapted to them. Hence, they are neither covered with garments, as 
when they proceeded into generation, nor have they superabundant 
additions of life, but they are purified themselves by themselves from all 
composition and variety, and extending their intellect to total good, they 
participate of it from the intellectual father, being guarded by the 
intellectual Gods, and receiving from them the measures of a happy life. 
They likewise pass through the whole of their existence with facility, lead 
a sleepless and pure life, being established in the generative powers of 
intelligibles; and being filled with intellectual goods, and nourished with 
immaterial and divine forms, they are said to live a life under Saturn, 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. VIU. 


O* PLATO. 


329 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Because, therefore, this God is the leader of all intellectual life, and 
every intellect as well that which is imparticipable, as that which is 
participate proceeds from this cause, hence it belongs to this mighty 
God to feed in a distributed manner, and to nourish souls. For because 
indeed he is intelligible in intellectuals, he nourishes souls, and souls are 
called the nurselings of Saturn. But because he does not fill them with 
first, and unical intelligibles, but with those that are multiplied by his 
own cause of separation, he is said to feed them distributedly, and as it 
were in a divided manner. And do you not see how through these 
things, this God appears to be coordinate to the first triad of the 
intelligible and intellectual Gods ? For as Socrates, in the Phaedrus, says, 
that souls are nourished in the supercelestial place, and in the intelligible 
meadow, so the Elean guest asserts that the souls that are fed under 
Saturn, are filled with intelligible goods. And it is not at all wonderful 
if souls are perfected by -both these; intellectually indeed, under the 
kingdom of Saturn; but intelligibly under the order of the first intel¬ 
lectual Gods. For this God himself is nourished by that order. And 
on this account he is allotted a leading and primary transcendency in 
intellectuals, because they are filled from that order [through him] with 
occult and unapparent powers. And he is that among the intellectual 
fathers, which the order of the first intellectual Gods is in the intelligible 
and at the same time intellectual orders. Hence the intelligible every 
where becomes nutriment to ascending souls, but the connexion with it 
is effected through the second and third Gods. 

As therefore, the demiurgic order elevates souls to the Saturnian place 
of survey, thus also the Saturnian order elevates them to the subcelestial * 


Proe. 


1 Per vxtgougcmon in this place, it is JteceMtfy tD reed vwovf*vkw. 

VOL. I. 


2 T 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



330 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


arch. For having made many and blessed discursive energies in the 
kingdom of Saturn, they are again extended from hence to the per¬ 
fective, and from thence to the celestial triad, from which contemplating 
the supercelestial place, they are now ineffably conjoined with the 
supreme goods of intelligibles. And after this manner the second orders 
always connect souls with the orders prior to them. Hence also, the 
theurgic art imitating the unapparent periods of souls, arranges initiations 
in the mysteries of the second Gods, prior to the more sublime mysteries* 
And through these, it causes us to pass to the intelligible place of survey. 
These things, therefore, Plato indicates concerning the Saturnian life, and 
the polity of souls under Saturn, not in the Politicus only, but also in 
the discourses of the Athenian guest. For in the fourth book of the 
I^aws he celebrates the life under Saturn, obscurely signifying the 
undefiled nature, the facility, plenitude, and self-sufficiency of that 
energy, through fabulous fictions. 


CHAPTER IX. 


If, however, it be requisite from these things, and from all the mystic 
discipline concerning this God, to consider and discuss the orders which ' 
he constitutes in wholes, in the first place, we must direct our attention 
to the three kings mentioned in the Gorgias, who distributing the 
kingdom of Saturn were produced by him, as being allotted in a divided 
manner a uniform and impartible dominion, and over whom he places 
the divine law, which is the cause of distribution according to intellect, 
both to the Gods themselves, and to all the natures posterior to the 
Gods. In the second place, we must consider the rulers and kings 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. IX. 


OF PLATO. 


331 


mentioned in the Laws, who are said to preside over the different 
allotments of souls, and who are not men, but daemons of a more divine 
and excellent genus, who distribute to souls the measures of good, cut 
off their generation-producing lives, restrain their disorderly lation, retain 
them in the intelligible, and comprehend them in the kingdom of Saturn. 
In the third place, therefore, we must direct our attention to the daemon 
Gods, who preside over the parts of the world, and the herds [of souls] 
that are in it, as the Elean guest says in the Politicus, and who at one 
time come into contact with the objects of their government, and 
distribute to them intellectual, and all unapparent goods, but at another 
time withdraw themselves from the physical life of the world, recur to 
their own place of survey, and imitate the exempt transcendency of the 
demiurgus and father of the universe. 

But after these things, we must survey the twofold circulations of the 
mundane Gods, viz. the Saturnian and the Jovian; for these Gods 
always have each of these, as the fable says in the Politicus. For it is 
evident that the mutation of the stars and the sun takes place in each of 
the revolutions. This period, therefore, being twofold, it is obvious to 
every one that the periods are full of Saturnian goods, and participate of 
the Saturnian series. And not only the mundane Gods, but likewise all 
the. more excellent genera that follow the Gods, energize according to 
both these energies, and revolve according to the twofold circulations, 
through which souls also sometimes participate of an intellectual life, 
and proceed in this path, exchanging for sense intellect as the leader of 
their motion and circulation. Saturn, therefore, extends his kingdom 
supernally from the first Gods, as far as to partial souls, perfects all 
things, and fills them with intellectual goods, distributing to different 
natures different measures of good. For on account of this, law also 
subsists with him, as Socrates says in the Gorgias: “ This law therefore 
was in the time of Saturn, and always was, and now is, among the 
Gods.” For law is the distribution of intellect; but this God is the 
first, most pure, and incorruptible intellect. 

If, however, this God is the primary leader of all division, and is the 
origin of intellectual separation, it is necessary on this account, that law 



Digitized by 


Google 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


932 

should be with him, which distinguishes the orders of beings, divides 
the intellectual genera, and separates all forms according to a well- 
ordered progression; but imparts to all things by illumination the 
measure of hyparxis, connecting the order which is in them, preserving 
the boundaries of divine distribution immutable, and possessing the same 
dignity in the kingdom of Saturn, and in intellectuals, as Adrastia in the 
supercelestial place, and in the intelligible, and at the same time,, 
intellectual orders. For from each of them an immutable guard, and the 
progression of order to all things are generated. But they differ from 
each other, because law indeed divides the one into multitude, defines 
the measures of intellectual subsistence, and distributes to eveiy thing an 
appropriate good, producing the differeut measures of beings from the 
one [Saturnian] intellect. But Adrastia abiding in the intelligible, 
guards all things uniformly, and preserves total order in a firm unde¬ 
viating manner, exempt from all division. Law, therefore, is a certain 
God which divides divine forms, and definitely imparts to every thing 
that which is adapted to it according to the plenitude proceeding from 
one uniform cause; and it is also co-existent with the Saturnian order, 
in which the separations of beings, and the all-perfect progression of 
forms first subsist. Hence the demiurgus likewise looking to this 
conducts all things according to law, and constitutes mundane provi¬ 
dence an image of the union of the father; but fate and the fatal laws, 
an image of the division according to law. Souls, therefore, live 
according to law; in the Jovian period indeed being governed con¬ 
formably to the laws of Fate; but in the Saturnian period living 
according to divine law they are subservient to the multitude [of divine 
forms] and are extended to the one cause of all; and ascending to the 
intelligible place of survey, they are subjected to the sacred law of 
Adrastia. For this law extends from on high as far as to the last of 
things, and defines to souls the measures of whole periods, as Socrates 
says in the Phaedrus. Who therefore this greatest God is, and what the 
goods are of which he is the cause to souls, and prior to these, to Gods 
and daemons, the leaders of souls, let it, from these things be manifest. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



GHAP, X. 


OF PLATO. 


sss 


CHAPTER X. 


Since however, theologists assert that an exemption from old age 
pertains to this order, as the Barbarians say, and Orpheus the tbeologist 
of the Greeks, (for he mystically says that the hairs of the lace of Saturn 
are always black, and never become hoary) I admire the divinely-inspired 
intellect of Plato which unfolds the same things concerning this God to 
those who proceed in his steps. For he says that souls in the Saturn¬ 
ian period abandon old age, but return to youth, and remove from them* 
selves hoariness, but have black hair. For he says that the white hairs 
of the more elderly become black; but the cheeks of those that have 
beards being rendered smooth, they are restored to the past season £of 
youth.] These things indeed are asserted by the Elean guest; similar to - 
which are the assertions of Orpheus concerning this God. 

* - -r-under Saturnian Jove 

Men liv’d immortal; moist and fragrant hair 
From the pure chin then sprouted, nor was mix’d 
With the white flower that marks infirm old age; 

But in its stead, a florid down appear’d.. 

In these verses he delivers the similitude of Saturnian souls to this 
G.od. For he says that they remove from the view the old age which - 
they had acquired from generation and abandon material imbecility; and' 
that they exert the juvenile and vigorous life of intellect; For it is no 
otherwise lawful for them to be assimilated to the God who is exempts 
from old age, than through intellectual puberty, and undefiled power. 
But the cause of this is, that king Saturn himself is the source of the 
unallured Gods, and the inflexible triad. Hence he is, as Socrates 
says, a pure intellect. For be is at the same time the intellect of the un~ 


Digitized by LjOOQle 



334 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


defiled order, ranking as a summit, and riding as in a vehicle in the flou¬ 
rishing and vigorous * Gods that govern wholes. The souls also which are 
sent to him, wonderfully advance, in conjunction with intellectual energy, 
in vigour, and in a power undeviating, and free from any tendency to 
matter. Partial souls therefore, when they change their periods, at one 
time proceed to a more juvenile, and at another, to a more aged condi¬ 
tion. But whole souls always live according to both these periods, and 
are conversant with Saturn according to the unapparent period, but go¬ 
vern the universe in conjunction with Jupiter, according to visible pro¬ 
vidence, at once receiving an increase according to both these periods, 
and becoming at one and the same time both older and younger. And 
this is what Parmenides indicates when he says, that the one proceeding 
according to time becomes at once younger and older. These things 
however, will hereafter be more manifest. 


CHAPTER XI. 


Having therefore brought to an end the information concerning the 
king of the intellectual Gods, it evidently follows that we should in the 
next place celebrate the queen Rhea. For both Plato and Orpheus assert 
that she is the mother of the demiurgus of wholes, but a divinity posterior 
to Saturn. Thus therefore, we must speak concerning her. The stable 
and united cause of all intellectuals, and the principal and original 
monad, abiding in herself, unfolding into light all intellectual multitude, 
and again convolving it into herself, and embosoming her progeny, and 
the causes of wholes that emerge from her, analysing as it were after 

' For «x/xauo;,hi8 necessary to read oxjMuoif. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XI. 


OF PLATO. 


335 


division the natures that are divided, and being paternally allotted the 
highest kingdom in intellectuals,—this being the case, the vivific Rhea 
proceeds as the second from her proper principle, being allotted a ma¬ 
ternal order in the whole paternal orders, and producing the demiurgus. 
of wholes, prior to other Gods, and the immutable guard of the Gods. For 
this Goddess is the middle centre of the paternal intellectual triad, and the 
receiving bosom of the generative power which is in Saturn, calling forth 
indeed, to the generation of wholes, the causes which abide in him, but 
unfolding definitely all the genera of the Gods. And being filled indeed 
from the father prior to her with intelligible and prolific power, but filling 
the demiurgus and father subsisting from her, with vivific abundance. 
'Whence also the demiurgus is the cause of life to all things, as containing 
in himself the plenitude of intellectual life, and extending to all things 
the prolific cause of his mother. For as the middle Goddess multiplies 
the uniform powers of Saturn, and produces and causes them to preside 
over secondary natures, so the third father, at one and the same time 
unfolds, divides, and produces as far as to the last of things, the all¬ 
perfect abundance of the Saturnian monad, and the dyadic generation 
of the mother Rhea, so as not to leave the most material and disorderly 
part of the universe destitute of the power of Saturn. 

This Goddess therefore, being the middle of the two fathers, one of 
which collects, but the other divides intellectual multitude, and the one 
through transcendency desiring to abide and to be established in himself, 
but the other hastening to produce, generate and fabricate all things, she 
educes indeed into herself, the demiurgic causes of wholes, but imparts 
her own proper power to secondary natures, in unenvying abundance. 
Hence also Plato assimilates her prolific exuberance to streams, as So¬ 
crates says in the Cratylus, evinces that this Goddess is a certain flux, 
and in what he asserts of her obscurely shows nothing else than her fontal 
nature, and a power unically comprehensive of the divisible rivers of 
life. For the first-effective flux is fontal; which also Socrates indicating 
in this Goddess, shortly after clearly says that the name of Tethys is the 
name of a fountain. Why therefore, is it any longer necessary to doubt 
about these things, and to say where does Plato make mention of fontal 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



336 


ON TUB THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


Gods? For he himself denominates the causes of the subsistence of all 
the Gods* fontal fluxions. And besides this, if he admits that the mun¬ 
dane soul is the fountain and principle of life, because it proceeds both 
from an impartible and partible vivification, how is it possible that he 
should not in a much greater degree and more truly call the Goddess 
who comprehends in herself all life, fontal? 

Concerning names however, it is not, I think, at all proper to contend, 
but we should survey the orders themselves of the first effective Gods, 
and see how Plato following theologists copiously unfolds them to us, 
celebrating after the Saturnian monad the kingdom of Rhea, constituting 
from these the demiurgus of Wholes, and all the multitude of Gods which 
is woven together with him. For this Goddess binding together the breadth 
of intellectuals, and embosoming total life* emits all the intellectual 
powers in herself of the rivers of life; and by the summit of herself 
indeed, is conjoined to the first father, and together with him generates 
wholes, and the genera of Gods that abide in him; but by her extremity 
is connascent with fabrication, and according to a kindred conjunction 
with fabrication, constitutes all the orders of Gods that are prior to the 
world, and that are in the world. Hence there also the causes of the 
Aemiurgi of wholes primarily subsist, and the more partial genera of 
life: and the union and total deity of all these, is at once exempt from 
■the plenitudes of herself, and is at once co-arranged with them. 

Thus therefore, she is both uniform and multiform, one and simple, 
though being self-perfect, she is avivific world, proceeding from on high 
<as far as to the last of things, and as far as to the extremities of the 
universe, giving subsistence to the vivific powers of the breadth of life. 
■Hence also Plato refers the vivific cause of wholes to this Goddess, and 
through the last gifts of this divinity, indicates her total energy; which 
primarily indeed fills the whole demiurgus with intellectual and pro¬ 
lific power, but secondarily perfects all the genera of, the Gods with the 
intellectual fruits of herself. According to a third order also, her total 
energy nourishes the souls that are the attendants of the Gods, with the 
rivers of divine perfection. And in the last orders, it imparts to mortal 
animals the gift of nature. This therefore is, J think, more known than 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XL 


OF PLATO. 


337 


every thing to those who admit that things divine are beyond the works 
of nature. 

That however, which it is more fit the lovers of the contemplation of 
truth should consider, I say, is this, that Plato divides Ceres from 1 the 
whole vivific deity, and coarranges her, at one time with Proserpine, at 
another with Juno, and at another with the progeny of Jupiter, as we 
may learn in the Cratylus. In which dialogue indeed, he co-arranges 
Ehea with Saturn, but connects a certain common investigation and 
theory about Ceres, Jupiter, and Juno. In the Laws likewise cele¬ 
brating the legislative Goddesses, he refers the whole of a legitimate life 
to the union of Ceres and Proserpine; since according to Orpheus this 
middle Goddess being conjoined with Saturn by her summit, is called 
Ehea; but producing Jupiter, and-together with Jupiter unfolding the 
whole and partial orders of the Gods, she is called Ceres. And all the 
order of middle life is comprehensive of the other Titanidae, and likewise 
of Ceres. For it preestablished this monad as a middle collective of all 
the orders in it, both those that are occult, and those that are divided 
about the generative powers of the Goddess. Each of these powers, 
however, are triple. And this monad indeed conjoins the superior triad 
to Saturn, but weaves the inferior, together with the demiurgic order. 
It also evinces that the Cerealian monad being the middle, is coarranged 
with, and is at the same time exempt from the demiurgus of wholes. For 
in conjunction with the whole order it constitutes, and together with 
Jupiter generates Proserpine. And thus we have celebrated the primo- 
genial Goddess who is the middle of the fathers. 

1 «*o is omitted in the original. 


Proc. 


VoL. I. 


2 U 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



OH THE THEOLOGY 


EooK n 


sse 


CHAPTER XII. 


Now however, after this Goddess, the demiurgus of wholes is in the 
third place to be celebrated, according to the order which he is allotted 
in the intellectual Gods, peculiarly unfoldingfor this purpose all the truth 
concerning him. And in the first place, we must remember that it is 
necessary the peculiarity of this third father should be demiurgic; and thus- 
ih the next place, following Plato, we must direct our attention to other 
particulars [respecting this GodJ The first of the intellectual Gods> 
therefore, who is parturient with multitude, who is the leader and source 
of all separation, and who separates himself from the uniform and first 
Gods, but generates the divided principles of wholes,—this God again 
converts his progeny to himself, and weaves together these parts with his* 
own sameness, and exhibits himself as one intelligible world in intellectu¬ 
als, bringing forth in himself, and retaining with himself his own offspring. 
But the second of the intellectual deities, is the vivific Goddess, who 
brings forth indeed in conjunction with the first intellectual God, occult 
multitude, (for she is conjoined to him according to supreme transcen^ 
dency) but cannot endure to remain in this mode of generating, and in> 
Collecting the separation of wholes into unseparated union. Hence she 
separates the third intellect from the [first] father; but produces the 
multitude of the Gods, and of intellectual reasons, and fills the demiurgus 
with generative power. If, therefore, the first intellectual God is partu¬ 
rient with the generation of wholes; but the prolific vivification of the 
intellectual orders causes this generation to shine forth;—it is evident 
that the intellect of the intellectual fathers, according to his own order, 
produces and adorns all things, and calls forth indeed, the occult nature 
of his father, into separation and progression, but prepares total vivifica¬ 
tion to send forth the rivers of itself, as far as to the last of things. For it is 
every where the peculiarity of intellect to divide and unfold multitude^ 
the plenitudes of life, and the unions of intelligibles. Intelligible 


D itized by 


Google 



CHAP. XIL 


OP PLATO, 


339 


intellect however contains multitude uniformly, or according to the form 
of one; for multitude preexists in the intelligible according to cause. 
But the intelligible, and at the same time, intellectual intellect, has 
indeed secondary measures of union, but is exempt from all perfect 
separation, abiding in the first principles of wholes. And intellectual. 
intellect is the source of all division, and of the subsistence of partial 
natures; since it preestablishes in itself all the multitude of forms, and 
this not tetradically only, as intelligible intellect, but it possesses one 
all-perfect intellectual cause of all forms. It is necessary therefore that 
the whole demiurgic principles should pertain to this intellect, that all 
the demiurgic Gods should proceed from this one third father, and that 
this should be the demiurgus of wholes. For as the first of paradigms 
co-subsists in intelligible intellect, and in the third triad and the first 
father, so likewise we must place the first demiurgic monad in intel¬ 
lectual intellect, and the third father of the intellectual Gods. For on 
this account also the demiurgic is conjoined with the paradigmatic cause, 
according to the analogy which each is allotted among the fathers; one 
indeed in intelligibles, but the other in intellectuals. For one is the 
boundary of the intelligible, but the other of the intellectual order. But 
this is evident from what has been before said. 

Farther still, fabrication being fourfold, and one indeed adorning 
wholes totally, another adorning wholes but partially, another adorning 
parts, but totally, and another weaving parts together with wholes, 
partially,—this being the case, it is evident that the cause of wholes 
which is the cause of them uniformly and indivisibly, is the most ancient 
of all the causes. It is necessary however, that this cause should cither 
be prior to, or in, or posterior to the intellectual Gods. Where therefore 
shall we place it ? For all the parts which are constituted by intellectuals 
are more partial than the one and total fabrication. For the division of 
wholes into three, and the leaders of divisible production, present them* 
selves to the view in these orders. The natures therefore, that are prior 
to intellectuals, are defined according to other peculiarities of the Gods, 
as was before shown, and in short, they subsist according to union, and 
are expanded above the separation of intellectual forms. 


Digitized by 



340 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOO K V 


CHAPTER XIII. 


\ 


It remains therefore that the one demiurgus of wholes must be arranged 
in intellectuals. But if indeed, he is the first father, he will be intelligible,, 
will contain his progeny in himself, and will be the collector of separation. 
How therefore, does he divide the worlds ? How does he generate the 
multitudes of mundane natures ? How does he speak to- all the junior 
demiurgi at once ? For the first father is uncoordinated with the whole 
number of mundane natures, and also converts his first progeny to 
himself, flying as it were from multitude to union, and hastily with¬ 
drawing himself from all-various separation into intelligible transcen¬ 
dency. But if the one demiurgus of wholes is the vivific order, all things 
indeed, will be full of life, on account of the whole demiurgus. And the 
cause of souls, according to a probable reason will here become apparent 
subsisting prior to multitude. But how will he convert all things to 
himself? How is he called demiurgus and father? For the vivific deity, 
herself by herself, has a maternal dignity among tin? Gods, and is the 
supplier of progression to all things. But to produce forms, and to 
convert, are the illustrious and peculiar good of intellect. Neither 
therefore, is the demiurgus of wholes in the supermundane order. For 
all the natures there are partial, and either partially preside over wholes, 
or comprehend the productions of parts totally. Nor is he in intelli- 
gibles. For all the Gods there are fathers; and no one there is called ' 
demiurgus and father. But the divine orders antecedently comprehend 
;dl things in a manner perfectly occult and unical. Nor is he in the 
intelligible and at the same time intellectual order. For to collect, 
•connect, and perfect multitudes, is not the province of the demiurgic 
peculiarity. For this is the source of separation, and the production of 
forms, glittering with intellectual sections. But the intelligible and at 
the same time intellectual Gods, extend intellectual multitudes to the 

* For tfapriTttt, it appears to me that we should read mi 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


541 


union of intelligibles. Nor again, is it possible to admit that the demi¬ 
urgic cause is in the first or second order of intellectuals. For the 
summit of intellectuals is imparticipable by mundane natures, and is 
rather proposed to them in the order of the desirable; but is not 
productive of them. Hence, all the Gods in the world are elevated to 
the Saturnian place of survey; but proceed from another secondary 
principle, and through it are converted and conjoined to the exempt 
kingdom. And the middle centre being vivific, is not defined according 
to the paternal characteristic. For the generative very much differs from 
the paternal, and the vivific from the demiurgic genus; so far, I think, 
as the principles of the whole orders, I mean bound and infinity, differ 
from each other. For the demiurgic and paternal order is referred to 
bound; but all vivific and generative power, to infinity. 


CHAPTER XIV. 

I wonder therefore, at those interpreters of Plato, who do not make 
one fabrication but many, who assert that there are three demiurgi of 
wholes, and pass at one time to the second, and at another to the third 
demiurgus; and who divide what is said in the Timseus, and think fit to 
refer some of the assertions to one, but others to another cause. For that 
there is a demiurgic triad, and another multitude of Gods characterized 
according to the producing cause, I also admit, and think it will be 
granted by Plato. It is necessary however in each order prior to the 
triad, and prior to every multitude, that there should be a preexistent 
monad. For all the orders of the Gods originate from a monad; 
because each of the whole orders is assimilated to the whole progression 
of the Gods. As therefore the subsistence of the Gods has the cause of 
its generation from the imparticipable one, thus also it is necessary that 
the perfect orders in the Gods, should have a preexistent monad, and a 
first-effective principle. According to the same reasoning, all the vivific 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



S42 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


progressions are suspended from one vivification, and the demiurgic 
orders are extended to one fabrication. And it is not proper that there 
should be multitude without the monad. For there will neither be 
co-arrangement, nor a division of multitude according to intellect, unless 
the one and whcde preexist. For on this account prior to all the divine 
progressions, the order of wholeness subsists, in order that it may compre¬ 
hend parts, and may define them in, and about itself. 

How therefore neglecting whole in fabrication, can we survey demiurgi 
divided according to parts? Though Plato himself thinks with respect to 
the paradigm of the universe, that the world should not be assimilated to 
any thing which naturally subsists in the form of a part, but to all perfect 
animal; and on this account he demonstrates that the world is only- 
begotten, because its paradigm is one. For if it were not one, but many 
paradigms, again it would be necessary that there should be another 
animal about it, of which it would be a part, and it would be more right 
to assert that the world is no longer similar to the many paradigms, but 
to that which comprehends them. For it is necessary that the one 
paradigm should precede the many, in the same manner as the one good 
subsists prior to participated goods, and that the whole world should be 
the image of one paradigm prior to many. For whether it is alone the 
image of many paradigms, whence will the world be one and a whole ? 
And how is it possible it should not be more dishonourable than its parts? 
For these indeed, are assimilated to intelligibles, but the whole world is 
similar to no one of real beings. Or whether all the world subsists from 
a certain intelligible paradigm, if indeed there are many paradigms of one 
world, these also will be similar to each other, if they are the causes of 
the same image. It is necessary therefore, that sameness should be 
communicated to these from one form; or again, the world will be more 
venerable than its paradigms according to union. But if the paradigm is 
one, after the same manner also the demiurgic cause is one. For as 
there is one image from one paradigm, thus also the progeny being one, 
derives its subsistence from one demiurgus and father. For it is 
■necessary that the paradigmatic cause should either be the same with the 
demiurgus, and should be established in him, or that it should be prior to 


Digitized by 


Goog 



OF PLATO. 


S 4 S 


CHAP. XIV. 

the demiurgus, as we say it is, or that it should be posterior to the 
demiurgus, as some think proper to assert. 

If however, the paradigm and the demiurgus are the same, the demiur¬ 
gus will be one according to Plato. For the paradigm is only-begotten, as 
he demonstrates. But if the demiurgus exists prior to the paradigm, 
which it is not lawful to assert, but the paradigm is one, much more will 
the demiurgus be one. For the causes which are more elevated are 
allotted a more uniform hypostasis; since also the first cause of wholes is 
one. And if the paradigmatic cause has indeed the first order in beings, 
but the demiurgic cause the second order, and this universe the last 
order, being the resemblance of the former, and the progeny of the latter, 
how is it possible since the extremes are monadic, the middle multitude 
should be without the monad ? For it is necessary that the paradigm 
being intelligible, should impart by illumination a greater degree of 
union to the universe than the demiurgic cause. And as the paradigm 
being only-begotten, comprehends in itself the first paradigms, after the 
same manner it is necessary that the demiurgic monad should be compre¬ 
hensive of many demiurgi. For if the world derives its only-begotten, 
subsistence from the paradigm, but through the demiurgus, the demi¬ 
urgus also is indeed entirely one. 

Farther still, I think that those who are the patrons of this opinion 
should direct their attention to that assertion of Socrates, that it is every 
where fit the many should be comprehended in the one. For on account 
of this we admit the hypothesis of forms [or ideas], and prior to other 
things we preestablish intellectual monads. How therefore are intellec¬ 
tual forms extended to one principle, and how do each of them proceed 
from one demiurgic cause, but the whole demiurgic form is multiplied, 
and divided prior to the indivisible monad ? For it is necessary that as 
all equals, whether they are intellectual, or psychical, or sensible, should 
be suspended from one first equality, all beautiful things, from beauty 
itself, and the many every where, from primary beings, thus also it is 
necessary that the multitude of demiurgi should be suspended from one 
fabrication, and should subsist about one demiurgic monad. For how 
can it be lawful to leave the one in forms rather than in the Gods ? For 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



344 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


forms indeed, have their hypostasis mingled with multitude; but the 
Gods are defined according to union itself. If therefore all the multi¬ 
tudes of forms are the progeny of monads, much more are the orders of 
the Gods allotted peculiarities which originate from monads, and which 
through monads are inherent in multitudes. But if this be the case, it is 
necessary that the whole demiurgus should subsist prior to the multitude 
of demiurgi, and that the three demiurgi should distribute the one cause 
of the generation of the universe. 

Again therefore we assert from the beginning that it is necessary the 
demiurgic principle should either be one, or many, or one, and many. 
But if indeed, it is one alone, and the multitude in the world, and the 
different order which it contains subsist similarly from one demiurgic 
principle, how are mortal and immortal natures the progeny of the same 
cause without a medium ? For all the natures that proceed from the one 
fabrication are immortal. But if the demiurgic principle is many only, 
whence is the common form of hyparxis communicated to the multitude, 
if it does not originate from-one? For as the final cause is one, viz. the 
good , as the paradigmatic cause is one, viz. animal itself, and as the world 
is a generated one, thus also after the same manner, the demiurgic cause 
is one. But if there are one and many demiurgic principles, whether 
does the one principle belong to partial or to total genera ? If however, it 
belongs indeed to partial genera, how is it extended to the first and 
intelligible paradigm? For the supermundane genera subsist about the 
intellectual Gods, and according to intellectual paradigms. For being 
partial, they entirely assimilate the natures posterior to themselves to 
intellectuals, co-ordinately to themselves. Or how will it any longer 
preserve the union of total fabrication which produces wholes totally? 
For a thing of this kind pertains to no partial nature ; but it belongs to a 
partial principle, to produce parts either totally 1 or partially, as we before 
observed. But if the demiurgic principle belongs to the total orders, it 
is necessary that it should either be intelligible or intellectual, or intelli¬ 
gible and intellectual. If however, it is of an intelligible nature, how is 

1 oAixcof is emitted in the original. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


3*5 


it divisive of wholes ? How is it co-arranged with mundane natures? 
How is it said to fashion the universe ? How from the genera of being 
does it produce soul, and the natures posterior to soul ? For [on this 
hypothesis] we must admit that all these are in intelligibles, viz. figure; 
the genera of being, and these divided, the similar and the dissimilar, 
and other things through which the demiurgic principle constitutes the 
whole world. But if the demiurgic principle is of an intelligible and at 
the same time intellectual nature, how does he produce participated 
intellect ? How does he separate the multiform orders of souls ? How 
does he divide the parts, or the circles that are in them ? For that which 
is generative of participated intellect, is imparticipable intellect. And 
that which has the power of dividing multitude will not [on this 
hypothesis] differ from that which connects the total genera of the 
Gods. And in short, the demiurgus of wholes, is called byTimaeus 
intellect, and is frequently said to see, to discover, and to reason, but he 
is no where denominated by him intelligible and at the same time 
intellectual. For the intelligible and at the same time intellectual Gods, 
divide all things triad ically. But the demiurgus, at one time indeed, 
divides the world into five parts, and at another divides the circles of tire 
soul into hebdomads, that he may generate either the celestial spheres, 
or the seven parts of the soul. We must say therefore, that he is entirely 
secondary to the intelligible and at the same time intellectual Gods, and 
he is the cause of secondary goods to the world. But we must refer to 
those Gods the cause of united forms and reasons. That the demiurgic 
intellect however, is an intellectual God, is I think through these things 
sufficiently apparent at present. 


Tree. 


VoL.I. 


*X 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



846 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


CHAPTER XV. 


Birr Plato appears to me to have indicated the peculiarity of this 
God in a remarkable manner, by calling him intellect, and asserting that 
he sees intelligibles, but admitting that they are visible to him according; 
to nature. For that which is truly intellect, and which establishes itself 
according to this hyparxis, is intellectual intellect. For intelligible intel¬ 
lect also, is indeed simply intelligible, and is of that allotment; but is- 
said to be intellect, as being the cause of every intellectual nature. 
And the intellect of the intelligible and at the same time intellectual 
Gods, has not its own nature unmingled with the intelligible. But intel¬ 
lectual intellect alone, is peculiarly intellect, being allotted the intellec¬ 
tual itself in intellectuals; just as the most principal of intelligibles, is- 
primarily, the first, and the highest intelligible, which we denominate the- 
one being, and that which is occultly being. This therefore is that which, 
is simply intelligible. But that which is simply intellect is intellec¬ 
tual intellect. For the intelligible indeed possesses the summit, but 
intellect the end of wholes. And the intermediate natures partly pertain? 
to the intelligible, and partly to Intellect, and the intellectual nature. 
And the intelligibles indeed, that are primarily so, possess intellect ac¬ 
cording to cause; but the first of intellectuals have the intelligible* 
according to participation; and the natures that are collective of these,, 
conjoin the intelligible and intellectual peculiarity together. Since, 
therefore, Timteus also calls the demiurgus intellect indefinitely, and 
neither denominates him life, nor intelligible, in consequence of his pecu- 
* liarity being alone intellectual, it is certainly necessary that he should 
be established at the end of the intellectual Gods. 

For there intellect is intellect itself, and is not such an intellect as 
the Saturnian is. For Saturn also is intellect, but he is a pure and incor- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHA^XV. 


OF PLATO 


S47 


ruptible intellect, which manifests his supreme empire in intellectuals, 
transcending the whole intellectual Gods. -But the demiurgus is simply 
intellect. As therefore, the simply intelligible is the first of intelligibles, 
so that which is simply intellect, is the last of intellectuals. For all 
things are in each of the orders. For in intelligibles life and intellect 
preexist; and in the breadth of life, there are similarly life and intellect. 
And in intellectuals there is each of the rest. But in intelligibles indeed, 
being is according to essence, but life and intellect are according to 
cause. In intellectuals, intellect indeed is according to essence, but being 
and life are according to participation. And in the intermediate natures, 
intellect is according to cause, but being is according to participation, 
and life according to essence. As therefore, that which is most vital 
in life is the middle, and as that which is especially intelligible is the 
summit in being, so in intellectuals, the extremity is that which is most 
intellectual. Hence if there is a certain intellect which is simply intel¬ 
lect, and a perceiving intellect, this is intellectual intellect, which Plato 
denominating the demiurgus unfolds to us the most manifest order, which 
it is allotted in intellectuals. On this account also, prior to all other 
things, the demiurgus constitutes participated intellect, as'Timaeus says. 
For placing intellect in soul, and soul in body, he fashioned the universe. 
Energizing therefore, according to his own essence, and producing by his 
very being, he constituted the intellect of the universe prior to all other 
things. For every participated proceeds from imparticipable intellect. 
Hence, as if Plato had said, that the generative cause which gives sub¬ 
sistence to participated intelligible, is that which is primarily being, so 
since the demiurgus first produces intellect from himself, he will be im¬ 
participable and intellectual intellect. From these things therefore, it is 
evident what the hyparxis of the demiurgus and father is, and what order 
it is allotted in intellectuals according to Timaeus. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



348 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BdOK Yl. 


CHAPTER xvr. 


Let us however after another manner syllogistically collect the pecu- 
Earity of the demiurgus, receiving from the Timaeus the principles of the 
arguments on this subject. This therefore is known to every one, that 
Timaeus calls the whole demiurgus fabricator and father, in the beginning; 
of what he says concerning him. For he says^“ It is difficult to discover 
the fabricator and father of this universe, and when found, it is impossible 
to speak of him to all men." Hence, he does not think fit to call him 
either father alone, or fabricator alone, nor again connecting the two,, 
father and fabricator, but on the contrary, he places the fabricative prior, 
to the paternal. Now therefore, we must show in the first place, in what 
respect fabricator and father differ from each.other; and in the next place,, 
in addition to this, who the fabricator alone is, and who father and fa¬ 
bricator is, and how the fabricative and at the same time paternal pecu¬ 
liarity, is considered by Plato as adapted to the demiurgus. 

If therefore, we divide all things into the Gods, and the progeny of the 
Gods, and this is the same thing as to divide them into superessentiaL 
monads, and the progressions of beings, father indeed will be generative 
of the Gods and superesseutial unities; but fabricator will give subsist¬ 
ence to essences and beings. For again, according to this reason Timaeus 
says, that the natures which are generated by the demiurgus are equal to 
the Gods; for the demiurgus is not only fabricator, but also father; but 
that those which are produced by the junior Gods, are allotted a mortal 
nature. For these Gods are alone producers and fabricators of things 
which participate of existence alone, and not of the superessential pecuf 
liarity. Hence through that by which they suffer a diminution with re¬ 
spect to the demiurgic monad, through this they are not allotted a power 
generative of things equal to the Gods. And through that by which the- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XVI: 


OF PLATO. 


349 

intellectual demiurgus is expanded above the junior Gods, through this 
he binds to himself the generations of all mundane natures. 

But if again, we divide beings into the total and partial, father indeed, 
will appear to us to be the hypostatic eause of wholes, but fabricator of 
partial natures. For the former is the cause exemptly of things that are 
generated; but the latter proximately. And the former, produces 
indeed by his very being, energy giving perfection to his hyparxis; but 
the latter produces by energizing, his hypostasis being fixed according 
to energy. If also we again separately divide the generations of perpe¬ 
tual and mortal natures, we must refer the generation of perpetual na¬ 
tures to the paternal cause, but the generation of mortal natures to the 
fabricative cause. For the fabricator indeed produces that which is ge¬ 
nerated from non-being to being. For the Elean guest defines the 
effective art to be this. But the father constitutes things posterior to 
himself consubsistent with himself. For he is father by his very being, 
and has the power of generating united with himself. Each therefore, I 
mean the paternal and the effective or fabricative, is assimilated to the 
principle of bound. And the former indeed is the cause of union, but 
the latter of the production of forms. And the former is the cause of 
wholes, but the latter of an extension as far as to parts. And the one 
indeed', is the primary leader of simple, but the other of composite na¬ 
tures. Again however, in' these the generative cause, and the cause 
which is productive of life, are opposed to each other; because the 
paternal cause indeed is connascent with generative powers, but the 
effective with vivific powers. And as the paternal and the effective 
causes pertain to the coordination of bound, so every thing prolific and 
vivific, pertains to vivificatioq, and the first infinity. 

These things, however, being thus divided by us, it is evident that the 
paternal indeed, is itself by itself primarily in the intelligible Gods. For 
they are the fathers of wholes, being fixed according to supreme intelligi¬ 
ble union. And on this account, Plato also calls the first God father, 
from the natures which are proximately established after him, transfer¬ 
ring to him the appellation of father. For every where indeed, it is usual 
with Plato to introduce names to the ineffable from secondary causes*- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



350 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


and the causes which are posterior to it. But at one time indeed, he 
introduces the names from all beings, and at another from the first beings. 
For it neither was nor is lawful to refer names to him who is exempt from 
all beings, from subordinate natures, and which are placed in an order 
very remote from him. If therefore, all beings participate of the paternal 
peculiarity, we must say that Plato gives this name to the one from all 
beings; for there is not among all beings such a cause as this. Hence it 
is evident that Plato introduces to the one an appellation of this kind, 
from that which is the first and highest in the Gods. The intelligible 
Gods, however, are more ancient than all the divine orders, and subsist 
immediately after the one. The paternal cause therefore of beings is in 
the intelligible Gods, and the intelligible Gods are the fathers of all the 
divine genera,' being established in the highest essences, and occultly pro¬ 
ducing wholes. And the first God indeed, is beyond the appellation of 
father, as he is likewise beyond all other names; and he is neither properly 
called the goody or the one , through his ineffable and unknown transcen¬ 
dency. But the intelligible Gods are primarily superessential unities 
and goodnesses, and are the exempt fathers of beings. 

The paternal peculiarity, therefore, originates supernally from the first 
intelligible triad; but the fabricative first presents itself to the view in 
the third triad. For that which generates all forms, and adorns all things 
with forms is the third triad of intelligibles. For there, as we have said, 
all-perfect animal subsists, which is comprehensive of the first and intel¬ 
ligible paradigms. Here therefore, the effective also or fabricative at the 
same time subsists. For animal itself constitutes the Gods, and produces 
the forms of all beings. Hence it is allotted the paternal peculiarity, 
according to the divine cause, but according to the formal cause, it un¬ 
folds into light the effective principle of wholes. But again, on the con¬ 
trary, the effective and at the same time paternal peculiarity, is allotted 
its hypostasis in the demiurgic monad. Hence also the demiurgus of 
wholes is the hypostatic cause of Gods. In a particular manner however, 
he fabricates the world, energizing with forms and demiurgic reasons. 
For he constitutes intellect, souls and bodies, adorning all things with 
forms, some indeed with first, others with middle, and others with last forms. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XVL 


OF PLATO. 


851 


Do you not see, therefore, how the end of intelligibles indeed, was 
paternal and at the same time effective; but the end of intellectuals is 
effective and at the same time paternal. There however, the paternal 
peculiarity is more predominant; but here the effective. For in both 
indeed, both causes preexist; nevertheless in the paradigm [i. e. in ani¬ 
mal itself] the paternal is more prevalent, but in the demiurgus the 
effective. For the former produces by his very being; but the latter by 
energizing. And in the former indeed, fabrication [or effective energy] 
is essential; but in the latter essence is effective. Forms also are with 
both; but in the former intelligibly, and in the latter intellectually. From 
these things therefore, it is evident, that the demiurgic cause subsists 
analogous to the paradigmatic cause; and that it has the same order with 
respect to intellectuals, as that has with respect to intelligibles. And on 
this account Timseus also says that the demiurgus of wholes was extended, 
to that paradigm. For he says, ** Whatever ideas intellect perceived by 
the dianoetic energy in animal itself, such and so many he conceived ife 
necessary for the universe to contain.” And together with this analogy* 
there is a diminution of the intellectual with reference to the intelligible. 
For the latter is more united; but the former is more separated. And; 
the one indeed is preestablished in the order of the desirable; but the 
other is moved about the desirable. And the one fills with paternal- 
power; but the other absorbs as it were and embosoms the whole prolific 
abundance of the desirable. And after this manner, the demiurgus of the 
universe is all-perfect, receiving whole intelligible powers, from all-perfect 
animal. For the universe is threefold; one indeed being intelligibly [all]; 
another intellectually; and another sensibly. For the world is perfect* 
from perfect natures, as Timseus says. And animal itself is perfect ac¬ 
cording to all things, as the same Timaeus asserts. The demiurgus like¬ 
wise, being the best of causes, is all-perfect. 

Again therefore, resuming what we have said, we repeat, that the 
paternal cause commences from the supreme union of intelligibles; but 
the paternal' and at the same time effective cause is consubsistent in the 
intelligible paradigm; and the effective and at the same time paternal 
cause is defined according to the whole demiurgus. But the cause which 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



35 % 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Y. 


is alone effective and fabricative, pertains to the junior Gods who give 
subsistence to partial and mortal tilings. The peculiarity therefore of 
the demiurgic cause is effective and paternal. And this Timaeus asserts, 
.not only in the beginning of the discourse about it, in which he says, “ [To 
discover] therefore, the artificer and father of .this universe, &c.;" but 
also in the speech to the junior Gods, he dues the same thing; for the 
demiurgus in a similar manner says to them : “ Gods of Gods of whom X 
am the demiurgus and father, [Whatever is generated by me is indissolu¬ 
ble, I being willing that it should be so.]” For he does not call himself 
.father and demiurgus, but demiurgus and father, just as there [Timaeus 
calls him] fabricator and father. And not in the Timaeus only is this 
mode of the arrangement of the names defined, but in the Politicus also, 
.the Elean guest speaking.about the world says that it imitates the instruc¬ 
tion of its demiurgus and father; and in the beginning indeed, he uses 
jthese names more accurately, but in the end more negligently. Since 
Plato therefore, every where preserves this .order of names unchanged, it 
is evident to those who are not entirely unskilled in things of this kind, 
that he defines the demiurgic monad according to this peculiarity, and 
.that he considers it to be effective and at the same time paternal. For 
because indeed, it is the end of the intellectual triad, it is allotted a pa¬ 
ternal transcendency with respect to all the second genera of Gods; but 
because it produces from itself all the partial genera and species of beings, 
jit possesses an effective cause of the natures to which it gives subsistence. 
And because indeed, it is father, power is in it, and at the same time in¬ 
tellect- For the demiurgus himself says, “ Imitating the power which I 
employed in your generation.” And again, Timaeus says concerning the 
demiurgus; “ Whatever ideas intellect perceived in animal itself, such 
and so many he conceived by the dianoetic energy it necessary for this 
universe to contain." Hence he is father, and the power of .the father is 
in him* and intellect. All these however, are in him intellectually, and 
not intelligibly. Hence, I think he is called father indeed, not simply, 
but together with effector and demiurgus; and power, not by itself, but 
,the power of the demiurgus and father. For he who calls himself demi¬ 
urgus and father, says that it is the power of himself. But he is imraedi- 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XVI. 


OF PLATO. 


353 


ately called intellect, without the addition of power, and the other 
appellations. “ Whatever ideas therefore intellect perceived," &c. For 
all things are in him intellectually, and both power and father, by which 
he imitates the intelligible paradigm. For in him all things were intelli¬ 
gibly, * viz. bound, infinity, and that which is mixed from both these. 
These, however, are father, power, and intellect. But the intellectual of 
the paradigm indeed was intelligible in the intelligible Gods, sub¬ 
sisting prior to an intellectual cause. The intellectual however of the 
demiurgus, is of itself intellectual, being intellectual in intellectuals, as 
was before observed. Because indeed, as we have said, he is father, 
power is in him, and also intellect. But because these are defined ac¬ 
cording to the effective and demiurgic, he is coarranged with the vivific 
order, and together with it constitutes the genera of life, and vivifies the 
whole world. What this order is however, and where it is arranged, we 
shall shortly survey. But thus much is evident from what has been said, 
that so far as he is the demiurgus, he requires contact with the vivific 
order, together with it generates total lives, and conjoins it to himself. 
Disseminating, however, all the measures of life in it, and together with 
it adorning and producing them, he again converts them to himself. Foi\ 
it belongs to him to generate all things, and to recall all things to him¬ 
self, no less than to generate them, because he is established at the end 
of the intellectual order, and is the demiurgic intellect. As he is there¬ 
fore demiurgic, he gives subsistence to all things; but as intellect, he 
convolves multitude to union, and converts it to himself. He also 
accomplishes both these, by the words which he delivers to the junior 
Gods. For he fills them with demiurgic and prolific power, collects them 
to himself, constitutes himself the object of desire as it Were to the mul¬ 
titude of Gods, and extends about himself all the demiurgi in the world. 


* For voeptogf it is necessary to read 


Proc. Vol. I. 


2 Y 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



354 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V- 


CHAPTER XVII. 


In the third place therefore, let us purify our conceptions about the de¬ 
miurgic cause according to other projecting energies of intellect, following 
for this purpose Timaeus. In the first place then, Timaeus in the begin¬ 
ning of the theory concerning the demiurgus, sufficiently exhibits his good¬ 
ness, and his unenvying and abundant communication of demiurgic 
reasons, being impelled to this from the seat of goodness which is in¬ 
herent in him, and from his exuberant deity. For his goodness and his 
unenvying abundance, are not as it were a certain habit of good, and a 
power, or a form itself by itself existing prior to many goods, but it is one 
ineffable participation of good, and the one of the demiurgic order; ac¬ 
cording to which the demiurgus also is a God, and fills all things with 
their proper good. For because there is deity in him which desires to 
adorn and arrange all things, and an hyparxis which is extended to the 
providence of the whole of things, on this account he establishes the prin¬ 
ciple of fabrication. His goodness therefore is nothing else than demi¬ 
urgic deity. But his will is the progeny of the energy of his goodness, 
bounding the end of his power. For since in the demiurgus of wholes 
there are, as we have said, father, power, and intellect, and these subsist 
in him intellectually, according to each of these he is filled with the par¬ 
ticipation of the one. And through goodness indeed, that which is 
paternal in him, and which is as it were the intelligible of intellect, is 
illuminated. But through will, his power is governed, and is extended 
to one intelligible good. And through providence, his intellect is perfect, 
and gives subsistence to all things. All these likewise are the progeny 
of the one deity in the demiurgus. 

In the first place, therefore, as I have said, Timaeus unfolds through 
these things the divine peculiarity of the demiurgus. But in the second 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XVII. 


OF PLATO. 


355 


place, he presents to our view the intelligible cause which is in him, and 
also the united paradigmatic cause of wholes which he contains. For 
to make all things similar to himself, evinces that he is the intelligible 
paradigm of every thing beautiful and good in the world. For because 
he gives subsistence to all things by his very being, that to which he 
gives subsistence is the image of himself. And according to this 
reasoning the demiurgus is not only a God, but he contains in himself 
the intelligible, and true being, and antecedently comprehends not only 
the final cause of mundane natures, but also the paradigmatic cause. 
But again, in the third place, Timasus celebrates the demiurgic power, 
and the principle which abolishes every thing disorderly and indefinite, 
and prepares the beautiful alone and the good to have dominion in 
wholes. For the assertion that the demiurgus to the utmost of his power 
suffered nothing evil and vile to exist, indicates his unconquerable 
power, which adorns things material in an unpolluted manner, and 
imparts by illumination bound to indefinite, and order to disorderly 
natures. 

In which part of the Timseus, likewise, this dogma of Plato will appear 
to you to be admirable, that matter is generated from some one of the 
Gods situated above the demiurgus. For the demiurgus receiving 
matter occupied by the vestiges of forms, thus himself introduces into it 
all the perfection of ornament and arrangement. Matter, therefore, and 
' the whole of that which is the subject of bodies, proceed supernally from 
the first principles, which on account of their exuberance of power, are 
able to generate even the last of beings. But the demiurgus of the 
universe, imparts by illumination, order, bound, and ornament, and the 
whole world is fabricated an image of intelligibles, through the commu¬ 
nication of forms. 

In the fourth place, therefore, let us survey how Timseus unfolds to 
us the demiurgic intellect. “ By,a reasoning process,” says he, ** the 
demiurgus discovered from the things which are visible according to 
nature, that no work which is destitute of intelligence can ever become 
more beautiful than that which possesses intellect.” What therefore is 
this reasoning ? What is the discovery, and whence does it originate ?. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



356 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Y. 


Reasoning, therefore, is indeed distributed intellection, looking to itself, 
and in itself investigating good. For every one who reasons, passes from 
one thing to another, and being converted to himself, searches after 
good. The demiurgic intellect, therefore, in adorning and arranging the 
universe subsists analogously to him who reasons; for he emits the 
divided causes of mundane natures, which preexist unitedly in inteU 
ligibles. For those things which intelligible intellect constitutes 
uniformly and exemptly, these intellectual intellect separating, distri¬ 
buting into parts, and as it were fabricating by itself, generates. 
Reasoning therefore is the being filled with the intelligible, and an all¬ 
perfect union with it. By which also it is evident that it is not fit to 
think this reasoning [of the demiurgus] is either investigation or doubt, 
or a wandering of divine intellect, but that it is stable intelligence 
intellectually perceiving the multiform causes of beings. For intellect is 
always united to the intelligible, and is filled with its own intelligibles. 
And in a similar manner it is intellect in energy, and intelligible. For 
at one and the same time, it intellectually perceives and is perceived, 
discovers itself, entering into itself, and the reasoning also finds what 
this intelligence is, but not according to transition. For the intelligence 
of the Gods is eternal. And invention with them is not the discovery of 
that which is absent; for all things are always present to the intellect 
of the Gods.. The intelligible likewise there is not separated from 
intellect. .The conversion, therefore, of intellect to itself may be called 
reasoning; but the being filled from intelligibles invention. And 
intelligibles themselves may be denominated things visible according to 
nature. For because Timaeus had denominated the unadorned subject 
of bodies when it was vanquished by the obscure vestiges of forms, 
visible, hence, I think, he calls intelligibles visible according to nature. 
For it is according to nature, to intellect to loqk to these, and not to 
things subordinate to these. As, therefore, he says, that intellect itself 
sees intelligibles, after the same manner also he calls intelligibles things 
naturally visible, and converts intellect to the intelligible, as that which 
sees to that which is seen. If, therefore, intellect sees animal itself, and 
assimilates to it the whole world, it may be said that animal itself is 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


357 


visible to the demiurgus of the universe. For there the most splendid of 
intelligibles subsists; and this is that which we before demonstrated, 
when we said that there the fountain of beauty shines forth, which 
Socrates, in the Phsedrus, denominates splendid and fulgid. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


Such therefore are the conceptions which are to be assumed of the 
demiurgic cause, and from these things they are to be derived. We 
shall however obtain one perfection of the summit of the dogmas 
concerning it, if we are able to survey the words which this cause 
extends to the junior demiurgi, and to unfold the concealed meaning of 
them. This, therefore, we shall also do, establishing the following principle 
of the explanation of them : The energies and powers of the Gods are 
twofold. And some indeed abide in, and energize about them, and 
have for their end one hypostasis, and which is united to essence. But 
others proceed from them, exhibit an efficacious power about secondary 
natures, and coexist with the multitude of their recipients, and with the 
peculiarity of essence. These, however, being twofold, the secondary 
are suspended from those that are prior to them, are defined about them, 
and receive their proper hyparxis according to them. For it is every 
where necessary that externally proceeding should be the images of 
internal energies, evolving the at-once-collected nature of their indi¬ 
visibility ; multiplying that in them which is united, and dividing their 
impartibility. 

According to this reasoning, therefore, the energy of nature is also 
twofold, one being that which abides in it, according to which it connects 
itself, and the reasons it contains, but the other proceeding from it. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



358 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


through which also bodies are filled with these physical powers, which 
being moved by nature, act on each other, and physically suffer by each 
Other. Again, the motion of the soul likewise is twofold. And the one 
indeed is self-motive, is converted to itself, is of itself, concurs with the 
life of the soul, and is without any difference with respect to it. But 
the other is incumbent on alter-motive natures, moves these, and about 
these extends the power of itself. The energy of intellect, therefore, is 
likewise twofold. And one indeed is intellectual, is united to true 
beings, and is impartible, being co-existent with the intelligible itself of 
intellect, or rather being the intelligible itself, and intellect. For intellect 
is not of itself in capacity, and afterwards receiving energy, intellec¬ 
tually perceives the intelligible; but it is one simple energy. For the 
multitude of it is unical,' and its energy is directed to itself. But the 
other energy of intellect is directed to externals, and to things which are 
able to participate of intellect. For these intellect causes to be intel¬ 
lectual through itself, splendidly as it were emitting the light of its oWn 
intelligence, and imparting it to others. It is necessary, therefore, that 
the divine and demiurgic intellect itself, should always indeed be united 
to the intelligible, and that it should have the plenitude and self- 
sufficiency of demiurgic intelligence eternally established according to a 
union exempt from wholes ; to which, as it appears to me, Timaeus also 
looking says, that the father of the universe abides in his accustomed 
manner, and withdraws himself to his own place of survey, delivering 
the fabrication of mortal natures to the mundane Gods. For so far as 
he is exempt from the beings posterior to himself and is uncoordinated 
with the more partial multitude of Gods, so far he is converted to 
himself, and surveys and intellectually perceives the natures prior to 
himself, according to one uniform union. But in consequence of the 
more ruling and leading Gods being extended towards him, he emits 
from himself secondary energies, to all the partial orders. 

Timaeus, therefore, fashions through words, these powers and effica¬ 
cious energies which proceed from the whole and one fabrication to the 
demiurgic multitude of Gods. For words are the images of intellections; 
because indeed they evolve that which is contracted in intelligibles, but 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


359 


lead forth that which is impartible into a partible, hypostasis. They 
likewise transfer that which abides in itself into habitude to another 
thing. And it is evident that the reasons which are impelled from 
nature, are certain natural [powers], and render that which receives them 
physical. But the reasons which are generated from soul, are indeed 
vivific, but render the inanimate nature which participates of them 
[animated] and moved from itself, through the power of soul, as Socrates 
says in the Phaedrus, and communicate to it the resemblance of self- 
motion, And the reasons which are generated from intellect, illumi¬ 
nating the natures posterior to it, distribute all intellectual goods to their 
recipients, being the suppliers of true knowledge, of purity and a more 
simple life. After the same manner also the demiurgic words produce 
in the junior Gods, whole, impartible, and united measures of exempt 
fabrication, and fill their essences with demiurgic providence. They 
likewise render them second demiurgi, and emulous of their father. 
For he indeed gives subsistence to the whole plenitudes of the world. 
But they, imitating him, fabricate all partial natures in conjunction with 
wholes. And he produces the essence of perpetual natures. But they 
fashioning mortal natures according to one generation-producing circle,, 
likewise transmute these. And as the one demiurgus governs the whole 
periods of the universe, thus also the many demiurgi convolve the 
divisible circles of the natures that are borne along' in generation. If, 
therefore, we assert these things rightly concerning the words proceeding 
from the demiurgus to the multitude of mundane Gods, and they are 
efficacious, fabricative, and convertive of their recipients to a union with 
him, and are also perfective of the beneficent reasons which they 
contain, we shall no longer seem to speak paradoxically, if we say that 
these words extend to the Gods in the world the participation of all the 
powers that are firmly established in the father, and of the causes prior 
to, and subsisting after him. And as he convolving the end of the 
intellectual Gods, is the plenitude of all things, so likewise the demiurgic 
words proceeding from him, produce in the junior Gods the peculiarities* 

* For read figo/nym. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



360 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


as I may say, of all the divine genera that are above the world, through 
which they are suspended from all the orders prior to them; just I think 
as the whole of this world [is suspended from the mundane Gods who'] 
lubricate all mortal natures, and impart to different things a different 
power, and an efflux of divine powers. 

What, therefore, in short, is it which Plato indicates the Gods derive 
through these words from the first demiurgus, and the all-perfect fabri¬ 
cation ? In the first place, indeed, they derive this, that they are Gods of 
Gods. For the vocal address proceeding to them from the father, is the 
supplier of divine power, and is allotted an efficacious presence in its 
participant, as we before observed. But in the next place, these words 
impart to them an indissoluble power. The demiurgus of wholes, 
however, comprehends in himself the cause of dissolution, in order that 
they may indeed lie essentially indissoluble, but according to the causfc 
of binding, not indissoluble. In the third place, therefore, the demiurgus 
produces in them from on high, through these words, a renovated 
immortality. For the assertion that they are neither immortal, nor shall 
be subject to the fatality of death, establishes them in this form of 
immortality, which the fable in the Politicus denominates renovated. 
In addition to this also, the words testify that they derive from the father 
a power perfective of wholes. For if the world is imperfect without the 
subsistence of mortal animals, it is doubtless necessary that those who 
preside over the generation of them should be the causes of perfection 
to the universe. And in the last place, these words impart to the junior 
Gods a paternal and generative empire derived from the exempt and 
intellectual cause of wholes; and insert in them the proximate powers 
of regeneration. For through these words, the junior Gods again receive 
in themselves the natures that are corrupted, fabricate parts from wholes, 
and again effect the dissolution of parts into their wholes. And 
universally the words of the demiurgus subject the perpetually-generated 
course of nature, to the fabrication of the junior Gods. In short, 

1 There is evidently something wanting in the original in this part; and as it appears to me 
after xotonreg (oiftai) xai o out on XO071O;, it is requisite to supply the words rou$ eyxo<r/uot/f 

Seou$ wjgTfrsti, ti. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


361 


therefore, the demiurgus fills the junior Gods with divine union, fills 
them with a firm establishment, and fills them with a perpetuity adapted 
to their nature. But he pours into them the all-various causes of 
perfective powers, of vivific rivers, and demiurgic measures. Hence 
also, the many demiurgi refer the fabrication of particulars to the one 
and whole providence of the father, and the principles of demiurgic 
works which they received from him, to his efficacious production. And 
all of them indeed are filled with all powers, because all of them 
participate of the demiurgic words which proceed into them from the 
father. But some of them are more characterized by one peculiarity 
than another. 

And some of them indeed are the suppliers of union to their progeny; 
others, of indissoluble permanency; others, of perfection; and others, of life. 
But others preside over regeneration, and being allotted in a distributed 
manner in the universe, the powers which subsist unitedly in the one demi¬ 
urgus, they are subservient to the providence of the father. And every thing 
which is generated by the many demiurgi, is in a much greater degree 
produced by the one fabrication ; which governs mortal natures indeed, 
eternally, things that are moved, immoveably, and partible natures 
impartibly. It is not however necessary that the progeny of that one 
demiurgus should be suspended from the motion of the junior Gods. 
For every where the one fabrication is more comprehensive than that 
which is multiplied. And the more causal of divine natures energize 
prior to their own offspring, and together with them constitute the 
progeny that proceed from them. The first [demiurgic] God, therefore, 
produces from and through himself the divine genera 1 of the universe, 
according to his beneficent will. But he governs mortal natures through 
the junior Gods, generating indeed these also from himself, but other 
Gods producing them as it were with their own hands. For he says, 
“ these being generated through me will become equal to the Gods." 
The cause, therefore, through which, is to be attributed to the junior 
Gods; but the cause from which, even in the production of mortal 

1 It appears from the version of Portus that the words t a* ywj are omitted in the original. 

Proc. Vol. I. 2 Z 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



362 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


natures is to be referred to the whole demiurgus. For always the first 
of those things that are constituted, produce in conjunction with their 
monad the generation of secondary natures. And all things indeed 
proceed from that monad, but some things immediately; and through 
it, but some things through other media receive the providence that 
emanates from it. For these middle genera of causes are allotted the 
providential inspection of secondary natures from the first effective 
monad. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


Concerning the words, therefore, in the Timaeus, which the demi¬ 
urgus delivers to the God’s in the world, thus much may suffice at 
present. But after these, it is fit to survey the second measures of total 
demiurgic providence, which the demiurgus extends from himself to the 
many and divisible souls. For having constituted these, divided them 
equal in number to divine animals, and disseminated them about the 
world, he inserts in them fabricative boundaries, defines the whole 
periods of them, inscribes in them the laws of Fate, proposes the 
apparent measures of their generation-producing life, legally institutes, 
and adorns in a becoming manner all the rewards of virtue, and the 
works of vice, intellectually comprehends in one the end of every period, 
and coarranges with a view to this the whole polity of partial souls. 
AH' souls, therefore, of an immortal condition, being allotted a pro¬ 
gression from the demiurgus, are filled from him with an united and 


* For it is necessary to read r«r«. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XIX. 


OF PLATO. 


365 


intellectual providence. Because, however, progeny which are suspended 
from their causes participate of the perfective efficacy which proceeds 
from them, divine souls, indeed, primarily subsisting from thenee, 
become auditors of the words of their father immediately; but partial 
souls participate of the uniform providence of the demiurgus secondarily, 
and with greater partibility. Hence also the demiurgus, as a legislator, 
defining to these all the measures of their life, he thus extends demiurgic 
words, unitedly comprehending the divided nature of the whole of their 
life, convolving in sameness without time their temporal mutability, and 
collecting uniformly, according to one simplicity, the multiform and 
diversified nature of the energy which exists about them. But to divine 
souls he immediately unfolds the providence of himself, and exhorts 
them to join with him in a providential inspection of the whole world, to 
fabricate, adorn and dispose in conjunction with him, mortal natures, to 
govern generated beings according to the measures of justice, and to 
lead and convolve all things, following demiurgic providence. Very far 
therefore, are tl^ose interpreters of Plato from according with the fabri¬ 
cation of the universe, who admit that partial are the same with jvhole 
souls, and who attribute the same essence to all souls; because all of 
them are allotted their generation from one demiurgus. 

For in the first place, the father in the course of his fabrication 
adorning, and disposing in an orderly manner partial souls, poured 
mingling, the remainder of the former mixture, says Timaeus, and 
produced the second and third genera. But in a progression of this 
kind, the words effective of conversion which he extends to divine souls, 
are intellectual, and demiurgic, and impart to them generative powers, 
and perfective goods; but those which he extends to partial souls, are 
the definite sources of generation, of the laws of Fate, of justice, and 
all-various periods. If, therefore, every thing which proceeds from the 
demiurgus is essentially imparted to souls, it is indeed necessary that 
different measures of words should be the causes of different powers; 
and that to some among the number of divisible souls, the demiurgus 
should ‘distribute a polity exempt from mundane affairs, but to others 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



364 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


a polity arranged under these souls, and supernally governed by them. 
These things, however, may elsewhere be more copiously demonstrated. 


CHAPTER XX. 


After the demiurgic words therefore, again returning to the demiurgic 
intellect, let us survey following Plato, who the demiurgus is, who 
convolves the end itself of the intellectual triad to the beginning, and 
after what manner it is fit to denominate him according to the Grecian 
theology. Or rather, prior to this let us summarily show what we may 
assume concerning him according to the narration of Tirnaeus. For we 
shall more easily learn those particulars, if we assent to these. For di¬ 
rectly, in the beginning of the theology concerning him, he is celebrated 
as the fabricator and father of the world. And he is neither called fabri¬ 
cator alone, nor father and fabricator, but at one and the same time 
manifestly possessing both peculiarities, he is rather characterized by the 
fabricative, than by the paternal cause. But he is denominated the 
demiurgus of wholes, according to his goodness, unenvying and exuberant 
will, and his power which is able to adorn and arrange all things, and 
even such as are of a disorderly nature. He is however particularly 
unfolded to us as the supplier of beauty, symmetry and order, and as the 
best of causes; and this because he is allotted the uniform, and first 
effective power of the whole demiurgic series. But he gives subsistence 
to intellect and soul, and at the same time to all the life in the world; 
since he fabricated the whole world an animal animated, and endued with 
intellect. Being likewise full of every intelligible, and extending himself 
to intelligible and all-perfect animal and conjoining this to himself through 


Digitized by 



CHAP. XX. 


OF PLATO. 


365 


similitude, he fabricates the sensible universe only-begotten, in the same 
manner as the separate paradigm [animal itself] transcending wholes, 
unitedly constitutes the intelligible universe. 

Moreover, he is likewise the fabricator of bodies, and the perfector of 
works, binding all things by the most excellent analogies, and co-adapt- 
ing their powers, bulks, and numbers by the most beautiful bonds. 
Farther still, he constituted the universe a whole from wholes, and perfect 
from perfect parts, that it might be free from old age and disease, and 
might qontain in itself all the genera of the elements. He likewise 
adorned it with the first figure, and with the most simple and most com¬ 
prehensive of all figures. Besides these things, he is also the cause of 
self-sufficiency to the universe, and of a circulation into itself, in order 
that suffering all things from, and effecting all things in itself, it might 
not be in want of any thing externally situated. And he is indeed the 
supplier of intellectual motion, and of a life which is evolved according 
to time, and which effects* a mutation always according to the same, and 
similarly, and about the same things. Farther still, he is the father of 
soul, and of all the genera in soul, of the division in it, and all the 
harmonic reasons it contains, constituting it in the world, as a self-moved 
and immortal lyre; and he is also the divider of the one, and the seven 
circles in it, and in short, is the maker and fabricator of figure and 
morphe.* 

In addition to these things likewise, he generates from himself the 
whole of time, according to the imitation of eternity, together with all the 
measures of time, and the Gods that unfold these measures into light. 
But he especially constitutes the whole sun, enkindling its light from his 
own intellectual essence, in order that possessing a transcendency exempt 
from the other Gods it might be the king of the universe. Moreover, he 
fabricates 1 ill the multitudes of mundane Gods and daemons, and all 
celestial and sublunary natures, in order that he may evince this only- 

* For Tonu/xtvov, it is necessary to read xoiouptvsf. 

* Morphe pertains to the colour, figure, and magnitude of superficies. 

1 For hfu ovpyov, it is necessary to read 8ij/*.iovpy«». 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



366 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


begotten and self-sufficient God [the world] to be the image of the intel¬ 
ligible and all-perfect God; fixing the earth indeed, as a firm seat 
or Vesta, in it, but distributing by lot the other elements to divine souls 
and daemons. Besides all this likewise, he converts to himself the genera 
of Gods that have proceeded from him, and fills all things with undefiled 
generation, with perpetual life, demiurgic perfection, and generative 
abundance. He also constitutes divisible souls together with their vehi¬ 
cles, divides them about their leading Gods, arranges different souls under 
different Gods, unfolds to them the laws of Fate, measures their descents 
into generation, establishes rewards to their contests in their periodic 
revolutions, and institutes, as I may say, the whole of their polity in the 
world. 

But .after all these things, he introduces a boundary to the providence 
of wholes, and returning to his own place of survey, delivering to the 
junior Gods the superintendence of mortal natures, and abiding in his own 
accustomed manner, is the paradigm to the demiurgi in the world of 
providential attention to beings of a second order. And as in the fabri¬ 
cation of wholes the paradigm is intelligible animal, so in the arrange¬ 
ment of partial natures, the paradigm is intellectual animal, in which all 
forms shine forth in a divided manner, according to their own nature. 
For Timaeus says, “ the children understanding the order of their father, 
were obedient to it,” and he abiding, and paternally, and eternally pro¬ 
ducing all things, they adorn and arrange the mortal genera demiurgi¬ 
cally, and according to time. Hence the providence of the demiurgus 
presents itself to the view, extending from on high as far as to the produc¬ 
tion of these, and what is here said by Plato, is as it were a hymn to the 
demiurgus and father of this universe, celebrating his productions, and 
the benefits which he confers on the world. 

And it is requisite that being persuaded by what is here clearly written, 
we should investigate all the other enquiries about the demiurgus. My 
meaning is, that we should investigate what we mentioned a little before, 
who the demiurgus is, and how we ought to denominate him according 
to the sentiments of the Greeks; and on what account, Timaeus neither 
delivers the name of him, nor unfolds to us who he is, but says, “ that it 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXI. 


OF PLATO. 


367 


is difficult to discover him, and that when discovered, it is impossible to 
speak of him to all men.” Now therefore, I think, from what has been 
already said, it is evident even to those who are but in a small degree 
intelligent, that according to the decision of Plato, it is the great Jupiter, 
who is. now celebrated by us as the demiurgus. For if, as we have ob¬ 
served, the kingdom of Saturn is the summit of the whole intellectual 
triad, and the intelligible transcendency of intellectuals, but the maternal 
and vivific fountain of Rhea, is the middle centre, and the receiving bosom. 
of the generative power in Saturn, it is manifest to every one, that the 
mighty Jupiter is allotted the end of this triad. For from the before- 
mentioned causes, one of which indeed is paternal, but the other gene¬ 
rative, he is the God having a paternal subsistence, who is said to reign, 
receiving the intellectual dominion of his father. If, therefore, it is ne¬ 
cessary that the demiurgus should convolve the end of this intellectual 
triad, as was before demonstrated, and to effect this, is the province of 
the royal power of Jupiter, we must evidently acknowledge that the 
Jovian empire is the same as that of the demiurgus, and that Jupiter is 
the demiurgus celebrated in the Timaeus. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


If, however, it be necessary to consider this as worthy of further discus¬ 
sion, and to demonstrate that the theology in the Timseus about the 
demiurgus, accords with what is elsewhere written by Plato concerning 
this God, let us in the first place assume what is delivered in the Critias, 
because this dialogue proximately follows the Timaeus, and is composed 
according to an analogy to it, delivering the hypostasis of the same things 
in image?, the primary paradigms of which Timaeus celebrates through 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



368 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


th? fabrication of the world. Here, therefore, Plato, (that I may derive 
what I say from the beginning) relating the warlike preparations of the 
Athenians, in former times, and the insolence and usurpation of the 
Atlantics, who were the progeny of Neptune, but destroyed the divine 
seed, through the mixture of human and mortal pursuits, and conducted 
themselves insolently to all men, collects indeed the Gods to a consultation 
concerning them, in the same manner as poets inspired by Phoebus, and 
forms a common assembly of the Gods. But Jupiter is the author of the 
whole polity of them, and converts the multitude of them to himself. And 
as in the Timaeus the demiurgus convolves all the mundane Gods to him¬ 
self, so Jupiter in the Critias providentially attending to the whole of 
things, collects the Gods to himself. 

In the next place, therefore, let us consider what Plato says concerning 
this God, and how it accords with what was before said by Timaeus. 
** But Jupiter the God of Gods who reigns legitimately, and who is able 
to perceive every thing of this kind, when he saw that an equitable race 
was in a miserable condition, and was desirous of punishing them, in order 
that by being chastized they might possess more elegant manners, col¬ 
lected all the Gods into their most honourable habitation, whence being 
seated as in the middle of the whole world, he beholds all such things as 
participate of generation." Here, directly in the beginning, king Jupiter 
being celebrated as the God of Gods, does it not accord with what is 
written in the Timaeus, where he is said to be the father and cause of all 
the mundane Gods ? For what other God is it who reigns over all the 
Gods, except the cause of their subsistence and essence? Who is it also 
that calls the mundane deities, Gods of Gods ? Is it not him who binds 
to himself the principle of all fabrication ? If, therefore, he imparts to 
his progeny to be Gods of Gods, in a much greater degree it pertains to 
him to be celebrated as the God of all £the mundane] Gods. To which, 
therefore, of the Gods prior to the world, does it particularly belong to 
punish offenders except to him who defines to souls all their measures, 
unfolds to them the laws of the universe, and legally institutes such things 
as are fit concerning justice and injustice, in order that afterwards he may 
not be accused of the vices of each of them ? Moreover, to congregate 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXII. 


OF PLATO. 


369 


all the Gods into their most honourable habitation, from which the whole 
of generation may be seen, and which possesses the middle of the universe, 
is to attribute to him a providence exempt from multitude, but extending 
equally to the whole world; which things indeed are thqdlustrious goods 
of the demiurgic monad. For to convert all the Gods to himself, and to 
survey the whole world pertains exemptly to the demiurgus of the 
universe. For what else is multitude able to participate proximately, 
except the monad from which it derives its subsistence ? And who can 
convert all the Gods in the world to himself, but the fabricator of their 
essence, and of their allotment in the universe? 


CHAPTER XXII. 


"We must establish this, therefore, as one and the first argument in 
proof of the thing investigated. But if you are willing, we will derive a 
second argument from what is said by Socrates in the Cratylus, in which 
he discusses the meaning of the names, from which he may represent to 
us the essence of Jupiter. For he is not led to the nature of this God 
from one name, as he is in tKe names of other Gods, such as Saturn, 
Rhea, Neptune, and Pluto, but from two names which tend to one thing, 
and which divisibly indicate the one and united essence of Jupiter, he 
unfolds the power of this God, and the peculiarity of his hyparxis. For 
the common rumour concerning him, denominates him in a two-fold 
respect. And at one time calling him (J» a ) dia, we worship him in our 
prayers and hymns; but at another time we celebrate him as ($jva) zena, 
a. word derived from life. Being therefore at the same time called (£ns) 
zeus, and delighting in the appellation of dia , he is similarly denominated 
Proc. Vol. I. 3 A 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



370 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


i 


BOOK V. 


from both names by the Greeks. And these names manifest the essence 
and order which he is allotted among divine natures. And neither of 
these names indeed, is by itself sufficiently able to malce known the pecu¬ 
liarity of the God; but when conjoined with each other and forming a 
sentence, they have the power of unfolding the truth concerning him. * 
How, therefore, from both the names the power of this king is signified, 
and the precedaneous order of his hypostasis in the Gods, we may hear 
Socrates himself saying, “ That the name of his father* who is called 
Jupiter is beautifully posited ; but that it is not easy to apprehend the 
meaning of it, because in reality the name of Jupiter is as it were a 
sentence. Dividing it however into two parts, some of us use one part, 
and some another. For some indeed call him zena, but others dia. 
And these parts collected into one evince the nature of the God, which 
we say a name ought to effect. For there is not any other who is more 
the author of life to us, and to all other things than he wh<f is the ruler 
and king of all things. It happens, therefore, that this God is rightly 
denominated, on account of whom life is present to aH living beings* 
But it is divided into two parts, as if I should say that there is.one' 
name from dia and zena The mode, therefore, of collecting the names 
into one, and of rendering the hyparxis of this God apparent through 
both, is manifest to every one. 

If, however, he is the supplier of life to aU things, as he is said to be, 
and is the ruler and king of all such things as are said to live, to whom can 
we assert this peculiarity pertains, if we omit the demiurgus? And is it 
not necessary, that according with what is said in the Timaeus, we should 
refer to him the principle of vivifica,tion. For the demiurgus renders the 
whole world animated, endued with intellect, and an animal, and consti¬ 
tutes the triple life winch is in it, one indeed being impartible and 
intellectual, another partible and corporeal, and another between these, 
impartible and at the same time partible. It is he likewise who conjoins 
each of the celestial spheres to the circulations of the soul, inserts in each 
of the stars a psychical and intellectual life, and produces in the 

* Foi*teura)v it seems necessary to read atwrou. 

1 i. e. Of the father of Tantalus. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXII. 


OF PLATO. 


371 


sublunary elements leading Gods and souls, and in addition to all these 
things, constitutes the divisible genera of life, and imparts to the junior 
Gods the principle of mortal animals. AH things therefore in the world 
are full of life, through the power of the demiurgus and father. And this 
world is one animal, deriving its completion from containing all animals, 
through the never-failing cause of the power by which it was generated. 
And there is no other who is the supplier of life to all things, and through 
whom all things live, some indeed more clearly, but others more 
obscurely, than the demiurgus of wholes. For he also is intellectual 
animal, in the same manner as the all-perfect paradigm is intelligible 
animal. Hence likewise, these are conjoined to eaah other. And the 
one indeed is paternally the cause of wholes; but thp other demiurgi¬ 
cally. And as animal itself constitutes intelligibly, all intelligible and 
sensible animals, according to one cause, thus also the demiurgus 
fabricates intellectually according to a second order, the animals in the 
world. 

As animal itself likewise proximately subsists from intelligible life, so 
the demiurgus is generated from intellectual life, and is the first that os 
filled with the rivers of vivification. Hence he illuminates all thingB 
with life, unfolding the depths of the animal-producing deity, and calling 
forth the prolific power of the intellectual Gods. If therefore, all things 
live through the demiurgic cause, they also participate of soul and intel¬ 
lect, and, as I may say, of all vivification, through the providence of this 
God. But he who pours the rivers of life on all things in the world from 
himself, and is the ruler and king of wholes, is the mighty Jupiter, as 
Socrates says in the Cratylus, and evidently appears to be the same with 
the demiurgus. And the divinely-inspired intellectual conception of 
Timaeus concerning the demiurgus, accords with the theojogy of Socrates 
about Jupiter. If likewise each of them denominates the knowledge of 
this God difficult to be apprehended, and one of them says that it is 
difficult to discover, him, and when discovered, that it is impossible to 
speak of him to all men, but the other asserts that it is not jeasy to 
understand the name of Jupiter, do they not in this respect accord with 
each other in what they say concerning this God ? Besides this also, the 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



373 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


composition of the names, and the coalition of the two names into one 
hyparxis, appear in a remarkable degree to be adapted to the demiurgus. 
For a biformed* essence, and generative power, are attributed to him 
according to other theologists. For the duad sits with him, according to 
which he generates all things; concerning which Timaeus also introduces 
him speaking to the demiurgi in the world, and saying, “ Imitating my 
power.” And through this he produces and vivifies all things. Hence 
it is necessary through names also to consecrate the duad to him 
according to ancient rumour. For he glitters with intellectual sections, 
divides and collects wholes, and constitutes one indissoluble order from 
many things. And this the power of the names indicates, extending us 
from divided intellection, to one self-perfect and uniform theory. 

All these particulars therefore, clearly demonstrate to us that Plato con¬ 
siders the demiurgus of wholes to be the same with Jupiter. For he who 
alone is the. cause of life to all things,, and who is the king of all things, is the 
demiurgus of the universe. And he who in a remarkable manner rejoices in 
a duad of names, is he who arranges and adorns the whole world. And it 
appears to me, as I have frequently said., that in consequence of being 
allotted the end of the intellectual triad, converting this to the beginning, 
and being full of the middle fountains of life, but uniting himself to the 
watch-tower of his father, and producing into himself the simplicity of 
an intelligible subsistence, according to the peculiarity of first-effective 
causes, he is also allotted a duad of names. And as he received his 
essence from both [i. e. from Saturn and Rhea] and possesses indeed 
bound from his father, but infinite power from the generative deity of his 
mother, thus also he possesses one of the names from his father, and from 
the uniform perfection which is in him; but the other from total vivifica- 
tion. And through both, as is allotted an essence, so likewise an 
appellation. For it is obvious to every one, that the term (ha) dia' on 
account of which , is a sign of a total essence. “Let us declare, says 
Timaeus, on account of what cause [the composing artificer constituted 
generation and the universe]. He was good.” But the name of life 

1 For it is necessary to read 

* In Uw original Sis, but it 4a evidently necessary to read tut. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXIII. 


GF PLATO. 


373 


pertains of itself to the middle order of beings. The demiurgus there¬ 
fore obtains one of these names, viz. dia, from the intellectual summit, 
and the paternal union. For according to the participation of it, he is 
one, 1 bound, and intelligible. But he obtains the other name from the 
middle order of intellectuals. For there life, and the vivific bosoms are 
allotted their hypostasis. The demiurgic intellect however, shining forth 
from both, participates also of the names through composition. For we 
call him dia and zena , because life proceeds to all things on account of 
him, and to live is inherent in all [vital natures] on account of him. 
And thus after a manner the position of the names indicates the progres¬ 
sion of the demiurgus from both the precedaneous causes. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


Again therefore, let us direct our attention to what is written in the 
Philebus, and survey how, in what is there said, Socrates refers the fabri¬ 
cation of the universe to Jupiter. For admitting that intellect adorns and 
arranges all tilings, in the same manner as the wise men prior to him, 
and that it governs the sun and moon, and all the circulation [of the 
heavens] he demonstrates that the whole world participates of soul, and 
intellectual inspection, and that we also derive the participation of these 
from wholes; but that the universe is not and was not from chance, and 
likewise the most divine of visible natures, as many physiologists assert, 
while the natures which the universe contains participate of soul and 
intellect. Having therefore, as we have said, demonstrated these things, 

* For trim, it is necessary to read ty mti. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



374 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


and shown that what the whole world contains is greater and more perfect 
than what we contain, and that wholes have a greater authority, and a 
more ruling essence than partial natures, and having placed intellect over 
wholes, as that which adorns and arranges the universe, and likewise 
assigned this province to soul, through the inspection of intellect, (for 
intellect is not present to the world without soul) he afterwards recurs to 
imparticipable intellect, to the author of participated intellect and soul, 
and the fabricator of the whole world, and he denominates and celebrates 
this fabricator, who contains the causes of the plenitudes in the world, as 
no other than Jupiter the great king and ruler of wholes, conformabty to 
the rumour of the Greeks. He likewise extends about him all the 
providence of the world, and places in him the whole cause of the 
arrangement and ornament of the universe. 

It is better however, in the next place, to hear the words themselves of 
Plato. He gives therefore to the world an intellectual superintendance, 
and adds this to the before mentioned demonstrations, that there is, as we 
have frequently observed, an abundance of infinity in the world, and a 
sufficiency of bound, and that there is a certain cause in them by no 
means vile and contemptible, which adorns and co-arranges the years, 
the seasons, and the months, and which may most justly be called 
wisdom and intellect. But again, because it is necessary that partici¬ 
pated intellect should govern the world through soul as a medium, (for it 
is impossible that intellect should be present to any thing without soul, 
as Timas us also asserts) hence it is requisite that soul also should preside 
over the universe, and that proximately having dominion over the natures 
it contains, it should govern the world according to intellect. This 
therefore Socrates having in the next place added, he subjoins as follows: 
“Moreover, wisdom and intellect could never be without soul." For 
how could the impartible and eternal essence of intellect be immediately 
conjoined with a corporeal nature P It is necessary therefore that intellect 
should preside over wholes, that it may connect the order in the world, 
well*being, and all things. For order and well-being are the progeny of 
an intellectual essence. But it is necessary that soul primarily participa¬ 
ting of intellect, should illuminate body with the light proceeding from 


* 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXIII. 


OF PLATO. 


$15 


thence, and fill all things with intellectual arrangement. It must be 
admitted therefore, that the world is animated and endued with intellect. 
Hence from this Socrates ascends to the cause itself of the whole world, 
which produced intellect and soul, and generated the total order [of the 
universe.] 

“ Hence, (Socrates adds) you may say that in the nature of Jupiter 
there are a royal soul and a royal intellect through the power of cause; 
and that in the other Gods there are other beautiful things, whatever 
they are, by which their deities love to be distinguished, and from which 
they delight in taking their respective denominations.'* One of these 
two things therefore is necessary, either that what is here said is said 
concerning the world, or concerning the demiurgus of wholes. For if 
the world is Jupiter, the participated intellect in the world is royal, 
and the soul also is royal which governs the universe, and arranges and 
adorns it according to intellect. And these things are evidently present 
to the world through the power of the cause by which it was constituted, 
and which rendered it a partaker of intellect and animated. And thus 
Jupiter will be that which is adorned and fabricated, and not the 
adorner and fabricator of all things. If, however, it is necessary that the 
power of cause should be comprehensive in an exempt manner of a royal 
intellect and a royal soul, we must admit that the nature of Jupiter is in 
the demiurgic order and power; and intellect and soul will be in him 
according to cause, since he imparts both these to his progeny. Of these 
two opinions therefore, every one may adopt that which he pleases, but 
to me, when I consider what is here said, and every other assertion of 
Plato concerning this God, it by no means appears to be necessary to 
refer the nature of Jupiter to the whole world. For neither does the 
only-begotten subsistence of the world accord with the kingdom of 
Jupiter, since the Saturnian triad, and which distributes the dominion of 
the father, is manifestly celebrated by Plato himself; nor can that which 
is cause to all things, as it is said in the Cratylus, refer 1 to the world. 
For the world is among the number of things which participate of life 

* For it is necessary to read oimQtfti. 


* 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



37 6 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


POOK V. 


from another. As I have said therefore, we must leave this opinion, as 
by no means adapted to Plato, though it is adopted by some of his 
interpreters. But considering cause to be the same as Jupiter, we must 
say that soul and intellect are established in him exemptly; and that 
Jupiter participates of both these, from the Gods that are prior to him ; 
of intellect indeed, from his father, bnt of soul from the queen [Rhea] 
who is the deity of vivification. For there the fountain of soul subsists, 
just as in Saturn, there is intellect according to essence. For every 
where the intelligible unically comprehends the intellect which is coordi¬ 
nate with it. And thus much concerning these particulars. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


In the next place, we may conjoin with this the mythological concep¬ 
tions in the Protagoras, and arrive at the same conclusion, considering in 
common with the Timaeus, how the opinions delivered to us concerning 
the mighty Jupiter, through the Protagorean fable, accord with the asser¬ 
tions about the demiurgus. The fable says, therefore, that Prpmetheus 
adorning the human race, and providentially attending to our rational 
life, that it may not perish by being merged in the furies of earth, and 
the necessities of nature, as some one of the Gods says, bound nature to 
the arts, extended these which are imitations of intellect, as it were to 
sportive souls, and through these excited our gnostic and dianoetic power 
to the contemplation of forms. For every artificial production is effec¬ 
tive of form, and adorns the matter which is the subject of it. The fable 
also adds, that Prometheus providentially attending to the arts gave them 
to souls, and that he received them from Vulcan and Minerva. For in 


% 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


377 


these Gods the Oause of all arts is primarily comprehended; Vulcan 
primarily imparting the fabricatiye power of them ; hut Minerva super- 
nally illuminating their gnostic and intellectual power. Not only 
however, is the invention of arts necessary to souls in generation, but 
also a certain other science, the political, which is more perfect than the 
arts, and which is able to arrange and adorn them, and to lead souls 
through virtue to a life according to intellect. But as Prometheus was 
unable to impart this life to us, because the political science is primarily 
with the mighty Jupiter, but it was not possible (says the fable) for 
Prometheus to enter latently into the tower of Jupiter, (for the guards of 
Jupiter are terrible, defending him exempt from all partial causes,)— 
hence Jupiter sent the messenger Hermes to men, who brought with him 
prudence and shame, and in short the political science. Jupiter also 
ordered Hermes to imparl similarly to all men these virtues, and to ^dis¬ 
tribute to all souls the knowledge of things just, beautiful, and good, but 
not in a divided manner, as different arts are distributed to different 
persons. And some men indeed are judges of these things; but others 
are ignorant either of all, or of some of the arts. 

In what is here said, therefore, Plato primarily refers to Jupiter the 
paradigm of the political science, as is evident from the words themselves. 
But he produces the progression of this science, and the communication 
and participation of the Hermaical series, and extends its essential, 
presence, which we participate in common, to all souls. For to distribute 
to all of them, is to insert in souls essentially a science of this kind. 
These things, therefore, being laid down, let us consider to whom we 
must say the political science especially pertains, and who it is that 
primarily established a polity in the universe, that formed divine to 
govern mortal natures, divided wholes from parts, and produced self* 
'motive and intellectual natures more ancient than those that are deprived 
of the presence of intellect. Is it not the demiurgus, who is the cause to 
us of all these goods, who governs the whole work! according to recti¬ 
tude, binds it by the best analogies, establishes every polity in it, pos¬ 
sesses and comprehends the laws of Fate, and extends the sacred laws of 
Adrastia, as far as to the last of things, and arranges and adorns by justice 
Proc. Vol. I. S. B 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



S78 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


book v. 


all celestial and sublunary natures ? For he who introduces partial souls 
into the universe as into their habitation, and imparts to them a total 
polity which is the best of all polities, and is governed by the most excel¬ 
lent laws, is he who denominates these laws the laws of Fate, who defines 
the measures of Justice, and legally institutes all things, as Timaeus says. 
Is it not therefore superfluous to endeavour to prove that he who possesses 
the first paradigm of the political science, is according to Plato the demi- 
urgus? 

If, however, these things are true, and according to the fable in the 
Protagoras it must be admitted that the political science first subsists in 
Jupiter, it is evident from what has been said, that the demiurgus of the 
universe is Jupiter. For to what other cause can we grant the primary 
form of the political science to belong, than to that which arranges and 
adorns the universe P If the polity in the heavens is the first and most 
perfect of all polities, as Socrates in the Republic says it is. Who like>- 
■wise is he that produces all things, and co-arranges them when produced 
to each other, in order to the elegant disposition of the universe ? If, 
therefore, the first and most perfect demiurgus of the universe is political, 
blit the political science first subsists with Jupiter, being established with 
him on a sacred foundation, proceeds from thence to all secondary 
natures, and adorns and arranges both wholes add parts according to 
intellect, it is evidently necessary that the demiurgus of wholes should be 
the same with Jupiter, and that there should be one hyparxis of both, 
which administers every thing in the world according to rectitude, and 
circularly leads every thing confused and disorderly into order. For, 

' says Timaeus, it is not lawful for that which is best to effect any thing 
else than that which is most beautiful. How therefore is it possible that he 
who adorns and arranges wholes through Themis, and together with her 
produces all things, should not essentially possess in himself the whole of 
the political science ? 

How is it possible likewise that he should not be the first Jupiter, who 
definitely imparts to all things that which is divine, and weaves one polity 
from all things, but is exempt from all partial causes and the Titannic 
genera, and is guarded by his own undefiled powers, beyond the whole 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXV. 


OP PLATO. 


379 


world ? For the guards which surround him, obscurely signify his immu¬ 
table order, and the undeviating defence of fabrication, through which 
being firmly established in himself, he pervades through all things without 
impediment, and being present to all his progeny, is according to supreme 
transcendency expanded above wholes. Moreover, the citadel of Jupiter, 
according to the rumours of theologists, is a symbol of intellectual circula¬ 
tion, and of the highest summit of Olympus, which all the wise suspend 
from the intellectual watch tower of Jupiter, to which he extends all the 
mundane Gods, imparting to them from thence intellectual powers, 
divine light, and vivific illuminations, and compressing all the profundi¬ 
ties of the worlds by one most simple circulation, through which the 
summit also of the apparent worlds is denominated the period of same¬ 
ness, and the most prudent and uniform circulation, as Timseus says, 
expressing the unical intellectual power of demiurgic conversion, and 
being allotted the same transcendency with respect to all the sensible 
world that the supreme summit of Jupiter possesses with respect to all 
the arrangement of the firmaments. . These things may also be assumed 
by us as subservient to the proposed investigation, from the fabulous 
fictions in the Protagoras. 


CHAPTER XXV. 


Wjs may, however, approach still nearer to the truth, and assume in 
the present discussion, the fable in the Politicus. For in this it will ap¬ 
pear that Plato in a remarkable manner considers, the demiurgus of the 
universe to be the same with Jupiter, and even as far as to the very 
names asserts the same things as Timseus. The Elean guest, therefore, 
as we have before observed, assigns [in this dialogue] twofold circulations 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



380 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


to the whole of this world, the one intellectual, and which elevates souk • 
but the other proceeding into nature* and imparting things contrary to 
the former* And the one indeed, being unapparent, and governed by 
divine providence, but the other apparent, and convolved according to 
the order of Fate, lie also places twofold motive causes over these 
circulations. For every mutation and period require a certain moving 
cause. And prior to the causes that move the circulations, he asserts 
that there are as it were twofold ends of the periods, and assigns first* 
effective causes of the motions, coordinate to the moving causes, and to 
the circulations themselves which differ from each other. Jupiter there¬ 
fore moves, and circularly leads one of the periods, whether you are wil¬ 
ling to call it intellectual, or providential, or in whatever other way you 
may denominate it, and lie also supplies the world with life, and imparts 
to it a renovated immortality. But lie preestablishes his father Saturn 
as the object of desire to, and the end of the whole of this circulation. For 
he leads back wholes, and converts them to himself. 

Moreover, he extends happy souls to the watch-tower of bis father, viz. 
those souls whose corporeal nature is obliterated, and whose circulation 
is to the incorporeal and the impartible. All the geaerationqiroducing t 
symbols likewise of these souls are amputated, and the form of their life 
is transferred to the intellectual summit. For these souls are also said to 
be the nurselings of Saturn, but to eeewnit the government of themselves 
to Jupiter, and through him to be extended to the intelligible, and the 
Saturnian dominion. For the intelligible is nutriment, as it is said by the 
Gods themselves. And as Socrates in the Pliaedrus elevates souls 
through the circulation of the heaven to the supercelestial place, where 
souls are nourished, survey true beings, and the unknown order of the 
Gods, with the highest powers of themselves, and as he there says, intel¬ 
lectually perceive with the heads of die charioteered—-thus also the Eleun 
guest circularly leads souls under Jupiter, to the Saturnian watehrtewer, 
and asserts that such as have ascended are nourished by Saturn, and calls 
them the nurselings of the God. For every where indeed, the intelligible' 
is perfective of, and has the power of filling an ititeUeetuallife, and. the 

* For rtKinovpya, it is necessary to read yivta’impya* 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXV. 


t)F PLATO. 


381 


summit of intellectuals extends perfection. These souls likewise partici¬ 
pate of the natures that are beyond, establish themselves in more elevated 
intellectuals, and ascend as far as to the unknown order, but remote from 
the good, and the one principle of all things. But the souls [[that ascend 
through the circnlation of the beaven[] are extended to the first intellect, 
which is imparticipate, and the intelligible itself, and when they are 
there, and have established their life in the occult order as iu a port, they 
ineffably participate of the union proceeding from the good, and of the 
light of truth. 

With respect however to what remains respecting the twofold periods, 
as we have said, the world itself indeed moves itself, being moved 
according to its own nature, and giving completion to the order of Tate. 
But thefirst-efiective cause of this motion of the world, and of its life, is 
the God who illuminates it with the power of being moved and of living, 
and is the mighty Jupiter. Hence also this period is said to be Jovian, 
so far as Jupiter is the cause of this apparent arrangement, just as Saturn 
is the cause of the intellectual and unapparent arrangement. It is better, 
however, to hear Plato himself discussing these things. That there are, 
therefore, twofold circulations of the universe, and that the God who 
moves it is the leader of the one, but of the other the world itself convolv¬ 
ing itself, Plato here teaches us. But as was just now said, and which is 
the only thing that remains, the universe is at one time co-governed by 
another divine cause, again acquiring life, and receiving a renovated 
immortality from the demiurgus; but at another time, when he lays aside 
as it were the handle of his rudder, the world being left by itself, moves 
for a time by itself, so as frequently to proceed in an inverted order. 

Again, however, that one of the periods, viz. the apparent, is Jovian, 
but that the other is referred to the kingdom of Saturn, Plato himself 
determines ia what foUows, subjoining these words, after the celebration 
of that life, and of the undefiled polity of the souls that are there, which 
is liberated from all corporeal pains, and the servitude about matter: 

You have heard, Socrates, what was the life of men under Saturn; but 
you yquwelfhave seen what the condition of the present life is, which is said 
to be uoder Jupiter.” And moreover, that of these two circulations. 


Digitized by 


Google 



382 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


(since the apparent is under Jupiter) Jupiter is the cause and maker of 
it, is obvious to every one, and that again Jupiter is the power that moves 
the unapparent circulation, which is Saturnian, may be demonstrated 
from what is written. For it is necessary that these two Gods should 
either rule over each of these circulations, or that one of them should rule 
over the unapparent, but the other over the present circulation. If, 
however, Jupiter moves the universe according to this period, the world 
can no longer be said to convolve itself, and to govern every thing it 
contains. Nor will it be true neither that the whole is convolved by 
divinity with twofold and contrary circulations, nor again, that two 
certain Gods convolve it whose decisions are contrary to each other. 
For if Saturn indeed moves it according to one circulation, but Jupiter 
moves it according to a period contrary to that of Saturn, two Gods 
^ill move it according to contrary circumvolutions. If, however, these 
fhings are impossible, it is indeed manifest to every one that both the 
divine causes preside over the circulation according to the Saturnian 
convolution; Saturn indeed as the supplier of an intellectual life; but 
Jupiter, as elevating all things to the Saturnian empire, and establishing 
them in his own intelligible. And thus that period may be called Sa¬ 
turnian, in consequence of Saturn imparting the first effective cause of 
the whole [of an intellectual] life. But according to this more physical 
circulation, and which is known to every one, Fate and connate desire 
move the universe. 

Jupiter, however, is the cause of this motion exemptly, who gives 
Fate and an adscititious life to the world. These things, therefore, being 
demonstrated by us, let us consider what the particulars are which are 
asserted of the God who moves the world according to the other period. 
And they are these; “ that the world indeed at another time is 
conjointly governed by another divine cause, again acquiring life, and 
receiving a renovated immortality from the demiurgus.” It is obvious, 
therefore, to every one ; that the Elean guest says, that the God who 
moves the universe according to the Saturnian period, supplies it with 
life, and imparts to it a renovated immortality, a:nd that he clearly calls 
him the demiurgus. Hence, if it is Jupiter who conjointly governs that 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXV. 


OF PLATO. . 


S8S 


period, as has been demonstrated, he will be the derniurgus of the world, 
and the supplier of immortality. And what occasion is there to say 
much on the subject ? For if the same God is the cause of life, and is 
denominated the demhirgus, again the Cratylus will present itself to 
us, and Jupiter according to this will be the same with the derniurgus. 
For life accedes to all things from Jupiter, as it is asserted in that 
dialogue. Moreover, in what follows, as Timeeus calls the cause of the 
circulation of Fate, derniurgus and father, after the same manner the 
Elean guest denominates this cause, and also calls it the maker. “ For 
the world,”says he, ** revolves, remembering the doctrine of the demi- 
urgus and father.” Properly, therefore, do we denominate the whole 
of this period Jovian, because the world moves and convolves itself^ 
according to the doctrine of Jupiter, and the order imparted to it from 
him. Again, therefore, Jupiter is derniurgus and father. And here also 
the Elean guest preserves the same order of the divine names as Timaeus. 
For he does not 1 call him father and derniurgus, but on the contrary, in 
the same manner as Timseus, derniurgus and father ; because the demi¬ 
urgic peculiarity in him is more manifest than the paternal deity. These 
things, however, have been copiously investigated before; and it has 
been shown in what respect the demiurgic is different from the paternal 
genus, how they are complicated with each other , 4 where the paternal 
subsists essentially, but the demiurgic according to cause, and where 
again, the demiurgic subsists essentially, but the paternal, according to 
participation. 


1 For x*j ya g it is necessary to read ov yap 
* For iv «AAoi$ ; it is requisite to read tv oAAi)Aoi$. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



384 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK r. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


It will remain, therefore, that we should make mention of what is 
written in the Laws concerning Jupiter. For perhaps in them also it 
will appear that Plato assigns the same order to the demiurgus and to 
Jupiter. As the equalities, therefore, according to which polities are 
adorned, are twofold, and the one polity indeed proposes the equal 
according to number, and proceeds through things which differ from 
each other according to an equal law; but the other embraces in aH 
things, the equality which is according to desert; and also, since 
equality subsists according to ratio,—this being the case, each of these 
equalities exists in the providence of the world. For the essence of the 
soul, indeed, is primarily divided by its fabricator by the equality 
■according to ratio; but it is also consummately filled with the remaining 
middles, and bound with them through the whole of itself. The several 
bodies [of the world] likewise, participate of a certain common essence, 
in the fabrication of things ; and on this account they are allotted the 
equality which is according to number. But all things are arranged and 
adorned through the best of analogies, and the demiurgus according to 
this inserts both in wholes and parts, an indissoluble order in the 
universe, and an adaptation of them to each other. 

This equality, therefore, the Athenian guest exhorts his citizens 
particularly to honour, in consequence of assimilating his city to the 
universe. He also says that it is a thing of this kind, but that it is not 
likewise easy for every one to perceive the most true and excellent 
equality; for it is the judgment of Jupiter. What therefore is the cause 
on account of which 4he Athenian guest asserts this analogy to be the 
judgment of Jupiter? What other cause can we assign than its con¬ 
tributing to the perfection of the world, and its power and dominion in 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXVI. 


OF PLATO. 


385 


the fabrication of wholes ? For that which gives an orderly distinction to 
the genera of causes, contrives the most beautiful bond of them, and 
weaves together one'order from wholes, is according to Timeeus the 
power of this analogy. For it established soul in the middle (of the 
universe) analogous to intellect and a corporeal nature. For soul is the 
middle of an impartible and partible essence. And by how much it 
surpasses a partible, by so much it falls short of an impartible hypostasis. 
The power of this analogy, however, binds the soul from double and 
triple ratios, and connects the whole of it proceeding from and at the 
same time returning to (its principles,) by the primary and self-motive 
boundaries of equality. It likewise constitutes the corporeal series from 
the four first genera. And it adapts indeed the extremes to each other 
through the middles, but mingles the middles according to the pecu^ 
liarity of the extremes. It reduces, however, all things to one world, 
and one indissoluble order connectedly comprehended in the universe. 
If, therefore, we acknowledge that this equality has dominion in the 
whole fabrication of things, the best of analogies is the judgment of the 
demiurgus, and according to the decision of him who generated wholes 
it is allotted that great dominion in the fabrication of the universe, 
which we have before shown it to possess. Hence if the same analogy 
is the judgment of Jupiter, as the Athenian guest says it is, it is obvious 
to every one that the nature of Jupiter is demiurgic. For it is not any 
thing else which judges of the dignity of this analogy than that which 
employs it in the arrangement of wholes. And to this the legislator 
establishing himself analogous, binds and in a particular manner adorn? 
the city which is assimilated to the universe, by this analogy. 


Proc. 


Vol. I. 


3 C 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



386 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


.BOOK V. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


From these things, therefore, and from all that has been previously said, 
we confidently assert, following Plato and paternal rumours, that Jupiter 
is the demiurgus of the universe; and we may collect into one, the 
scattered opinions of the ancients on this subject; of whom, some, indeed, 
refer the paradigm of the world, and the 'demiurgic cause to the same 
order; but others divide these from each other. And some place all¬ 
perfect animal prior to the demiurgus ; but others afford an, hypostasis 
to it after the demiurgus. For if the demiurgus is, as has been said, the 
great Jupiter, and the paradigm proposed to the demiurgus in order to 
the generation of the world, is all-perfect animal, these are at the same 
time united to each other, and are allotted an essential separation. 
And animal itself, indeed, intelligibly comprehends in itself the whole 
Jovian series; but Jupiter the demiurgus of the universe intellectually 
pre-establishes in himself the nature of animal itself. For animal itself 
is the supplier of life to all things, and all things primarily live on 
account of it, and Jupiter being the cause of life, possesses the paradigm 
and the generative principle of the essence of all animals, Justly, 
therefore, does Timseus, in Plato, having called the intelligible paradigm 
animal, conjoin the demiurgic intellect to the first intelligible animal; 
and through the all-perfect union of the demiurgus and father with it, he 
also arranges and adorns this universe. For Jupiter binding to himself 
the fabrication of the universe, and being an intellectual animal, is 
united to intelligible animal, and being allotted a progression analogous 
to it, constitutes all things intellectually, which proceed from animal 
itself intelligibly. ' 

For, as we have said, the intelligible hypostases being triple, and one 
indeed, being allotted its hyparxis according to existence and the one 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXVII. * 


OF PLATO. 


387 


being; but another according to intelligible life, and the middle centre 
of the intelligible breadth, where eternity, all life, and intelligible life 
subsist, as Plotinus somewhere says; and another according to intel¬ 
ligible multitude, the first plenitude of life, and the all-perfect paradigm 
of wholes,—this being the case, the three kingdoms of the intellectual 
Gods are divided analogous to the three intelligible hypostases. And 
one indeed, the mighty Saturn, being allotted an hyparxis according to 
the summit of intellectuals, and having a paternal transcendency; 
possesses a dominion analogous to the summit of the intelligible Gods, 
and the occult order. And as in that order, all things are uniformly, 
and are ineffably, and without separation united, thus also this God 
again converts to himself, and conceals in himself the natures that have 
proceeded from him, imitating the occult of the first summit. But again, 
the order which comprehends the middle genera of wholes, and is filled 
indeed, from the generative power of Saturn, but fills from itself the 
whole fabrication with vivific rivers, has the same order in intellectuals 
which eternity has in intelligibles, and the uniform cause of the life 
which is there. And as eternity proximately generates intelligible 
animal, which is also denominated eternal, through the participation of 
eternity, thus also the middle bosom of the intellectual Gods, unfolds 
the demiurgus of the universe, and the vivific fountain of wholes. But 
the third king, viz. the fabricator and at the same time father, is indeed 
co-ordinate to the remainder of the intelligible triad, viz. to all-perfect 
animal. And as that is an animal, so likewise is Jupiter. And Jupiter 
indeed is intelligibly in all-perfect animal; but all-perfect animal is 
intellectually in Jupiter. The extremities likewise of the intelligible 
and intellectual Gods are united to each other; and in them, separation 
is co-existent with union. And one of them, indeed, is exempt from 
fabrication; but the other is converted to the intelligible, is filled from 
thence with total goods, and is allotted a paternal transcendency through 
the participation of it. The maker, therefore, and father of the universe, 
who has firmly established in himself the uniform strength and power of 
all fabrication, who possesses and comprehends the primary cause of 
the generation of wholes, and who stably fixes in himself all things, and 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



388 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


again produces them from himself in an undefiled manner, being allotted 
such an order as this among the intellectual fathers, is celebrated, as I 
may say, through the whole of the Timaeus, in which dialogue, his 
prolific and paternal power is unfolded, and his providence which 
pervades from on high as far as to the extremities of the universe. He 
is also frequently celebrated by Plato in other dialogues, so far as it is 
possible to celebrate his uniform and united power,* and which through 
transcendency is exempt from wholes. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


Ip however some one recollecting what is said in the beginning of the 
Timaeus about him, viz. that it is difficult to discover him, and when 
found, impossible to speak of him to all men, should enquire in the first 
place, why since the Grecian theology ascribes such a name to the 
demiurgus, as we have before mentioned, Timaeus says that he is ineffable, 
and established above all the indication which subsists in words. In 
the next place, if he should inquire why intelligible animal which is 
arranged above the demiurgus is both denominated, and is made known 
by many signs, but the demiurgus who has established his kingdom in 
an order secondary to that of all-perfect animal, and is an intellectual 
God, (all-perfect animal receiving an intelligible transcendency) is left by 
Timaeus ineffable, as we have said, and unknown, perhaps we also, 
following Plato, may be able to dissolve all such doubts. For every 
order of the Gods originates from a monad, and presides over its 

* Svvopiy is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


389 


proper series according to the first-effective cause. And such things 
indeed as are nearer to this principle are more total than those 
that are more remote from it. But more total natures are manifestly 
seen to be less* distant from the monad, and conjoin things which 
are diminished according to essence to the natures that are prior 
to them. Every order of the Gods likewise is a whole united to 
itself through the whole, is allotted one indissoluble connexion, both 
in wholes and parts, and through the monad which collects every order 
into one, it is converted about itself, is suspended from this, and is 
wholly convolved according to it. 

If, therefore, we assert these things truly, in each order a monad is 
allotted a transcendency with respect to multitude, analogous to the 
good. And as the unical cause of whole goods, and which is incom¬ 
prehensible by all things, is exempt from all things, constitutes all things 
about itself, generates them from itself, and hastily withdraws the unions 
of all things to its own ineffable superunion, thus also the uniform and 
generative principle of every co-ordinate multitude, connects, guards and 
perfects the whole series of itself, imparts good to it from itself, and 
fills it with order and harmony. It is likewise that to its own progeny, 
which the good is to all beings, and is the object of desire to all the 
natures that originate from itself. Thus, therefore, the union of the 
intelligible father subsists prior to the whole paternal order; the one 
wholeness of the Synoches is prior to the connective order; and the first 
effective cause of life, to the vivific order. 

Hence also, of every demiurgic series, which is suspended from th^ 
triad of the sons of Saturn, the monad which proximately fabricates 
wholes, and is established above this triad, comprehends in itself all the 
demiurgic Gods, converts them to itself, and is of a boniform nature. 
The one fountain likewise of all the demiurgic numbers, subsists, as I 
may say, with respect to all this order analogous to the one , and to the 
one principle of all things. Timaeus therefore, indicating these things 
to us, asserts directly in the teginning of the generation of the world, 

1 For tA«v it is evidently necessary to read ijttov. 


Digitized by v^.ooQle 



390 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


that this monad which proximately fabricates wholes, is difficult to be 
known, and is indescribable, as having the same ratio as the ineffable 
and unknown cause of all beings. Whence likewise, I think, he calls 
the demiurgus the best of causes, and the father of this universe, as being 
allotted the highest order among the demiurgi, and convolving to himself, 
and producing from himself all the effective principles. That one how¬ 
ever, Parmenides demonstrates to be perfectly unknown and ineffable; 
but Timaeus says that it is difficult to discover the maker and father of 
the world, and impossible to speak of him to all men; which assertion 
falls short of the cause that flies from all knowledge, and all language, 
and appears to verge to the nature of things known and effable. For 
when he says that it is impossible to speak of him to. all men, he does 
not leave him entirely ineffable and unknown. And the assertion that it 
is difficult to discover him, is not the sign of a peculiarity perfectly 
unknown. For because the demiurgus has established a kingdom 
analogous to the good, but in secondary and manifold orders of it, he 
participates indeed of the signs of the good , but is allotted the participa¬ 
tion in conjunction with an appropriate peculiarity, and a communion 
with beings adapted to him. And as he is good, but not the good itself, 
so likewise he is difficult to be known by the natures posterior to him, 
but is not unknown. He is also celebrated in mystic language, but is 
not perfectly ineffable. You may see however, the order of things, and 
the remission in them proceeding in a downward progression. For the 
good indeed, is exempt from all silence, and all language. But the genus 
<jf the intelligible Gods rejoices in silence, and is delighted with ineffable* 
symbols. Hence also, Socrates in the Phaedrus, calls the vision of the 
intelligible monads the most holy of initiations, as being involved in 
silence, and perceived intellectually in an arcane manner. But the 
vision of intellectuals is indeed effable, yet is not effable and known to all 
men, but is known with difficulty. For through diminution with respect 
to the intelligible, it proceeds from silence and a transcendency which is 
to be apprehended by intelligence alon^ into the order of things which 
are now effable. 

’ For agirrois, it is necessary to read «jjijroif. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


391 


If however, this be the case, all-perfect animal is much more ineffable 
and unknown than the demiurgic monad. For it is at once the monad 
of every paradigmatic order, and is intelligible, but not intellectual. 
How therefore, do we endeavour to denominate, and as it were unfold it, 
but thus magnificently celebrate the demiurgic cause? And how do we 
class this cause in the same rank with things ineffable ? For this will not 
be acting conformably to Plato, who arranges animal itself beyond the 
demiurgus; but this will be giving an hypostasis to it in a secondary 
order of Gods, where it will be ranked, and will be effable and known 
more than the demiurgic monad. To which may be added, that to 
denominate that all-perfect animal most beautiful, but the demiurgus the 
best of causes, gives indeed the same analogy to these causes with 
respect to each other, as there is of the good with respect to the beautiful. 
And as the good is prior to the beautiful, (for the first beauty, as Socrates 
says in the Philebus, is in the vestibules of the good) so likewise the best 1 
is prior to the most beautiful, and the demiurgus is prior to all-perfect 
animal. For the best indeed, remarkably participates of the good t but 
the most beautiful, of beauty. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


In addition to these things therefore, it must also be asserted by us, 
that the most beautiful and the best, are simply indeed related to each 
other according to order, as the good is to the beautiful. For the series 
of the whole of goodness is expanded above all the progression and 
arrangement of the beautiful. Every where, therefore, the best is prior 


‘ For *gg»)Toy, it is necessary to read *g«rw. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



902 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


.BOOK V. 


to the most beautiful. And the one, indeed, with reference to an inferior 
order, will be the best, but the other with reference to a more excellent 
order, will be the most beautiful. I say for instance, that the most 
beautiful, as in intelligibles, will have this peculiarity; but the best as in 
intellectuals. And if the most beautiful, in supermundane natures, is a 
thing of this kind, the best will be said to be best as with reference to the 
Gods in the world. Hence, if the best of causes is the leader of the 
demiurgic series, and according to it is allotted a transcendency of this kind, 
but the most beautiful of intelligible animals preestablishes the illustrious 
power of beauty in a higher order, by what contrivance can it on this 
account be shown that intelligible and all-perfect animal is subordinate 
to the intellectual cause ? And that the demiurgus is converted to that 
which is posterior to himself? Or how can it be said that animal itself is 
visible to him, and all-perfect animal, and that which is comprehensive 
of all intelligibles, if it is made to be comprehended by another? For 
thus the demiurgus will be more comprehensive than animal itself, if the 
former indeed being characterized according to the best, is expanded 
above the paradigm, but the latter being denominated as most beautiful 
is secondary to the demiurgic cause. 

Moreover, as that all-perfect and intelligible animal is particularly 
considered by Timaeus according to a formal nature, and not according 
to the union which is in it, and an hypostasis which is above all forms,’ he 
very properly grants that animal itself may be known and manifested by 
words, but considers the demiurgus as in a certain respect ineffable, and 
superior to knowledge. For both indeed, I mean the demiurgus and 
animal itself, participate of union, and prior to a formal essence, are con¬ 
tained in the one. And if you assume the unities which are in them, you 
must admit the unity of the paradigm to be intelligible, but the demiurgic 
unity to be intellectual, and that an intelligible hyparxis is nearer to the 
first one, which is unknown and incomprehensible by all things, than an 
intellectual hyparxis. But if you are willing to survey the forms of the 

' Imtead of too Tams, it is doubtless necessary to read r» *an*. For the demiurgus also has 
an hypostasis which is above the forms of the universe. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXIX. 


0FPLATO. 


S93 


paradigm by themselves, according to which it is said to be the paradigm 
of every thing in the world, and the goodness and union of the demiurgus, 
the former will appear to you to be known and effable ; but the demiur¬ 
gic cause will be seen to participate of the unknown and ineffable pecu¬ 
liarity of the Gods. For again, Timaeus was in a remarkable degree in 
want of the demiurgus and father, as the producing cause of wholes, and 
the generator of the world. But to generate, to produce and provide are 
the peculiarities of Gods, so far as they are Gods. Hence also Ti¬ 
maeus denominates the peculiarity of the demiurgus according to which be 
is a God, the cause of the generation of the universe, and the most proper 
principle of the arrangement of wholes. But he denominates the pecu¬ 
liarity of the paradigm to be that which comprehends the first forms, 
according to which the world also is invested with forms. For it is the 
image of the paradigm, but the effect of the demiurgus. It belongs, 
therefore, to the paradigm to be the first of forms, but to the demiurgus 
to be the best of causes, according to his goodness, and the hyparxis of 
essence. For, as we have said, to generate, to give subsistence to, and to 
provide for other things, especially pertain^to the Gods, and not to the 
natures which are primarily suspended * from them; but the latter are 
allotted through the former an abundance prolific of secondary natures. 
It appears to me that Socrates in the Republic indicating these tilings, 
does not say that the sun is the cause of generation, till he had declared 
him to be the progeny of the superessential principle of all things; just as 
Ttmoeus does not begin the fabrication of the universe, till he had cele¬ 
brated the goodness of the demiurgus of wholes. For each [i. e. the 
demiurgus and the sun] is a producing cause according to the goody the 
former indeed of the universe, but the latter of a generated nature; but 
not according to the intellect which is in them, or life, or any other form 
of essence. For these through the participation of the good constitute 
the natures posterior to themselves. And thus through these things we 
have answered the before-mentioned doubts. 

* For ifipti/uvoif, it is necessary to read efipnyMvwf. 


Proe. 


Vol. I. 


3 D 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



$94 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOJfc-Y.. 


CHAPTER XXX. 


Of the problems pertaining to total fabrication, it now remains for me 
to relate what my opinion is respecting the Crater, and the genera that 
are mingled in it. For these alsoTimaeus co-arranges with the demiurgic 
monad, in the generation of the soul. The demiurgus, therefore,, mingles 
the elements of the hypostasis of souls; but the middle genera of being 
are mingled. The much-celebrated Crater, however, receives this mix¬ 
ture, and generates souls in conjunction with the demiurgus. Hence,, in 
the first place, the genera of being must be admitted to be twofold. And 
it must be granted indeed, that some of them give completion to total 
hypostases, but others, to such as are partial; and that the hyparxes of 
first effective and united causes, are established in the intelligible Gods.. 
For there essence subsists primarily in the summit of intelligibles, and 
motion and permanency are*in the middle centre. For intelligible eter¬ 
nity abides in one, and at once both abides and is the occult cause of alt 
life. Hence, Plotinus also calls eternity life which is one and total: and 
again, in another part of his works he calls it intelligible life. But the 
third from him, Theodorus, denominates it permanency. And hoth 
these opinions harmonize with each other; because permanency also is in. 
eternity, (for according to Timaeus, eternity abides in one)and motion. 
For eternity is intelligible life, and that which participates of it is intelli¬ 
gible animal. Moreover, sameness and difference, are in the extremity, 
of intelligibles. For whence does multitude originate, but from differ¬ 
ence? And whence is the communion of parts with wholes, and the 
hyparxis of things which are divided in each other derived but from same¬ 
ness? For that one participates of being, and being of the one. All the 
parts likewise of the one being pervade through each other in an uncon¬ 
fused manner; for at one and the same time sameness and difference are 
there occultly. And the whole intelligible breadth is allotted its bypo- 


igitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXX. 


OP PLATO. 


S95 

stasis according to the first and most uniform genera. As essence likewise 
presents itself to the view in conjunction with the one, according to the 
first triad, so motion and permanency shine forth in the second, and 
sameness and difference in the third triad. And all things are essentially 
in the intelligible; just as life and intellect are there intelligibly. For 
since all beings proceed from intelligibles, all things preexist there 
according to cause. And motion and permanency are there essentially, 
and sameness and difference uniformly. 

Again, in the middle genera of the intelligible and intellectual hypo¬ 
stases, the same things subsist secondarily and vitally. In the summit of 
diem indeed, essence subsists. For Socrates in the Phaedrus speaking 
about this order, characterizes the whole of it from essence. For the 
truly-existing essence which is without colour, without figure, and without 
contact, subsists after this manner. But in the middle centre there are 
motion and permanency. For there the circulation of the heaven sub¬ 
sists, as the same Socrates says; being established indeed undeviatingly, 
in one form of intelligence; but being moved in, and about itself; or 
rather being motion and eternal life. But in the extremity of this order, 
sameness and difference are vitally established. Hence it is converted to 
tbp beginning according to the nature of sameness, is divided uniformly, 
proceeds into more numbers, and generates from itself more partial 
monads. 

Again, in the third orders, the highest of the intellectual Gods possesses 
ell things according to essence, and is the intelligible itself and true being 
in intellectuals, again recalling the separation which is in himself into 
undivided union. But the middle order subsists according to motion and 
at the same time permanency. For it is a vivific deity, abiding and at 
the same time proceeding, being established with purity, and vivifying 
all things by prolific powers. And the third progression subsists accord¬ 
ing to sameness, together with difference. For this separates itself from 
the fathers, and is conjoined to them through intellectual conversion. And 
it binds, indeed, at once the natures posterior to itself, to each other, 
according to the common powers of forms, and at the same time separates 
them by intellectual sections. But in this order, all genera and species 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



396 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Y- 


first' shine forth to the view; because it is especially characterized 
according to difference, being allotted the end of all the total hypostases 
From this likewise it proceeds to all things, viz. to participated intellect, 
the multiform orders of souls, and the whole of a corporeal nature. For,, 
in short, it constitutes triple genera of the natures posterior to itself; 
some indeed, being impartible and the first; others being media 
between partible and impartible natures; and others being divided about 
bodies. And through these things it generates all the more partial genera 
of beings. That we may therefore again return to what has been before 
said, the genera must be admitted to subsist every where, yet not every 
where after the same manner; but in the highest orders-of divine natures 
indeed, they subsist uniformly, without separation, and unitedly, where 
also permanency participates of motion, and motion of permanency, and 
there is one united progression of both. In the more partial orders, however, 
it must be admitted that the same things subsist in a divided manner,, and 
together with an appropriate remission. For since the first and most 
total of forms are in the extremity of intelligibles, it is indeed necessary 
that genera should have the beginning of their hypostasis in intelligibles. 
And if the demiuFgic cause is generative of all the partial orders, it com¬ 
prehends the first genera of the hypostasis of them. As likewise the 
fountain of all forms subsists in this cause, though there are intelligible 
forms, so the genera of being preexist in it, though there are other whole 
genera prior to it. And the divine Jamblichus somewhere rightly 
observes that the genera of being present themselves to the view in the ex¬ 
tremity of the intelligible Gods. The present theology likewise, following 
things themselves, gives a progression to these as well as forms supernally, 
from the intelligible Gods. For such things as subsist according to cause, 
occultly, and without separation in the first essences [i. e. in intelligibles] 
these subsist in a divided and partible manner, and according to the nature 
ofeach,in intellectuals. For from hence, ail the divisibleorders of beingsare 
filled both with these genera, and with formal hyparxes. And on this ac¬ 
count, the demiurgus also is said to comprehend all genera, and to have the 
fountain of forms, because he generates, all the partial rivers [of life] and 
imparts to them from himself by illumination all the measures of subsistence* 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXXI. 


OF PLATO. 


397 


Hence triple genera of all beings proceed from the demiurgus, some 
indeed being impartible, others partible, 1 and others subsisting between 
these, being more united indeed than the partible, but more separated 
than the impartible genera; but subsisting according to the middle of 
both, and connectedly containing the one bond of beings. And the 
demiurgus indeed produces the intellectual essence, through the first and 
impartible genera; but the corporeal essence through the third and 
partible genera; and the psychical hypostasis which is in the middle of 
these, through the middle genera in beings. Moreover, he generates 
every intellectual and impartible nature from himself, and fills them with 
total generative power. But he constitutes the psychical essence, in 
conjunction with the Crater; and the corporeal essence, in conjunction, 
with total Nature. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


Th at in this arrangement likewise we follow Timaeus, any one may 
learn from the following considerations: The demiurgus producing the 
intellect of the universe, himself produces it from his own essence alone, 
unfolding it at once according to one union, in consequence, of consti¬ 
tuting it eternally, and no mention whatever is here made of the Crater. 
But the demiurgus in arranging and adorning soul prior to body, mingles 
the genera, and energizes in conjunction with the Crater. And in fa¬ 
shioning the body of the universe, and describing the heaven, he fabri¬ 
cates it in conjunction with Necessity. For the nature of the universe, 
says Timaeus, was generated mingled from intellect and necessity. And nei¬ 
ther does he here assume the Crater in order to the arrangement of bodies. 

* The words t* Si /wpiara are omitted in the original, but evidently ought to be inserted. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


398 

But it lias been abundantly shown by us elsewhere, that Plato calls 
physical production, a production through necessity, and does not, as 
some suppose, consider necessity to be the same with matter. It is 
evident, therefore, that the demiurgus produces the generation of bodies 
together with total Nature, mingles the partible genera in the first Nature, 
and thus produces bodies from intellect and necessity. For bodies 
receive* from intellect indeed, good and union; but from necessity a 
progression which terminates in interval and division. He arranges and 
adorns, however, tlie self-motive essence of souls, in conjunction with the 
Crater. And neither intellect, nor bodies, require a cause of this kind. 
The demiurgus indeed is the common source of the triple genera. But 
the Crater is the peculiar cause of souls, and is co-arranged with the de¬ 
miurgus and filled from him, but fills souls. And receiving from thence 
indeed the powers of prolific abundance, it pours them on souls according 
to the measures of their respective essences. To some of them likewise it 
orderly distributes the summits of the genera [[of being], to others the 
middle progressions of the genera, and to others, the terminations of 
them. Hence the Crater is indeed essentially vivific, since souls also are 
certain lives, but it is the first-effective cause of souls, according to the 
peculiarity of hyparxis, aud is the uniform and all-perfect monad, not 
of every life, but of that which is psychical. For from this Crater the 
soul of the universe subsists, and likewise the second and third genera of 
partible souls, and of those souls that are allotted a progression between 
these. 

The whole number, therefore, of the psychical order proceeds from the 
Crater, and is divided according to the prolific powers which it contains. 
Hence the Crater is said to be the cause of souls, the receptacle of their 
fabrication, and the generative monad of them, and the like. For it is 
said to be so rightly, and conformably to the mind of Plato. If, how¬ 
ever, the Crater is co-arranged with the demiurgus, and equally consti¬ 
tutes with him the genera of souls, it is indeed necessary that this Crater 
should be fontal, in the same manner as the whole demiurgus. Hence 


* For kgofufo, it is necessary to read S*^ 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



chap. xxxr. 


OF PLATO, 


3 99 


the Crater is the fountain of souls, but is united to the demiurgic monad. 
And on this account, Socrates also in the Philebus says, that in Jupiter 
there is a royal soul, and a royal intellect. For that which we at present 
denominate fontal, he calls royal; though the name of fountain when 
applied to souls is well known to Plato. For Socrates, in the Phsedrus, 
says, that the self-motive nature is the fountain and principle of motion 
to such other things as are moved. 

And you see that as a twofold divine monad prior to souls is delivered 
by theologists, the one being indeed fontal, but the other of a primary 
ruling nature, Plato likewise gives to the progeny of these twofold 
appellations, assuming one name from the more total* but the other from, 
the more partial monad. For the self-motive nature, is a fountain indeed, 
as being the offspring of the fontal soul, but it is a principle, as participa*. 
ting of the primary ruling soul. If therefore, the name of fountain, and 
also of principle is assigned by Plato to souls, what occasion is there to> 
wonder if we denominate the exempt monads of them, fountains and 
principles? Or rather from these things that is demonstrated. For 
whence is a ruling power imparted to all souls except 'from the ruling 
monad ? For that which similarly extends to all souls, is necessarily 
imparted to them from one and the same cause. If therefore, some one 
should say it is imparted by the demiurgus, so far as he is the demiurgus r 
it is necessary that in a similar manner it should be inherent in all other 
things which proceed from the demiurgic monad. But if it proceeds, 
from the definite and separate cause of souls, that cause must be 
denominated the first fountain and principle of them. 

Moreover, that of these two names, the ruling is more allied to souls 
than the fontal, as being nearer to them according to order, Plato* 
manifests in the same dialogue. For calling the self-motive nature the 
fountain and at the same time principle of the motion of the whole of 
things, he nevertheless frames his demonstration of its unbegotten, 
subsistence from principle alone. For, says he, principle is unbegotteu.. 
For it is necessary that every thing which is generated should be 
generated from a principle. If therefore, demonstrations are from things 
proximate to the things demonstrated, it is necessary that principle 


Digitized by LjOoq le 



400 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


should be more proximate to souls than fountain. Farther still, if every 
thing which is generated is generated from a principle, as Plato says, but 
souls are in a certain respect generated, as Timaeus says, there is also a 
precedaneous principle of souls. And as they are the principles of 
things which are generated according to time, so after another manner 
principle subsists prior to souls, which are generated. And as they are 
unbegotten according to the generation of bodies, thus also the principle 
of souls is exempt from all generation. Through these things therefore, it 
is demonstrated by us, that the Crater is the fountain of souls, that after the 
fountain there is a primary ruling monad of them, and that this monad 
is more proximate to souls than the fountain, but is established above 
them, as being their prolific cause. And all these particulars we have 
demonstrated from the words of Plato. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


Again therefore, let us return to the things proposed, and teach in a 
greater degree the lovers of the contemplation of truth, concerning this 
Crater. For the whole vivific deity having established in the middle of 
the intellectual kings the prolific cause of divine natures, and according 
to her highest, most intellectual and all-perfect powers, being occultly 
united to the first father, but according to more partial and secondary 
causes from them, being conjoined to the demiurgus, and establishing 
one conspiration together with him of the generation of the partial orders, 
Timaeus mystically mentions those more ancient powers of the Goddess, 
and which abide in the first father. But with respect to those powers 
that are co-arranged with the demiurgus, and adorn together with him 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 


CHAP. XXXH. 


OF PLATO. 


401 


the natures in the universe, some of these he delivers more clearly but 
the whole of others through indication. For the secondary monads 
themselves of the Goddess are triple, as the wise assert, one of them 
being the fountain of souls, the second, being the fountain of the virtues, 
but the third being the fountain of Nature which is suspended from the 
back of the Goddess. The demiurgus therefore, also assumes these three 
hypostases to his own prolific production. And the Crater indeed, as 
we have said, is the fountain of souls, unically containing the whole and 
perfect number of them.' And as the demiurgus is allotted a paternal 
cause with respect to the psychical generation, so the Crater is prolific, 
and is allotted the ratio and order of a mother. For such things as 
Jupiter produces paternally in souls, the fountain of souls produces 
maternally and geDeratively. 

Virtue however, energizes by itself, and adorns and perfects wholes. 
And on this account, the universe having participated of soul, immedi¬ 
ately also participates of virtue. “ For the demiurgus, says Timaeus, 
having placed soul in the middle, extended it through the universe, and 
besides this surrounded the body of it externally with soul as with a veil, 
and causing circle to revolve in circle, constituted heaven one, alone and 
solitary, but through virtue able to converse with itself, and being in want 
of no other thing, but sufficiently known and friendly itself to itself.” At 
one and the same time therefore the world is animated, lives through the 
whole of its life according to virtue, and possesses from the virtues as its 
highest end, friendship with itself, and an all-perfect knowledge of itself. 
For it is itself sufficiently known and friendly to itself through virtue. 

Moreover, nature also is consubsistent with the generation of body. 
For the demiurgus generates body through necessity, and fashions it 
together with its proper life. And on this account, shortly after, having 
constituted partial souls, he shows to them the nature of the universe, 
and the laws of Fate. For in consequence of possessing the cause of 
total Nature and Fate, he also exhibits these to souls. For the 
demiurgus is not converted to things posterior to himself, but primarily 

' For xvtov, it is necessary to read «otwv. 

Proc. Vol. I. 3 E 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



402 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


contains in himself the things which are exhibited, and unfolds to souls 
the powers of himself. Hence, the paradigm of all Nature, and the one 
cause of the laws of Fate pre-subsist in him. For the fountain of 
Nature, is called the first Fate by the Gods themselves. “You should 
not look upon Nature, for the name of it is fatal.” Hence also, Timaeus 
says, that souls at one and the same time see the laws of Fate, and the 
nature of the universe, viz. they see as it were mundane Fate, and the 
powers of it. And the Elean guest in the Politicus, denominates the 
motive cause of the more physical circulation of the universe, Fate. 
For he says that “Fate and connate desire convolve the world.” And 
the same person likewise clearly acknowledges that the world possesses 
this power from the demiurgus and father. For he says that all the 
apparent arrangement and circulation are derived from Jupiter. It is 
demonstrated therefore, that according to these three causes of the vivific 
Goddess which are co-arranged with the demiurgus, the world is perfec¬ 
ted by him, viz. according to the fontal Crater, the fountain of the 
virtues, and the first-effective cause of nature. 

It is likewise manifest that again in these things Plato does not refuse 
to employ the name of fountain. Fpr in the Laws he calls the power 
of prudence which is essentially inherent in souls, and which is productive 
of the virtues in us, the fountain of intelligence. And he also says, that 
two other fountains are imparted to us by nature, viz. pleasure and pain. 
As, therefore, we before demonstrated that souls are called the fountains 
of motions, on account of the one fountain of them, of which they 
participate, thus also when Plato calls the first progeny of Nature 
fountains, it is obvious to every one, that he will permit the exempt 
cause itself of them to be denominated a fountain. After the same 
manner, likewise, since he magnificently celebrates the essential power 
of virtue in us, as the fountain of intelligence, he will not be compelled 
to hear a name which does not at all pertain to his philosophy, if some 
one should be willing to denominate, the first monad of the virtues, a 
fountain. But where shall we have the name of fountain posited by him 
in the intellectual Gods? In the Cratylus, therefore, he says that Tethys 
is the occult name of a fountain, and he calls Saturn himself and the 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXXIII. 


OF PLATO. 


403 


queen Rhea fluxions. For these divinities are rivers of the intelligible 
fountains, and proceeding from fountains placed above them, they fill 
all the natures posterior to themselves with the prolific rivers of life. 
And the Crater itself likewise is fontal. The Gods, therefore, also 
denominate the first-effective causes of partial natures, fontal Craters. 
These things, however, we shall more fully investigate elsewhere. Let 
it be considered also, that we have here sufficiently examined the 
particulars concerning the demiurgic monad, according to the narration 
of Plato. 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


In the next place, let us survey those causes and leaders of uncon- 
taminated purity, and see if Plato any where appears to remind us of 
this order of Gods, and of the inflexible power proceeding from them to 
all the divine genera. For the. first-effective triad of the immutable 
order, is united to the triad of the intellectual kings and the progressions 
of the former are co-divided with the monads of the latter. And the 
summit of the triad, and as it were, the flower of the inflexible guard of 
wholes is united to the first intellectual king. But the middle centre of 
the triad, is in a kindred manner conjoined to the second intellectual 
king, proceeds together with him, and subsists about him. And the 
extremity' of the. whole triad is connected with the third intellectual 
king, is converted with him to the principle [of the intellectual order,] 
and together with him is convolved to the one union of the •‘father of all 
the intellectual Gods. And after this manner, indeed, the three 

* ro tvyecro* is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



404 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


unpolluted guardians of the intellectual fathers, are monadically divided. 
But together with this division they have also an hypostasis united to 
each other. All of them, likewise, are in a certain respect in each of 
the fathers, and all of them energize about all. And after a certain 
manner indeed according to their proper hypostasis, they are divided 
from the fathers ; but after another manner they are impartibly assumed 
■with them, and at one and the same time they are allotted an equally- 
dignified or^er with the fathers, and appear to possess an essence 
subordinate to them. 

Such, therefore, being their nature, they preserve, indeed, the whole 
progressions of the fathers undefiled, but supply them with inflexibility 
in their powers, and immutability in their energies. They are suspended, 
however, from total purity. And if some of the ancients have in any 
of their writings surveyed in intellect that which always subsists with 
invariable sameness, which receives nothing into itself from subordinate 
natures, and is not mingled with things. inferior, they celebrate all such 
goods as these, as pervading to intellect, and other natures, from these 
Gods. For the oration in the Banquet of Plato, celebrates in a remark¬ 
able manner the immiscibility of the divine essence with secondary 
natures; and that which transcends the whole of things in purity and 
immutable power, arrives to the Gods through the guardian cause. And 
as the intellectual fathers, are the suppliers of prolific production, both 
to all other things, and to the inflexible Gods, thus also, the undefiled 
Gods, impart the power of purity, both to the fathers, and to the other 
divine orders. At one and the same time, therefore, the three unpolluted 
Gods subsist with the three intellectual kings, are the guardians of the 
fathers themselves, establish about them an immutable guard, and 
firmly fix themselves in them. Hence also, the Athenian guest, as he 
arranges and adorns his polity through the best analogy, through which 
the demiurgus binds and constitutes the whole number [[of the elements,] 
so likewise he appoints a guard to all the inhabitants of the region, that 
nothing, as much as possible, may be without defence; imitating in this 
the intellectual Gods themselves who guard all things by the undefiled 
leaders. And it appears to me that on this account he calls the rulers 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


405 


[of bis polity] guardians of the laws, or [simply] guardians, because the 
inflexible guardians are consubsistent with the intellectual leaden of the 
whole worlds. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


These arguments, however, will be more remote from that divine 
triad, and are referred to it from ultimate images. But perhaps 
omitting these, we may abound with greater conceptions, and more 
conducive to the investigation of the thing proposed, and speculating | 
together with Plato the divine genera, we may discover how he also 
celebrates this order of Gods, and constitutes them together with the 
three kings that are now discussed, just as by other theologists also, we 
are mystically instructed in the truth concerning them. In the fable 
therefore of Protagoras, Plato indicating to us the exempt watch-tower 
of Jupiter, and the transcendency.of his essence which is unmingled with 
all secondary natures, through which he is inaccessible and unrevealed 
to the partible genera of Gods, refers the v cause of this to his* immutable 
guard, and the defensive order by which he * is surrounded. For ofl 
account of this, all the demiurgic powers indeed are firmly established in 
themselves. But all the forms [that are in him] are according to supreme 
transcendency exempt from secondary natures. And in short, the 
demiurgic intellect [through this order] abides after its accustomed 
manner. For the fable says that the guards of Jupiter are terrible to 
all things. And on this account such [partible] genera of Gods (one of 


* For airrtov, it is necessary to read axnov. 

1 The same emendation is here also necessary, as above. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



406 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


which also Prometheus is) cannot be immediately conjoined with the 
undefiled and Olympian powers of the demiurgus. If, therefore, Socrates 
himself in the form of a fable clearly delivers to us the guard about the 
demiurgus, is it not through these things evident that the guardian 
genus is consubsistent with the intellectual Gods ? For as the Oracles 
say, that the demiurgic order is surrounded with a burning guard, thus 
also Plato says that guards stand round it, and defend inflexibly the 
summit of it exempt from all secondary natures. 

But in the Cratylus, Socrates unfolding through the truth which is 
expressed in names, who Saturn is, demonstrates indeed his' peculiar 
hyparxis, according to which he subsists as the leader of the total intel¬ 
lectual orders. He likewise unfolds to us the monad of the unpolluted 
order, which is united with Saturn. For Saturn, as he says in that 
dialogue, is a pure intellect. For, he adds, the koron (to xojov) of him, 
does not signify his being a boy, but the purity, and incorruptible nature 
of intellect. After an admirable manner therefore, the fabricator of these 
divine names, has at one and the same time conjoined the Saturnian 
peculiarity, and the first monad of the unpolluted triad. For the union 
of the first father with the first of the unpolluted Gods, is transcendent, 
and hence this inflexible God is called silent by the Gods, is said to accord 
with intellect, and to be known by souls according to intellect alone; 
because he subsists in the first intellect according to one union with it. 
Saturn therefore, as being the first intellect, is defined according to its 
proper order, but as a pure and incorruptible intellect, he has the unde¬ 
filed conjoined in himself. And on this account, he is the king of all the 
intellectual Gods. For as intellect he gives subsistence to all the 
intellectual Gods, and as a pure intellect, he guards the total orders of 
them. The two fathers therefore, [Saturn and Jupiter] are shown by the 
words of Plato to be co-arranged with the immutable Gods, according to 
union indeed, the first, but according to separation the third. 

If you are willing however, to survey the one inflexible guard of them 
with respect to each other, according to which the third father is stably 

' For it is requisite to read wrtu, 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



CHAP. XXXIV. 


.OF PLATO. 


407 


in the first, as being the intellect of him, and energizing about him, again 
direct your attention to the bonds in the Cratylus, of which indeed, 
partible lives, and the lives deprived of intellect, and which are stupidly 
astonished about matter, are unable to participate. But a divine intel¬ 
lect itself, and the souls which are conjoined to it, participate of these 
bonds according to an order adapted to them. For the Saturnian bonds, 
appear indeed to bind the mighty Saturn himself, but in reality, they 
connect about him in an undefiled manner the natures that throw the 
bonds around him. For a bond is the symbol of the connective order of 
the Gods, since every thing which is bound is connected by a bond. 
Again therefore from these things, the guardian good which extends from 
the connective Gods to the intellectual kings is apparent, since it unites, 
and collects them into one. For a bond guards that which is connected 
by it. But the immutable Gods inflexibly preserve their own appropri¬ 
ate orders. For the guardship of these Gods is twofold; the one indeed, 
being primary and uniform, and suspended from the triad of the 
connective Gods; but the other being co-existent with the intellectual 
kings, and defending them from a tendency to all secondary natures. 
For all the intellectual fathers ride on the unpolluted Gods, and are 
established above wholes, through their inflexible, undeviating, and 
immutable power. 

If however, it be not only necessary that these two fathers should 
participate of this guardian order, but that the middle vivific deity of 
them should be allotted a monad of the immutable Gods coordinate to 
herself, it is indeed necessary that the first [guardianship] of the unpol¬ 
luted leaders in the intellectual fathers, should be triadic, and should have 
the same perfect number with the three intellectual Gods. It is likewise 
necessary that the first of these leaders should be stably united to the 
first [of the intellectual kings]; but that the second should in a certain 
respect be separated from the second of these kings, together with a 
union with him. And that the third should now be entirely separated 
from the third king. And thus the unpolluted proceeds conformably to 
the paternal order, and is -after the same manner with it triadically 
divided, llie first of the unpolluted Gods likewise guards the occult 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



408 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


nature of Saturn, and the first-effective monad which transcends wholes, 
and establishes perfectly in him the causes that proceed from, and again 
return to him. But the second, preserves the generative power of the 
queen Rhea, pure from matter, and undefiled, and sustains from the 
incursions of secondary natures her progression to all things, on which 
she pours the rivers of life. And the third preserves the whole fabrica¬ 
tion of things established above the fabrications, and firmly abiding in 
itself. It likewise guards it so as to be inflexible, one, and all-perfect 
with respect to the subjects of its providential case, and expanded above 
all partial production. 


CHAPTER XXXV. 


Let us now then from this indefinite and common doctrine about 
these Gods, adduce the Grecian rumour concerning it, as delivered to us 
by Plato, and demonstrate that he as far as to the very names follows 
the theologists of the Greeks, just as in the mystic theory of the three 
kings, and the narration of the unpolluted Gods, he does not depart from 
their interpretation. For who that is in the smallest degree acquainted 
with the divine wisdom of the Greeks, does not know that in their arcane 
-mysteries, and other concerns respecting the Gods, the order of the 
Curetes, is in a remarkable manner celebrated by them, as presiding 
over the undefiled peculiarity, as the leader of the goddess ([Rhea,] and 
as binding in itself the guardianship of wholes P These Gods therefore, 
are said to guard the queen Rhea, and the demiurgus of wholes, and 
proceeding as far as to the causes of partible vivification and fabrication, 
to preserve the Proserpine and Bacchus which are among these causes, 




CHAP. XXXV. 


OF PLATO. 


409 


exempt from secondary natures, just as here [i.e. in the intellectual order], 
they defend the vivifications of total life, and the first-effective monads of 
all-perfect fabrication. Not only Orpheus therefore, and the theologists 
prior to Plato knew this Curetic order, and knowing, venerated it, but 
the Athenian guest also in the Laws celebrates it. For he says, that the 
armed sports of the Curetes in Crete, are the principal paradigms of all 
elegant motion. And now, neither is he satisfied with having mentioned 
this Curetic order, but he also adds the one unity of the Curetes, viz. our 
mistress Minerva, from which the mystic doctrine also of theologists 
prior to him, suspends the whole progression of the Curetes. He like¬ 
wise, surrounds them above with the symbols of Minerva, as presiding 
over an ever-flourishing life, and vigorous intellection; but beneath, he 
manifestly arranges them under the providence of Minerva. For the 
first Curetes indeed, as being the attendants of the intelligible and occult 
Goddess, are satisfied with the signs that proceed from thence; but those 
in the second and third orders, are suspended from the intellectual 
Mi nerval monad. 

What then is it, that the Athenian guest says concerning this monad, 
which converts to itself in an undefiled manner the Curetic progressions ? 
“ The core (*°w) i.e. virgin, and mistress that is with us, being delighted 
with the discipline of dancing, did not think it proper to play with empty 
hands; but being adorned with an all-perfect panoply, she thus gave 
perfection to dancing.” Through these things therefore, the Athenian 
gnest clearly shows the alliance of the Curetic triad to the Minerval 
monad. For as that triad is said to sport in armour, so he says that the 
Goddess who is the leader of them [i.e. of their progression] being 
adorned with an all-perfect panoply, is the source to them of elegant 
motion. And as he denominates that triad Curetic, from purity, so like¬ 
wise he calls this goddess Core, as being the cause of undefiled power 
itself. For koron (roxogov) as Socrates * says in the Cratylus, signifies the 
pure and incorruptible. Whence also the Curetes are allotted their 
appellation, as presiding over the undefiled purity of the Gods. And 

1 Kgaryjs is erroneously printed in the original for 2wxgar*i$. 

Proc. Vol. I. 3 F 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



410 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Y. 


the monad of thein is particularly celebrated as a mistress and as Core 
[a virgin} she being the supplier of an inflexible and flourishing dominion 
to the Gods. The word koron therefore, as we have said, is a symbol of 
purity, of which these Gods are the primary leaders, and according to 
which* they are participated by others. But their being armed, is a 
symbol of the guardian power according to which they connect-wholes, 
guard them exempt from secondary natures, and preserve them estab¬ 
lished in themselves. For what other benefit do men derive from arms 
except that of defence? For these are in a particular manner the safe¬ 
guard of cities. Hence fables also ascribing to the unpolluted Gods an 
unconquerable strength, give to them an armed apparatus. Hence 
adorning the one unity of them with an all-perfect panoply, they estab¬ 
lish it at the summit of the progression of these Gods. For the all-perfect 
precedes things which are divided according to parts, and the panoply 
exists prior to the partible distribution of guardian powers. And it 
appears to me that through these particulars Plato again asserts the same 
things as were afterwards revealed by the Gods. For what they denomi¬ 
nate every kind of armour , this Plato celebrates as adorned with an 
all-perfect panoply. [For the Gods say,] “Armed with every kind of 
armour, he resembles the Goddess.” For the all-perfect in the habit of 
Pyrrhich arms, and the undefiled in power, pertain, according to Plato* 
to the Minerval monad; but according to the narration of the Oracles 
they pertain to that which is furnished with every kind of arms. 

Farther still, rythm and dancing are a mystic sign of this deity, because 
the Curetes contain- the undefiled power of a divine life; because they 
preserve the whole progressions of it always arranged according to one 
divine boundary; and because they sustain these progressions from the 
incursions of matter. For the formless, the indefinite, and the privation 
of rythm, are the peculiarities of matter. Hence, the immaterial, the 
definite, and the undefiled, are endued with rythm, are orderly, and 
intellectual. For on this account, the heavens also are said to form a 
perpetual dance, and all the celestial orbs participate of rythmical and 

’ For x«? iv it is necessary to read xuS" ijr. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXXVI. 


OF t»LATO. 


411 

harmonious motion, being filled with this power supernally from the 
unpolluted Gods. For because they are moved in a circle they express 
intellect, and the intellectual circulation. But because they are moved 
harmonically, and according to the first and best rytbms, they participate 
of the peculiarity of the guardian Gods. Moreover, the triad of the 
unpolluted leaders is suspended from the summit of the intellectual 
Gods. And that it proceeds from this summit, Plato himself teaches us, 
by placing the first cause of purity in Saturn the king of all the intellec¬ 
tual hebdomad. For purity (ro Kogov) is there primarily, as he informs us 
in the Cratylus, and the first-effective cause of purity, preexists unically 
in Saturn. For on this account also, the Minerval monad, is called Cote 
(a virgin) and the Curetic triad is after this manner celebrated, being 
suspended from the purity in the intellectual father. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 


Concerning the undefiled leaders, thus much we have had to say, 
according to the narration of Plato. The monad therefore, now remains, 
which closes the number of all the intellectual hebdomad, and is the first 
and uniform cause of all division, which must in the next place be 
discussed by us. The sections therefore, of the intellectual Gods which 
are celebrated by all the wise in divine concerns among the Greeks, and 
which obscurely signify the separations in those Gods, are effected in 
them through the seventh monad, which is the cause of division, and 
according to which they separate themselves from the Gods that are 
placed above them, proceeding into another order, are allotted a union 
exempt from subordinate natures, and by themselves have a definite 


. Digitized by v^ooQle 



412 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


order, and a progression bounded according to number. Plato however, 
allows indeed poets that are inspired by Phoebus, to signify things of this, 
kind obscurely and mystically; but he excludes the multitude from 
hearing these things, because they believe without examination in the 
fabulous veils of truth. And this is what Socrates reprobates in Euthy- 
phron, who was thus affected in consequence of being ignorant of divine 
concerns. According to the divinely-inspired intellect of Plato therefore, 
transferring all such particulars to the truth concerning wholes, and 
unfolding the concealed theory which they contain, we shall procure 
for ourselves the genuine worship of a divine nature. For Socrates 
himself in the Cratylus, unfolds to us the Saturnian bonds, and their 
mystic meaning, and in a remarkable manner demonstrates that the 
visions of those ancient and illustrious men do not fall off from the 
truth. 

After the same manner therefore, he will permit his friends to assume 
intellectual sections, and the power which is productive of these, accord¬ 
ing to divinely-inspired conceptions, and will suffer them to survey these 
together with bonds in the intellectual Gods. Farther still, the fable in 
the Gorgias, in a clearer manner separates the empire of Jupiter from 
the Saturnian kingdom, and calls the former the second from, and more 
recent than the latter. What is the cause, therefore, which separates 
these paternal monads? What intellectual power produced the intel¬ 
lectual empire from that which is exempt from it? For it is necessary 
that there should be with the Gods themselves the first-effective fountain 
of division, through which Jupiter also separates himself from the monad 
his father, Saturn from the kingdom of the Heaven, and the natures 
posterior to Jupiter, proceeding into an inferior order, are separated 
from his all-perfect monad. 

Moreover, the deftiiurgus himself in the production of the genera 
posterior to himself, at one and the same time is the cause to them pf 
union, and the source of their all-various divisions. For fabricating the 
soul one whole, he separates it into parts, and all-various powers. And 
in the Timaeus where the demiurgus is said to do this, Plato himself 
does not refuse to call these separations, and essential divisions, sections. 



Digitized by L.OOQ le 



CHAP. XXXVII. 


OF PLATO. 


413 


He likewise cuts off parts from thence, places them in that which is 
between these, and again separates parts from the whole, and thus the 
mixture from which he had cut off these parts, was now wholly con¬ 
sumed. Is it therefore any longer wonderful that the framers of fables 
should denominate the divisions of the intellectual leaders, sections, since 
even Timaeus himself who does not devise fables, but indicates the 
essential progression of souls into multitude, uses as a sign the word 
section ? And does not also Plato in the greatest degree accord with the 
highest of theologists, when he delivers to us the demiurgus glittering 
with intellectual sections ? As therefore the demiurgus, when producing 
the essence of souls, constitutes it according to true being, when gene¬ 
rating life, he generates it according to the life which is in real beings, 
and produces the intellect which is in souls according to the intellect 
which is in himself,—thus also when cutting the essence of the soul from 
itself, and separating it, he energizes according to the sections and 
separations which are in the intellectual order, and according to the one 
and intellectual cause of them. According to Plato, therefore, there is 
a first monad of the total divisions in intellectuals, and together with 
the twofold triads, I mean the paternal and the undefiled, it gives- 
completion to the whole intellectual hebdomad. And we, following 
Plato, and other theologists, concede the same things. 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


Let us now, however, return to the beginning, and demonstrate that 
Parmenides delivers the same things concerning this intellectual hel> 
domad, and that he produces this hebdomadic aion {eternity) and the 
peculiarity of the Gods which is intellectual alone, in continuity with. 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



414 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


the triple orders of the intelligible, and at the same time intellectual 
Gods. And, in the first place, let us survey what he says concerning 
the father of the intellectual Gods, and the undefiled power which is 
co-arranged with him. For after the threefold figure, and the order of 
the Gods which perfects all things, that which is in itself' and in another, 
becomes apparent. These things, however, are demonstrated to be 
signs of the intellectual summit of the intellectual monads. For the 
first father of the Gods in this order, at one and the same time is allotted 
a paternal transcendency with respect to those posterior to him, and is the 
intellect of the first intelligibles. For every imparticipable intellect is 
said to be the intellect of the natures prior to itself, and towards them, 
from whom it is produced, it has an intellectual conversion, and in them 
as first-effective causes it establishes itself. Whence also the demiurgic 
intellect is the intellect of the natures above itself, and proximately indeed 
of its own father, from which likewise it proceeds, but eminently of the 
intelligible unities beyond [Saturn]. 

The first king, therefore, in intellectuals, is both an intellectual father, 
and a paternal intellect. He is, however, the intellectual father indeed 
of the Gods that proceed from himself; but he is the paternal intellect 
of the intelligibles prior to himself. For he is indeed intellectual 
essentially; but he has an intelligible transcendency in intellectuals; 
because he is also established analogous to the unknown order of the 
intelligible, and at the same time, intellectual Gods, and to the occult 
order of the intelligible triads. And as they are expanded above the 
triadic hypostases of the Gods posterior to themselves, thus also the 
father of intellectuals, is a father expanded above the whole intellectual 
hebdomad, in consequence of being a paternal intellect. And analo¬ 
gously to the above-mentioned orders of Gods, he establishes himself in 
them, and is filled from them with paternal and intelligible union. On 
this account also, he is occult, shuts in himself the prolific powers of 
himself, and producing from himself total causes, he again establishes 
them in, and converts them to himself. 


* For tv eunep, it is necessary to read n tmrra. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXXVII. 


OF PLATO. 


415 


These things, therefore, Parmenides also indicating, magnificently 
celebrates this order by these twofold signs, and characterizes the first 
king and father of the intellectual 1 Gods through these peculiarities. 
For he is in himself, and in another. For so far indeed as he is a total 
intellect, his energy is directed to himself, but so far as he is in the intel- 
ligibles prior to himself, he establishes in another the all-perfect intelli¬ 
gence of himself. For, indeed, this subsistence in another, is more 
excellent than the subsistence of a thing in itself; since, as Parmenides 
himself concludes, the subsistence of Saturn in another, pertains to him 
according to whole, but the subsistence of him in himself, according to 
parts. Where, therefore, does the another pre-exist ? And to what order 
of the Gods prior to Saturn does it belong? Or is not this also divinely 
unfolded by our preceptor ? For he says that this another , remarkably 
pertains to that order, according to which the power of difference first 
shines forth, being the progeny of intelligible and paternal power. Hence 
in the first triad the another was occultly, so far as power also had there 
an occult subsistence; but it particularly shines forth in the first order 
of the intelligible, and at the same time, intellectual Gods. For there 
the first difference, the feminine nature of the Gods, and the paternal 
and unvocal power subsist. 

[Saturn therefore] who is the first of the intellectual fathers being 
intelligible, sd far as he is a whole, establishes himself in the intelligible 
triads prior to himself, from which also he is filled with united and occult 
goods. And on this account he is said to be in another. With respect 
to those triads indeed, the another is occultly and according to cause in 
the intelligible [i. e. in the first triad] of intelligibles; but according to 
essence in the intelligible of the intelligible, and at the same time, 
intellectual Gods. All intelligibles therefore are united ; the intelligible 
indeed of the intelligible and intellectual Gods being united to the 
intelligible of the intelligibles prior * to intellectuals; but the intelligible 
of intellectuals, to both. And the subsistence indeed in another, adheres 


' For voijt»v, it is obviously necessary to read voepoov. 
% For wpwrmy it is necessary to read wpo T«y. 


Digitized by LjOOQle 



416 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


to the difference which is according to unical number. But unical 
number is suspended from the occult union of the one being; on which 
account also it is unical. 

Farther still, we also say, that there is a twofold conversion in those 
orders, the one indeed being towards themselves, but the other towards 
the causes of them, (for it neither was nor will be lawful for divine natures, 
to convert themselves in any respect to natures posterior to themselves). 
And the intelligible Gods generate all things stably; but the intelligible 
and intellectual Gods who illuminate imparticipable life, impart the 
original cause of progression to all things; and the intellectual Gods 
arrange and adorn wholes according to conversion. Hence, it is indeed 
necessary that the summit of intellectuals which pours forth from itself 
the whole and all-perfect form of conversion, should be characterized by 
both the convertive symbols, and should be at one and the same time 
converted to itself, and to the natures prior to itself. Hence, because 
indeed, it is converted to itself, it is in itself; but because it is converted 
to the intelligible orders beyond itself, it is in another. For the another 
is more excellent than the.whole intellectual order. As, therefore, the 
summit of intelligibles primarily subsists according to the intelligible 
peculiarity itself, and is firmly established above wholes; and as the 
summit of intelligibles and intellectuals primarily unfolds the peculiarity 
of this order, subsisting according to divine diversity, and being to all 
tilings the cause of all-various progressionsthus also the intelligible 
deity of intellectuals, exhibits from himself according to union the twofold 
forms of conversion, being indeed in another according to the more 
excellent form of conversion, but in himself according to the less excelleut 
form. For to be converted to himself is inferior to the conversion to 
more excellent natures. 

Again, therefore, the subsistence in another , is the illustrious prero¬ 
gative of the intelligible and paternal peculiarity. For the another is 
intelligible, and difference was the power proceeding from the intelligible 
fathers, and from the natures firmly established in them. Hence, that 
which is comprehended in this power, and is filled from it, is paternal 
and intelligible. But the subsistence of a thing in itself is the proper 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



chap, xxxvii. 


OF PLATO. 


417 


sign of the unpolluted monad. For as we have before observed, the 
summits of the two intellectual triads are conjoined. And the monad 
of the guardian triad has eternally established itself in the paternal 
monad, and again establishes in, and converts to itself the natures which 
have proceeded from itself. And the first intellectual father is indeed 
father on account of himself, but on account of the unpolluted [monad,] 
he comprehends in himself the genera of himself, stably recalls them 
[when they have proceeded from him] to himself, and in his own 
allness 1 contains the intelligible multitudes of intellectuals in unpro¬ 
ceeding* union with their monad. 

The first leader, therefore, of the guardian order subsists in conjunction 
with the father. And the father indeed comprehends the unpolluted 
cause, but is comprehended by the first intelligibles. And as he is 
intelligibly established in them, so likewise he has established in himself, 
and constituted about himself, the one summit of the inflexible Gods. 
In the Parmenides, therefore, also the same God appears to us to be a 
pure intellect. Because, indeed, he is intellect, being extended to the 
intelligible place of survey, and on this account being in another, so far 
as he is wholly established in it. But again, because he is pure and 
immaterial, being converted to himself, and shutting in himself all his 
own powers. For the parts of this wholeness, are more partial powers, 
which hasten indeed to a progression from the father, but are on all 
sides established and comprehended by the wholeness. And the whole¬ 
ness itself is a deity, connectedly containing in itself intelligible parts, 
being parturient indeed with intellectual multitude, generating all things 
stably, and again embosoming and collecting to itself its progeny, and 
as the more tragical fables say, absorbing and depositing them in itself. 
For the progeny of it are twofold; some indeed, being, as it were, analyzed 
into it; but others being divided from it. And some abiding in it 
through the first unpolluted monad; but others proceeding according to 
the prolific cause of the intellectual Gods, surmounting the union of the 

i 

■ For lauronjTi read wetrrtnin. * For »x$o<njTa read awx^omjra. 

PrOCt Vol. I. 3 G 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



418 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK YV 


father, and being the primary leaders of another order, and of the: 
arrangement and ornament of secondary natures. The first order there*- 
fore of die intellectual Gods, is thus delivered to us by Parmenides. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


The second order however, after this, is that which comprehends- the' 
middle genera of wholes, is the cause to all things of progression and 
prolific power, and is in continuity with the first order of the intellectual 
Gods. What else therefore than life is every where in continuity with 
the intelligible and true berng? For it is the medium between intellect 
and the intelligible, conjoining intellect to the intelligible, and expressing, 
the intelligible power which collects together the one and being. As the 
intelligible therefore is to the one and hyparxis, so is life to power, and 1 
intellect to being. And as in intelligibles, the one is the object of desire, 
but being aspires after the participation of the one , and power collects 
being to the participation of the one , and the one to a communion with 
being, (for the one here is not imparticipable, and exempt from all power); 
so likewise the intelligible is the object of desire to intellect, but intellect 
is filled with it. And life binds indeed intellect to the intelligible, but 
unfolds the intelligible to intellect. Whence also, I think, those who are 
wise in all divine concerns, call the one and hyparxis intelligible. But that 
which is primarily being, they eall’ the first intellect, conformably to this 
analogy. Life therefore, is the medium between being and intellect, in 
the same manner as power subsists between the one and being. And all 
these, viz. the intelligible, life, and intellect are primarily in intelligibles ; 


1 For *v(tXuovT»f, it is necessary to read avaxoXo emj. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



CHAP. XXXVU1. 


OF PLATO. 


419 


but secondarily in intelligibles and intellectuals; and according to a 
third diminution, in intellectuals. In intelligibles however, being is 
■according to essence; for there intellect is primarily according to cause. 
But in intellectuals, intellect indeed, is according to essence; but the 
natures prior to intellect, are according to participation. Since therefore, 
life is surveyed in a threefold respect, in intelligibles indeed according to 
■cause; but in intelligibles and intellectuals, according to hyparxis; and 
in intellectuals,' according to participation, it is indeed necessary that 
the life which is in the intellectual order, should both be life, and 
participate of the causes generative of life prior of itself. The one 
therefore of the intellectual Gods which is arranged in the middle, is 
not motion, but that which is moved. For prior to this, it has been 
demonstrated by Plato, that all life is motion. For soul is self-motive 
because it is self-vital. And intellect is on this account moved, because 
it has the most excellent life. The first vivific cause, therefore, o£the 
intellectual Gods, is primarily allotted motion. If, however, it was the 
first-effective and highest life, it would be requisite to denominate it 
motion, and not that which is moved. But since it is life as in intel¬ 
lectuals, but is filled from exempt life, it is at the same time motion, and 
that which is moved. Very properly, therefore, does Parmenides 
demonstrate that the one in this order is moved, because it proceeds from 
the causes of all life that are placed above it, and is analogous to the 
middle centre of intelligibles, and to the middle triad of intelligibles and 
intellectuals. Hence also, Socrates in the Phaedrus calls this middle 
triad Heaven; for the whole of it is life and motion. But that which 
is moved, is the middle in intellectuals, as being filled from it, [i. e. from 
the life in the middle triad of intelligibles and intellectuals;] since 
eternity also, which is arranged according to the intelligible wholeness, 
is all-perfect life, and all life, according to Plotinus. There, however, 
the middle is life according to cause; but in intellectuals, it is life 
according to participation; and in the order between these, it is life 


* In the original; after Bt rots voyrot$ xat vosgot$, it is necessary to supply vwaggiv> 

?9Jg0f£ | x. r. X. 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



420 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


according to essence, proceeding indeed from intelligible life, (as Parmenides 
also manifests, characterizing both according to wholeness, though the 
wholeness in intelligibles is different from that which is in intelligibles and 
intellectuals, as we have before observed,) but producing after this, 
intellectual life. For that which is moved, is indeed entirely allied to 
the circulation of the Heaven, and to intellectual and intelligible life. 

Moreover, the permanency which is coordinate with this motion, is not 
one certain genus of being, as neither is motion. For beings indeed are 
naturally adapted to participate of the genera of being; but the super- 
essential goods of the Gods, are expanded above the order of beings. If, 
therefore, Parmenides here, assuming the one itself by itself, surveys in 
this motion and permanency, he evidently does not attribute the ele¬ 
ments of being to the Gods, but assigns to them peculiarities appropriate, 
all-perfect, and transcending wholes. And thus asserting that the one is 
moved and stands still, according to motion, indeed, he delivers the vivific 
hyparxis of the Gods, the generative fountain of wholes, and the leading 
cause of all things. But according to permanency, he delivers the un¬ 
polluted monad coordinated with motion, and which connectedly-contains 
the middle centres of the guardian triad. For as the summit of the 
guardian triad, is united to the first father, according to the first hypos¬ 
tasis, thus also the deity who contains the middle bond of the unpolluted 
leaders, is by a congeniality of nature consubsistent with the motive 
cause of all the Gods, which moves wholes, and is primarily moved from 
itself. And through this deity, the prolific power of this Goddess [[Rhea]} 
is firmly established in herself. Producing likewise, and multiplying all 
things, she is [through this deity] exempt from wholes, and inflexibly 
exists prior to her progeny. With respect, therefore, to motion here and 
permanency, the former indeed is the fountain of the life and generative 
power that proceeds to all things ; but the latter,' establishes the whole 
vivific fountain in itself, but is from thence filled with the prolific rivers of 
life. Parmenides, therefore, delivering to us these things, and the pro¬ 
gression of them, demonstrates fhat t^at which is moved is generated 
from that which is in another, but that which stands still, from that which 

1 Id the original >j Ss is omitted. 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 



CHAP. XXXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


421 


is in itself. For the first monad of the paternal triad constitutes the 
natures posterior to it. And after the same manner, the highest of the 
unpolluted triad, and which is intelligible as in this triad, imparts at one 
and the same time the middle and last monad of the triad. On this 
account, also, motion here is better than permanency. For as a subsist¬ 
ence in another is according to cause more ancient than the subsistence 
of a thing in itself, so likewise that which is moved, is causally more 
ancient than that which is permanent. For the unpolluted Gods, are in 
power subordinate to the fathers, and are comprehended in them. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


TnE third, therefore, to the Saviour, as they say, and let us direct our 
attention to the demiurgic monad, unfolding itself into light together with 
the coordinate Gods it contains. In the first place, then, here also the 
communion of the one with other things is apparent, and we must no 
longer consider the one alone by itself, but according to its habitude 
towards other things. Because, therefore, the demiurgic order produces 
wholes from itself, and arranges and adorns a corporeal nature, it also 
generates all the second and ministrant causes of the Gods. For what 
occasion is there to say that the term other things , is a sign of a corporeal 
condition of being, since formerly the Pythagoreans thought fit to cha¬ 
racterize an incorporeal nature by the one , but indicated to us the nature 
which is divisible about body, through the term others ? In the second 
place, the number of the conclusions [in this part of the Parmenides] is 
doubled* For the one is no longer demonstrated to be alone same, or 
different, as it is to be in itself, and in another, or to be moved, and stand 
still, but it is demonstrated to be the same with itself, and different from 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



jm 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


itself, 1 and to be different from other things, and the same with other 
things. But this twice appeared to us before to be entirely adapted to 
the demiurgic monad, both according to other theologists, and to Socrates 
in the Cratylus, who says that the demiurgic name is composed from 
two words. In the third place, therefore, the multitude of causes is here 
separated, and all the monads of the Gods present themselves to the 
view, according to the demiurgic progression. For the demiurgic order 
is apparent, the prolific power co-ordinate with it, the undefiled monad 
the cause of exempt providence, and the distributive fountain of wholes; 
and together with these, as I may say, all the orders about the demiurgus 
are apparent, according to which he produces and preserves all things, 
and being exempt from the things produced, is firmly established 
in himself, and separates his own kingdom, from the united empire of 
his father. 

How, therefore, and through what particulars do these things become 
apparent? We reply, that the same with itself (for this Parmenides first 
demonstrates) represents to us about the nature of the one , the monadic 
and paternal peculiarity, according to which the demiurgus also subsists. 
Hence, likewise, the one is said to be the same with itself. For the 
another is in the demiurgus according to the transcendency of different 
causes; but the same , appears to be a sign of his proper, viz. of his 
paternal, hyparxis. For being one, and the exempt father and demi¬ 
urgus of wholes, he establishes his proper union in himself. And in this 
one, Parmenides in a remarkable manner shows the uniform, and that 
which is allied to bound. But the same with other things , is the singular 
good of prolific power, and of a cause proceeding to, and pervading 
through all things without impediment. For the demiurgus is present 
to all things which he produces, and is in all things the same, which he 
arranges and adorns, pre-establishing in himself the generative essence 
of wholes. If, therefore, we rightly assert these things, bound and 
infinity subsist in him demiurgically. And the one indeed is in the 
sameness which is separate from other things, but the other 4s in the 


1 After *AA« in the original it it necessary to supply the words xeu touts * tovr®, xou sregov sourow. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


42 ) 


power which generates other things. For every where power is prolific 
of secondary natures. But the principle which subsists according to 
bound, is the supplier of an united and stable hypostasis. 

Moreover, the different from other things , manifests his undefiled purity* 
and his transcendency which is exempt from all secondary natures. For 
the firsLintellect was on this account pure and incorruptible, as Socrates 
says in the Cratyhis, because it is established above coordination or 
communion 1 with all sensible natures. For as some one of the Gods' 
says, he does not incline his power to matter, but is at once exempt from 
all fabrication. But the demiurgic intellect receiving from thence total 
power, and a royal dominion, adorns indeed sensibles, and constitutes' 
the whole erf a corporeal nature. Together however, with prolific 
abundance, and the providential attention to secondary natures, he 
transcends his progeny, and abides in his own accustomed manner, a* 
Timaeus says, through the inflexible guard which subsists with him, and 
the power imparted to him from it, which is uncentaminated with other 
participants. Hence, through the never-failing supply of good, and 
providential energies, and the generation of subordinate natures, he- 
is the same with them. For he is participated by them, and fills his- 
progeny with his own providential care. But through his purity, 
undefiled power, and indexible energies, he is separate from wholes, is 
disjoined from them, and is imparticipable by other things. And as the 
first king of intellectuals is allotted his non-inclination to matter,, through 
the guard which is united to him, and through the undefiled monad; 
and as the vivific goddess possesses her stable and inflexible power 
from the second cause of the guardian Gods; thus also the demiurgic 
intellect preserves a transcendency exempt from other things, and a< 
union separated from multitude, through the third monad of the leaders 
of purity. For the cause of separate providence is a guard coordinate- 
with the demiurgus, who hastens to produce 1 all things, and to pervade 
through all things. But the guard which is the supplier of stable power,- 

V 

1 For xoiwowav, it is necessary to read xo imvutf. 

1 The word wttgttyt w is omitted, in the original, but ought doubtless to be inserted! 


Digitized by v^ooQle 



424 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V. 


is coordinate with the vivific deity, who is moved to the generation of 
wholes. And with the intellect that is multiplied according to intellec¬ 
tual conceptions [i. e. with Saturn,] the guard is coordinate, that imparts 
an undefiled union of the conversion of all his energies to himself. The 
monad, therefore, remains, which is arranged as the seventh of these 
intellectual monads, which is present with, and energizes with all of 
them, but particularly unfolds itself into light in the demiurgic order, 
and which Parmenides also producing for us together with the whole 
demiurgus, defines it in difference , in the same manner as he does the 
undefiled cause in the demiurgus. He says however, that this difference 
separates the demiurgic monad itself from itself. For we have before 
observed that this order is the supplier of separation to all the Gods. 
As therefore, the demiurgus is the same with, himself, through the pater¬ 
nal union, after the same manner he is separated from himself and his 
father through this difference. Whence therefore, does he derive this 
power? From being in himself, says Parmenides, and in another. For 
these were indeed unitedly in the first father, but separately in the third. 
Separation therefore, preexisted there according to cause; but in the 
demiurgus it shines forth, and unfolds the power of itself. 

That the cause however of division, is in a certain respect in the first 
father, Parmenides manifests in the first hypothesis, when he says, “ that 
every thing which is in itself is in a certain respect a duad, and is 
separated from itself.” There however, the duad is occultly; but here it 
subsists more clearly, where also all intellectual multitude shines forth to 
the view. For difference is the progeny of the firmly-abiding duad 
which is there. 1’his therefore separates the demiurgic intellect from the 
Gods prior to it, and divides the monads in it from each other. For if 
so far as it is in another, it is united to the intelligible of itself, but so far 
as it is in itself it is separated from it, because it proceeds according to 
each order of its own intelligible,—if this be the case, it is necessary that 
this difference should be the cause to it of separation from its father. 
All the intellectual monads therefore,' have appeared to us to subsist 
coordinately with each other. And the subsistence indeed, in another is 
the sign of the father. But the subsistence in itself, is tine sign of the 


Digitized by L.OOQ Le 



“CHAP. XXXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


425 


first unpolluted monad. Again, motion is the sign of vivific goodness; 
but permanency of the inflexible power conjoined with motion. And same- 
7 less with itself, and with another , is the sign of the demiurgic peculiarity; 
but the being different from other things, is the sign of the guard about 
the demiurgus. And in the last place, the being different from itself, is 
the sign of the seventh intellectual monad, which is according to cause 
indeed, and occultly in the first father, but is allotted its hypostasis more 
clearly in the demiurgus. Parmenides likewise appears to me, when 
dividing the signs of fabrication, to have unfolded in the middles 
themselves, the peculiarities of the undefiled monad, and of the dividing 
monad, so far as they also are in a certain respect comprehended in the 
fabrication. For he shows in the first of the conclusions that the one is 
the same with itself; in the second, that it is different from itself; in the 
third, that it is different from other things ; and in the fourth that it is 
the same with other things. For he co-arranges indeed, the dividing 
power with the paternal union; but connects with a transcendency 
separate from secondary natures, the providential cause of them. For in 
the Gods, it is necessary that union should exist prior to separation, and 
and a purity unmingled with secondary natures, prior to a providential 
inspection of them ; through which likewise, being every where, they are 
no where, being present with all things, they are exempt from all things, 
and being all things, they are not any of their progeny. 


END OF VOL. I. 


Proc. 


Vol. I. 


3 H 


Digitized by L: )OQle 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



PROCLUS 

ON 

THE THEOLOGY OF PLATO. 


Proc. 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



Digitized by 


Google 



/ 


V.' ' 


SIX BOOKS OF PROCLUS 

platonic &ticte*0or, 

ON THE THEOLOGY OF PLATO, 

TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK $ 

TO WHICH 

A SEVENTH BOOK IS ADDED, 

IN ORDER TO SUPPLY THE DEFICIENCY OF ANOTHER BOOK ON THIS SUBJECT, 

WHICH WAS WRITTEN BY PROCLUS, BUT SINCE LOST. 

ALSO, A TRANSLATION FROM THE GRREK OF 

PROCLUS’ ELEMENTS OF THEOLOGY. 

TO WHICH ARE ADDED 

A TRANSLATION OF THE TREATISE OF PROCLUS, 

SDn prominence anm jFate j 

A TRANSLATION OF EXTRACTS FROM HIS TREATISE, ENTITLED, 

TEN DOUBTS CONCERNING PROVIDENCE; 


A TRANSLATION OF EXTRACTS FROM HIS TREATISE 

ON THE SUBSISTENCE OF EVIL,; 

As preserved in the Bibliotheca Gr. of Fabricius. 

BY THOMAS TAYLO R. 

tmv, ktti, xar Tig tyy iXa Xoyce, 

Ztvg, xai ftoi, fiporua Xiw<romg wetSt). Euripides. 

There are, there are, though laugh die scoffer may, 

Jove and the Gods, who mortal ills survey. 

mm, tun Stoi mWei, xeu xugioi toXXo Corinth. I, Cap. 8. v, 6. 

As there be Gods many, and Lobds many. 

TWO* VOLUMES. 

VOL. II. 

LONDONS 

PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, 

By A. J. Valpy, Tooke't Court, Chancery Lane. 

AND SOLD BY MESSRS. LAW AND Co.; LONGMAN AND Co.; BALDWIN AND Co.; 

AND ALL OTHER BOOKSELLERS, 

1816, 


Digitized by 


Google 





\ 


I 


Digitized by 


Google 



PROCLUS, 

THE PLATONIC SUCCESSOR, 


ON 

®j>eolog|> of $lato. 


BOOK VI. 


CHAPTER I. 

The hebdomatic aion (eternity) therefore, of the intellectual Gods has 
been through these things celebrated by us, following the mystic 
conceptions of Plato. But after this, let us in the next place con¬ 
template the multiform progressions of the ruling orders, and refer the 
one union of them to the intellectual theory of Parmenides. For this 
order is woven together in continuity with the demiurgus and father of 
wholes, proceeds from, is perfected by, and converted to him, according 
to his perfective power. Hence also, it is necessary to connect the 
narration about the^jgovernors of the universe, with the discussion 
concerning the demiurgus, and to assimilate words to the things of which 
they are the interpreters. For all the series of the ruling Gods, are 
collected into the, intellectual fabrication as into a summit, and subsist 
Proc . Vol. II. A 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK vr. 


2 

about it. And as all the fountains are the progeny of the intelligible 
father, and are filled from him with intelligible union, thus likewise, 
all the orders of the principles or rulers, are suspended according to 
nature from the demiurgus, and participate from thence of an intellectual 
life. And let no one be offended with me, on hearing in this place the 
names of fountain and principle, nor accuse these names, as not at all 
pertaining to Plato. For, as we have before observed, Plato does not 
leave unnoticed any one of these mystic names. But in his discussions- 
about souls, when he denominates them the fountains and principles of 
motion, he at the same time indicates the difference between the pecu¬ 
liarity of fountain, and the peculiarity of principle, and the inferiority 
of principle with respect to the exempt transcendency of fountain. 

He likewise manifests that the self-vital extends to all things as far 
as to soul, from fountain ; but the unbegotten from principle. And this 
is because the fontal genus indeed of the Gods is self-begotten, and 
first-effective, and produces other things from itself; but the ruling 
genus of the Gods, and which has the relation of a principle, though it 
proceeds from the fountains, and is allotted a more partial order among 
beings, yet it is expanded above every thing which is generated, and 
neither is in a certain respect connected with generated natures, nor 
communicates with a sensible nature. For the mundane Gods, indeed, 
are in a certain respect generated; whence also, they are denominated 
generated by Timaeus, and this whole world is likewise called by him a 
generated god. But the ruling Gods, and who have the relation of 
principles, are perfectly exempt from generated natures, and are not 
co-arranged with them. Hence also, the unbegotten is most particularly 
adapted to them. Those Gods, however, who preside over the liberated 
dominion being the media between the unbegotten and generated Gods, 
come into contact indeed with the latter, but do not give completion to 
the choir of mundane Gods. Hence, they are in a certain respect both 
generated and unbegotten. The Gods, therefore, .who are the summits 
of super-mundane natures, and the rulers of wholes, are alone allotted an 
unbegotten subsistence in the orders that proceed from- the demiurgus. 
Hence, likewise, this peculiarity is from thence derived to souls. For, 



Digitized by 


Google 


I 



CHAP. II. 


OF PLATO. 


3 


as Plato says, principle is unbegotten. For it is necessary that every 
thing which is generated should be generated from a principle, but that 
the principle should not be generated from any thing. 

At the same time, therefore, it is manifest through these things, how 
the [[ruling] principles proceed from the Gods prior to them. For they 
are not allotted a progression from them according to motion, nor in 
short, according to mutation; but the orders of the ruling Gods subsist 
by their very being, according to their prolific power, and unenvying 
and exuberant will; and the self-begotten power of the intellectual 
Gods, gives to the principles also the first generation from itself. 
Whether, therefore, some one is willing to adopt these, or other names of 
the divine orders, we shall consider it as a thing of no consequence. But 
receiving the peculiarity of them, whatever it may be, according to the 
rumours of theologists, we shall transfer their mystic tradition to the 
Platonic narration. For thus we shall make the investigation of what 
follows conformable to what has been before said, and what we assert 
will be adapted to the things themselves. 


CHAPTER II. 


An AiN therefore, let us assume the principles of the science concerning 
these Gods, and demonstrate that the theory pertaining to them is 
consequent to the first causes. The intelligible Gods therefore, surpass 
wholes according to supreme transcendency, and primarily participate 
the union and divine light, in which all the Gods perfectly establish their 
hypostases. They likewise unically produce all things from themselves, 
according to the paternal and exuberant will of the communication of 


Digitized by boogie 



4 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VL. 


\ 


good, and preestablish in themselves occultly the first effective causes 
of secondary natures. For the whole and common measures of forms 
presubsist in them, and they comprehend according to one cause the 
uniform genera of being, and prior to these, bound and infinity, from 
which the superessential orders of the Gods generate all beings. 

But in the second rank after these, the intelligible and at the same 
time intellectual Gods subsist, being divided indeed according to the 
same number, and preserving the measure of the all-perfect triad in a 
second orderj but producing into- multitude the unities of intelligibles, 
and transferring the unical boundaries of those triads into essential 
hypostases, and which participate of the one. Instead of powers however, 
which are whole, without separation, and occult, they are transferred into 
divided causes, and which proceed far from the one. 

Again, in the third rank after the intelligible Gods, those that are 
called intellectual are arranged at one and the same time indeed, 
proceeding into an order diminished with respect to that which is prior to 
it, and changing the number according, to which they subsist. For 
instead of the perfective triads, they are intellectually divided according 
to hebdomads. And with respect to the hebdomads, the division of 
them into two triads, is supernally derived from the first triads ; but the 
terminations of them into monads, express the ends of those orders. For 
every thing which is the peculiarity of difference and multitude, proceeds, 
from thence to all the genera. 

Again therefore, from these, the multiform’ orders of the ruling, 
principles are generated, being divided indeed, analogous to all the- 
intelligible Gods, and to those that are prior to these intellectual Gods* 
viz. to those that are called intelligible- and at the same time intellectual; 
They have however, their proximate and peculiar hypostasis from the 
one fabrication; but their united generation together with intellectuals, 
from the third triad of intelligibles. For that all-perfect cause produces 
also from itself, the whole orders of the Gods. Hence likewise Parmeni¬ 
des denominates it infinite multitude, aa unfolding into light all the genera 
of being,-and all the orders of divine natures, and a» being sufficient 
through one afi-perfect power to the generation of wholes. 


Digitized by 


Google 



f 


CHAP. II. OP PLATO. 5 

Farther still, we may also assert this of these leading and rnling Gods, 
that the intellectual monads make their progression according to imparti- 
cipable intellect, in the same manner as the Gods prior to them illuminate 
imparticipable life, and prior to all things, the intelligible Gods constitute 
about themselves truly existing and intelligible essence. For every God 
is participated indeed by beings, and on this account falls short of the 
unity which is imparticipable and exempt from all things. But a 
different deity proceeds according to a different peculiarity. And some 
of the Gods indeed, being defined according to the ineffable good itself, 
comprehend the intelligible causes of wholes. But others produce the 
vivific powers, and connectedly contain the first genera of the Gods* 
Others again, unfold into light all the intellectual involutions, and preside 
over the participants of the unities that produce divided hypostases. 
Since therefore, the intellectual Gods primarily subsist according to 
imparticipable intellect, and on this account are denominated intellectual, 
the orders that first proceed immediately after them, illuminate the 
summit of participated intellect, and are intellectual indeed, as with 
reference to the inferior orders, and which are now divided according to 
providential energies about the world. But they are secondary to the 
first intellectuals, and are allotted a more partial government; just as 
the first of intellectuals, are indeed intelligible with respect to the Gods 
produced from them, but fall short of the union of first intelligibles. As 
therefore, they unfold into light the first and imparticipable life, which 
the intelligible monads preestablished in themselves according to cause 
only, and occultly; (for all the causes of wholes are pre-assumed there 
according to one ineffable union) after the same manner also, these Gods, 
shining forth the first of the intellectuals, express the Gods from whom 
they derive their subsistence, and are intellectual indeed^ but produce the 
pure, uniform, and total hyparxis of the fathers, into a secondary, and 
multiplied progression, which is divided about themselves, and into a 
diminution of essence. By first emissions also from the first-effective, 
and self-subsistent fountains, they shine forth similarly to the intellectual 
Gods. 

Hence also, they hind to themselves the ruling and generative causes 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



6 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 




of all the partial orders, and which exist prior to these orders both in 
dignity and power. And in short, they have the same transcendency 
with respect to the other Gods [subordinate to them,] which the intel¬ 
ligible Gods have to those that are produced from them. For the 
intelligible Gods being expanded above all the intellectual genera,' have 
preestablished the intelligible hyparxis, by itself, unmingled and pure; 
and these ruling Gods have also established in themselves the supermun¬ 
dane union, and this peculiarity perfectly exempt from mundane natures. 
And as in the imparticipable and total hypostases, there is indeed, the 
intelligible genus, itself by itself; there is also the intellectual which is 
foreign from this; and there is that which is collective of both, which is 
celebrated as subsisting in the middle, and is denominated intelligible 
and at the same time intellectual,—thus also, in these partial orders, the 
peculiarity of the supermundane Gods, preexists by itself exempt from 
the parts of the universe, uncoordinated with this world, and on all sides 
comprehending it according to cause. 

But the essence of all the mundane Gods is allotted the third order, 
being proximately carried as in a vehicle in the parts of the world, giving 
completion to this one and only begotten God, and connectedly-con¬ 
taining the different progressions in it. The government however of the 
liberated Gods is allotted the middle bond of the extremes, possessing 
sovereign authority over all [mundane] natures, and in a certain respect 
communicating with the divisions about the world, but unitedly ascend¬ 
ing at the same time into many of its parts, and collecting the divided 
pumbers of the mundane Gods into unical bounds, and more simple 
causes. Every genus likewise, of the mundane Gods is spread under 
this liberated order, being on all sides connected, contained, and 
perfected by iti and filled with the first of goods. If therefore, there is 
any thing supermundane in the Gods, and if it imparts a certain definite 
hyparxis of essence to them, and defines a certain peculiarity of powers 
and a transcendency of order by itself, we must admit that it primarily 
subsists in the ruling Gods, being derived to them from the intellectual 

* For yoycw, it is necessary to read yimv. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. II. 


OF PLATO. 


7 


fathers, unmingled with a mundane nature. And this supermundane 
order indeed is universal, as with reference to all the partible rivers of 
the Gods, but it is partial, as with reference to the all-perfect, one and 
whole kingdom of the intellectual Gods. For it is every where necessary 
that the leading causes of secondary orders, should be in a certain 
respect assimilated to the terminations of the orders established above 
them. 

And thus the progression of the Gods is one and continued, originating 
supernally from the intelligible and occult unities, and ending in the last 
division of a divine cause. For, as in sensibles the most gross and solid 
bodies, are not immediately con nascent with the etherial expanse, but 
those which are simple and more immaterial than others, are proximately 
spread under the celestial periods, and of containing bodies, those which 
are primarily 1 contained, are allotted a greater communion than those 
which are situated remotely, and are conjoined to them through other 
media; thus also, in the divine essences prior to the world, the second 
orders are in continuity with those prior to them. The progressions of 
beings however, are completed through similitude. But the terminations 
of the higher orders are united to the beginnings of second orders. And 
one series and indissoluble order, extends from on high, through the 
surpassing goodness of the first cause, and his unical power. For because 
indeed, he is one, he is the supplier of union; but because he is the good , 
he constitutes things similar to him, prior to such as are dissimilar* 
And thus all things are in continuity with each other. For if this 
continuity were broken, there would not be union. And things dissimilar 
to each other being placed in a consequent order, that which is more 
similar to the principle, would not have a more ancient and honourable 
progression into being. If therefore, we assert these things rightly, it is 
necessary that the first hypostases of the partial orders should be total, 
according to an intellectual transcendency which they are allotted m the 
divided genera of the Gods, and thus that they should causally compre¬ 
hend all secondary natures, and conjoin them to the Gods prior to* 

’ It appears to me tbatwgmws is in this place emitted in the original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



8 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


themselves. The order of the ruling Gods therefore, is in continuity with 
the kingdom of the intellectual Gods. Hence also, Parmenides proxi- 
xnately constitutes it from the demiurgic monad. These things however, 
will afterwards be apparent. 


CHAPTER III. 


Fob the present, however, let us survey the common peculiarity of 
the whole of this order, that we may to the utmost of our power admire 
the divinely-inspired intellection of Plato, which unfolds to us the most 
mystic of dogmas. The progression, therefore, of these Gods is said 
to be supermundane, as we have observed, and to have the second 
dominion in wholes, after the intellectual Gods. But being defined 
according to the hyparxis itself of this essence, it unfolds indeed the 
united nature of the intellectual Gods; but produces into multitude the 
causes comprehended in them. It also arranges and adorns the more 
partial genera of beings, from total and first-effective monads, divides 
them according to the best' order, and co-arranges them to each other. 
But it collects and binds all secondary natures* and inserts in them an 
admirable communion of essences and powers. Besides this, likewise, it 
conjoins all the natures posterior to itself, to those prior to itself, and 
calls forth the beneficent will of exempt causes, into the providential 
care of secondary natures, but establishes the hyparxes of subordinate iu 
first essences, and imparts to all beings continuity, and one series of 
hypostasis. Conferring also all these benefits, it comprehends in itself 
the supply of them according to one peculiarity. For it assimilates all 

’ For agi<rr*> I read agjo-njv. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. III. 


OF PLATO. 


9 


things, subordinate natures, to those prior to them, and co-ordinate 
natures, to each other. And through this similitude, atone, and the 
same time, indeed, it unfolds the essences and multiform powers of 
them, and is the collector of many things into union, and of divided 
natures, into the divine communion of goods. 

From hence, therefore, the orders of different images primarily subsist. 
For every image is produced according to a similitude to its paradigm. 
But that which assimilates secondary to first natures, and binds all things 
through similitude, especially pertains to these Gods. For what else is 
able to assimilate the world itself, and every thing in the world to their 
paradigms, butthis supermundane genus of Gods? For all intellectuals 
constitute the natures in the world according to one union, And an all¬ 
perfect providence, and impartibly preside over the essence of them. 
But the liberated genus of Gods, in a certain respect now comes into 
contact with the world, and co-operates with the, mundane Gods. It is 
necessary,therefore, that tbeassimilating nature should every where accord¬ 
ing to essence indeed lie exempt from the things assimilated, and which are 
impressed through similitude; but that it should adorn secondary 
natures with separation, and a division according to species. For how* 
would it be possible for it to assimilate some things to others, and 
appropriately conjoin all things to their paradigms, unless it proceeded 
as far as to the last forms, and separated all those things from each other, 
of which there are immoveable pre-existing causes ? For the demiurgus, 
indeed, appears to assimilate all things to himself, as Timaeus says, being 
good, he produced all things similar to himself on account of his 
beneficent will. He likewise imparts to the world the order of time, by 
this mean rendering the world more similar to intelligible animal. And 
iu short, on account of the similitude of the universe to its paradigm, he 
produces all things, and perfects his own fabrication. 

In the demiurgus, however, all things, and likewise the second genera 
of Gods, are according to cause. And as he is the plenitude of all the 
natures prior to himself, thus also, he comprehends the united causes 
of the natures posterior to himself. Hence, he perfects the universe, 
energizes assimilatively, vivifies wholes, is the father of souls, the plastic 

Proc. Vol. II. B 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



10 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


book vr. 


framer of bodies, the supplier of harmony, the author of bonds, the 
cause of the impartible and partible genera, and the maker of all figures. 
And these things, indeed, he constitutes unically; but the Gods posterior 
to him in a divided manner. Let not, however, any one assert, that 
the assimilative nature is primarily in the demiurgus, but pet him rather 
say] that existence is present to the demiurgus according to sameness.' 
But if from him similitude subsists in all things, and his very being is in: 
sameness, as Parmenides teaches us, we must indeed admit, that such a* 
genus of Gods [as the assimilative]] is proximate to him, which also first 
unfolds his whole fabrication, and inserts it in secondary natures, but is- 
essentially different from and posterior to him, and falls short of the* 
first-effective principle of all things whieh he contains. In short, the 
demiurgic monad, and all the multitude co-arranged with it, presides^ 
over the similitude of wholes, uniformly, originally, and impartibly ; but 
the order of the ruling Gods, divides indeed that which is united in the- 
demiurgic fabrication, expands that which is total in the energy of the- 
intellectual Gods, and produces into variety the simplicity of their 
providence. Hence similitude extends from these to all* the natures ini 
the world, and to the first, middle, and last forms of life. For that 
which is assimilated presides over a second form of communion with, 
appropriate principles, on account of progression from causes. 

If, however, you are wilting by investigating each particular to survey 
the providence pervading to all things through similitude, you .will find* 
that the whole world is the image of the perpetual Gods on account of 
this, and also that all the wholenesses in it are in a similar manner- 
suspended from, their paradigms, that whole souls always dance about? 
the intelligible, and that the more excellent genera that follow the Gods, 
and such of our souls as are happy, are on account of similitude extended 
from the wandering produced by generation, to their proper fountain.. 
In short, you will find, that all progressions and conversions are effected 
and perfected on account of the cause of similitude. For every thing, 
which proceeds subsists through- similitude to its generator, and every 

1 For xttTct twro> it is necessary to read xara t««tok* 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. Ill 


OP PLATO. 


11 


thing which is converted, in consequence of being assimilated to its pro¬ 
per principles, makes a conversion to them. Moreover, similitude eter¬ 
nally guards the never-failing nature of all the forms in the world, 
•extending supernally from the Gods themselves. And the stable simili¬ 
tude of forms, brings back again to the circle of generation, the unstable 
mutation of particulars, not only in immaterial, but also in material forms* 
which are conversant with mutability. And it closes in a finite period, 
the infinite variety of generated natures. But it refers the all-various 
division of reasons [i. e. of productive principles] to their united and 
first-effective cause. And on this account, the world being perpetually 
all-perfect, is completely filled by total genera and species. Hence also, 
it is similar to intelligible animal, possessing and comprehending all such 
things after the manner of an image, as all-perfect animal possesses para- 
digmatically. 

We must not, therefore, suppose that the genus of similitude is some¬ 
thing small, and extended only to a few things, since it is the cause of 
perfection to the whole world, gives completion through similitude to its 
first generation and self-sufficiency, and supplies from itself, its entire 
comprehension of all things. But neither must we admit that a produc¬ 
tion of this kind, is to be referred to one certain intellectual form. For 
that which extends ' to all the superessential, essential, psychical, incor¬ 
poreal, and corporeal genera, exists prior to all forms -and genera, and to 
incorporeal and corporeal causes. For the Gods in the world, do not 
proceed assimilated to their causes, on account of the intellectual form 
of similitude. Nor on account of the paradigmatic idea of the dissimilar, 
are the superessential unities of the Gods divided, the intellectual nature 
separated from itself, and the psychical essences allotted a progression in 
order; but, I think, that both similitude and dissimilitude have their hy¬ 
postasis analogous to intellectual sameness and difference. And as they 
are primarily in the Gods themselves, but secondarily in intellectual 
forms, being unfolded into light together with the hyparxes of the Gods, 
thus also, this similitude and dissimilitude, are allotted indeed a prece- 


* For htxxgivov, it is necessary to read hxumv. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



12 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VH 


daneous hyparxis in the superessential unities, but a successive hyparxis 
in the descending progressions of beings. And on this account Parme* 
nides, as he evinced that the one is moved and stands still, is same and 
different, separate from being, thus also he demonstrates to us- the similar 
and the dissimilar in the uniform hyparxes themselves of the Gods. A'nd 
Socrates indeed presents to our view in the beginning of the dialogue* 
the similar and the dissimilar, and defines each paradigm of these to be 
separate, and exempt from the many, similars and dissimilars. But Par* 
menides recurring to the superessential hypostases of wholes, produces 
beings from thence, according to the peculiarities of the first causes. 

For as every thing in generation is adorned with forms from essences*- 
thus also the peculiarities of hyparxes extend to all essences from super¬ 
essential natures. For generation is the image of essence; but essence 
has its progression according to superessential union. The genus of simi¬ 
litude, therefore, is primarily in the Gods; but is divided secondarily in 
intellectual forms. And on this account the progressions of the whole of 
things are according to similitude; but the conversions of all things to 
their principles are through similitude, it being said that all things pro¬ 
ceed, and receive the power of conversion from divinity. The intelligible 
paradigm indeed preassumes in itself the occult cause of the assimilative 
Gods. . For it is not sluggish from itself, and established unprolific. But 
it produces all things essentially assimilated to itself, constitutes thenv 
paternally, and is by its very being alone. It likewise imparts by illu¬ 
mination hyparxis to secondary natures, and the power of assimilation to 
itself. But again, that which is demiurgic of the divine genera, being 
suspended from the precedaneous cause of the intelligible paradigm, and 
adhering to, and energizing about it, assimilates indeed all things both to 
itself and the paradigm, but does not define its proper hyparxis in the- 
genus of similitude. For it comprehends intellectually and unitedly the 
causes of the similitude of wholes, and employs such like genera of Gods 
as ministrant to .the generation of secondary natures. But the tribe of 
rulingGods, being wholly arranged in the partible orders,but first unfolding 
the intellectual fabrication of the father, is suspended indeed from him/ 

1 For WT9,1 read «un». 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. IV, 


01-' PLATO. 




through the similitude of the causes preexisting in him, but extends and- 
expands all things to the demiurgic union. It converts, however, die 
partible genera of the Gods to impartible intellectual sameness. But it 
assimilates the proceeding orders to the intelligible paradigms, and gives- 
completion to the one series of all beings. Very properly, therefore, do 
those who are wise in divine concerns assert, that the last triad of intel- 
ligibles is the cause of the fontal and ruling Gods, and that the whole 
series* of rulers subsists about the intellectual father. For die genus of 
assimilating natures pertains to the perfect paradigm, just* as the genus of* 
things assimilated pertains to the extremity of the intellectual order. For- 
. all things are assimilated to the first paradigm, and the conversion of all* 
secondary natures to it is through similitude. And with the demiurgus* 
of wholes, the cause of intellectual sameness and difference is united, being: 
partibly unfolded into light through the power of similitude and- dissimi¬ 
litude, and producing the one and whole form of that fabrication in all 
beings through divided energies,.and the separations of essence. Through* 
these things, therefore, we have reminded the reader r that the first* 
and most total of the partible divine genera,* and which is united to the* 
intellectual orders, is allotted the assimilative peculiarity, and being: 
defined according to this, conjoins all things to the demiurgic monad ;• 
and [we have also shown] how it proceeds from the intelligible paradigm* 
to all mundane natures, and is the primary origin of their generation. 


CHAPTER IV: 


Again, it follows In addition to what has been said, that we should- 
separate all the assimilative powers, properly arrange them, and survey 
them proceeding about the one essence of the Gods. Plato, therefore. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



u 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


asserts that the first and most ruling of these powers,, are those that unfold 
the intellectual production of the father, and expand it to all the divided 
•orders of beings. But that the second, are those which are connective of 
wholes, and which preserve one series and indissoluble connexion of the 
divine progressions. And that the third, are those which are the primary 
leaders of perfection to all secondar}- natures, and produce through 
similitude self-perfect conversions to principles. But next to these he 
arranges those powers that extend all the proceeding genera of the Gods 
to impartible monads, and which preexist as the collectors of partible 
natures. Farther still, he likewise asserts that other assimilative powers 
give subsistence to the divided genera, and are definitely the suppliers of 
existence and essence to first and last natures. And besides all these, 
that other powers are the causes of undefiled distribution, and of perpe¬ 
tually stable perfection. 

Moreover, together with these, I should arrange the authors of prolific 
production, and those that pour upon and distribute to all secondary 
natures the partible rivers of life. And farther still, after these, I should 
arrange the powers that elevate secondary beings, cut off every thing 
material, confused, and inordinate, and are the suppliers of all goods. 
For there is no one of all the beautiful things in the world that does not 
proceed from this* order of Gods, which fills its participants with divine 
goods. Or whence indeed is the world always established in its proper 
principles, whence does its circulation remain immutable, and whence is 
the universe connected by indissoluble bonds? For the ends of its 
periods become the principles of the subsequent revolutions. But the 
circle of generation imitates the invariable supply of the celestial orbs, 
and all things are converted to more divine natures. Matter, indeed, is 
assimilated to beings, through the last representations of the production 
of form. But that which is moved in a confused and disordered manner, 
is circularly led to order and bound by demiurgic reasons, being assimi¬ 
lated to natures which always subsist with invariable sameness and per¬ 
manency. Things, however, which are borne along in a diversified gene- 


1 Instead of sx nj; 8i«xoa-/xij(r«of, it is necessary to read nc tuvdjs &*xo<rpj<re«>f. 


Digitized by boogie 



chap. nr. 


15 


OF PLATO 

ration, and multiform mutations, are as9ij»ilated to the celestial orbs, and 
being moved in an all-various manner,.follow the revolutions of the hea¬ 
venly bodies. But the convolutions of the heavens, represent as m intages 
die psychical periods; and the circulations of the spheres inscribe as it were' 
the intellections of the Celestial souls. Time itself likewise, which- pro¬ 
ceeds according to number, and forma a circular dance, is in a certain 
respect 1 assimilated to stable intellections, and to [eternity3 the measure* 
of all intelligibles. For the whole of this time was generated an image 1 
of eternity abiding in one, since it is evolved after the same manner 
according to number. All things, therefore, are allotted a progression 
into existence, and the distribution of perfection according to measure*, 
from the assimilative leaders, and connect the essence of themselves- 
through similitude. 

Moreover, this order of Gods in a particular manner, presides over the* 
sympathy of things in the world, and their communion with each other,. 
For all things concur with each other through similitude, and communi¬ 
cate the powers which they possess. And first natures, indeed, impart, 
by illumination the gift of themselves to secondary natures, in unenvying 
abundance. But effects are established in their causes. An indissoluble' 
connexion, likewise, and communion of wholes and a colligation of agents, 
and patients, are surveyed in the world. For in effects their generative* 
causes subsist through similitude. And in causes, the progeny that pro¬ 
ceed from them are contained according to comprehension. All things,, 
likewise, are in each, other, and similitude is the collector of all things.. 
On this account, also* celestial, impart to sublunary natures,, an. exu¬ 
berant and unenvying communication of their own effluxions ; but sub¬ 
lunary, being in a certain respect assimilated to celestial natures, partici¬ 
pate of an appropriate perfection. A chain likewise extends from on. 
high, as far as to the last of things, secondary, always expiessing the* 
powers of the natures prior to them, progression indeed diminishing the- 
similitude, but all things* at the same time, and even such as most ob¬ 
scurely participate of existence, bearing a similitude to the first causes,. 

1 For o»u>f, it is necessary to read *a;, and in consequence of. this, the sentence, should notbe*. 
as it is in the original, interrogatory.. 


/ 


Digitized by boogie 



16 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


and being co-passive with each other, and with their original causes. For 
■there is naturally a two-fold similitude in things which have proceeded 
from their causes. For they are assimilated to each other, according to 
their progression from the one , and their conversion again to it, and they 
are also assimilated to their ruling and first-effective causes. And through 
the former similitude, indeed, the elements conspire, are connascent, and 
are mingled with each other. But through the latter, they hasten to their 
proper principles, and are conjoined with their paradigms. ' On this 
account, all things which participate of the solar effluxion, are suspended 
from the circulation of the sun; I mean, not only the genera that are 
more excellent than us, but likewise the number of souls, animals, plants, 
-and stones. But all things adhere to the Mercurial circulation, which 
receive the peculiarity of this God. And the like takes place in the other 
{mundane] Gods. For all of them are leaders and rulers in the universe. 
And many orders indeed of angels dance round them; many numbers of 
demons; many herds of heroes; the copious multitude of partial souls; 
the multiform genera of mortal animals; and the various powers of plants. 
And all things indeed aspire after their leaders, and in all things there- is 
an impression of their proper monad ; but in some this impression is more 
clear, and in others more obscure; since similitude also subsists in a 
greater degree, in the first progeny, but is obscured in the middle, and 
last progeny, according to the ratio of progression. Images, therefore, 
and paradigms, are allotted their Hypostasis on account of collective 
similitude. And every thing on account of similitude is familiar to itself, 
and tp coordinate natures. But there is an unshaken friendship between 
the coordinate natures in the world through the presence of similitude; 
since contraries, also, and things which are most distant from each other, 
are irreprehensibly bound through it, and connected so as to produce the 
perfection of the universe. 

In short, therefore, we may say, that the assimilative leaders of wholes, 
produce and generate all things from themselves. For progressions are 
through similitude; and every thing which is constituted, is wont to be 
assimilated to its generative cause. The assimilative rulers also convert 
all things to their principles; for every conversion is through similitude. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CtfAP. V. 


OF PLATO. 


17 


They likewise bind coordinate natures to each other. For the commu- 
' nion of the one cause [of all] produces similitude indeed in its partici¬ 
pants, but from this, It inserts in them an indissoluble connexion. They 
also cause all things to sympathize, be friendly, and familiar with each 
other; exhibiting indeed, through participation, more elevated in more 
abject natures; but subordinate in more perfect essences, through causal 
comprehension. They likewise extend series and periods from on high, as 
far as to the last of things. And they produce monads indeed, into dimi¬ 
nution, through appropriate numbers; but collect multitudes into union, 
through communion according to essence. They also adapt wholes to 
parts; but comprehend parts in wholes. And things imperfect, indeed, 
they perfect, through contact with ends; but they guard immutably 
perfect natures, through a similar cause. They likewise lead into definite 
order, by similar forms and reasons, the sea of dissimilitude; but they 
terminate the very-routable generation of sublunary natures, by stable 
paradigms. Thus much, therefore, we have to say in common concerning 
the order of divine natures, which we assert to be proximate indeed to the 
intellectual Gods, but to be' the leader, and cause of the assimilation of 
all secondary natures to their proper principles.' 


CHAPTER V. 


In the next place, I wish prior to the theory of Parmenides to 
teach, what the Gods are, possessing this peculiarity, of whom Plato 
makes mention in other dialogues. For perhaps thus the doctrine of 
Parmenides will become more credible, and more manifest to reason. 
The ruling Gods, therefore, are divided in a threefold manner; and some 
of them indeed are united to the intellectual kings, and extend the whole 
Proc. Vol. II. C 


Digitized t 


Google 



18 ON THB THEOLOGY BOOK VL. 

series under themselves to a union with those kings ; but others give 
completion to the middle genera, and distribute the aH-perfect progres¬ 
sion of these Gods; and others close the end of this order, and unfold the 
powers of these divinities to secondary natures. This being the case, 
those Gods that are arranged in the summits, do not immediately partici¬ 
pate of the similitude of the assimilative Gods; but some of them are in 
a certain respect established above it, and are essentially connected witb 
the intellectual Gods; but others proceed from it, and are mingled with 
the secondary genera. Hence, those only who give completion to the 
middle breadth, genuinely define in themselves the hyparxis of this order. 
We, therefore, likewise beginning from these, shall embrace by a reasoning, 
process the whole theory of Plato. For we shall find in these, the perfect 
measures of the ruling order, perfectly delivered to us by him. 

Again, therefore, let us refer the whole progression of these middle orders, 
to a triad, it being allotted a division of this kind supernally, from the 
three intellectual fathers. Hence, indeed, this whole order of Gods, is. 
Suspended from the demiurgic monad. But the demiurgic intellect 
produces indeed some of them from itself and the intellectual lather; but 
Others from itself, 1 and the whole vivification; and others from appropriate 
rivers. Hence, also, of the Gods that thus derive their subsistence, some 
are allotted a paternal dignity, and are ruling fathers ; but others are 
allotted a generative; and others an elevating and convertive dignity. 
But since a certain order of the Unpolluted Gods is conjoined with each 
of the intellectual kings, it is indeed necessary that in the ruling Gods 
also, a second progression from them should shine forth to the view, and 
that on this account the guardian order should be connascent with the 
above-mentioned triple orders, being appropriately consubsistent with 
each of them; viz. paternally indeed in the first; but vivifically in the 
middle; and intellectually and convertively in the third order. And thus 
it is necessary that this whole order of Gods should be divided by pater¬ 
nal powers, and prolific progressions, by powers that lead upward all 

* Prom the version ofPortus, it appears necessary after the words rovg fu*, of '«ww«, to sup- 
-ply the words TN WfW iwtrpof, *eof Si mf'tmnotrrt x, r. A. 


Digitized by boogie 


CHAP. VL 


OF PLATO. 


19 


secondary natures, and by those that are of an qndefiled guardian cha¬ 
racteristic. For being allotted their hypostasis from the intellectual 
Gods, some indeed ascend totally into parts, but others partibly pour on 
-wholes, the exuberant powers of themselves. They likewise distribute the 
providence of the demiurgus and father, some indeed arranging and 
adorning the universe with the first, middle, and last forms of production; 
others educing the rivers of life, and pouring them on all things; others 
elevating the natures that have proceeded, and recalling them to the father; - 
and others presiding over purity, and being the guardians of secondary 
Matures. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Again, therefore, receiving the beginning of the theory of Plato from 
the paternal cause, we assert as follows: The demiurgus and father of 
this universe, being allotted this order in the intellectual kings, as was 
before demonstrated, as he produced wholes totally, and referred all things 
to the one form of the world, and the one perfection of the universe, thus 
also he arranged aqd adorned the parts of the world, and gave completion 
to the whole, contriving that all immortal and mortal natures should be 
generated for the sake of the universe. And this is what Plato introduces 
him saying in the Timaeus to the junior Gods : “ That mortal natures 
therefore may exist, and that this universe may be truly all, convert your¬ 
selves according to nature to the fabrication of animals.” Since, 
however, after the monad, it is every where necessary that a multitude 
should be generated proximate to the monad, and that prior to an- all¬ 
perfect division, united number should subsist (for that which has pro¬ 
ceeded to all things is not allied to that which abides, nor is it possible 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



20 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VL 


that what is all-variously divided, should be connascent with that which 
is impartible)—this being the case, the demiurgus of wholes, produces 
indeed from himself, and his father a number proximate to the monad of 
the fathers. But the three [fathers] deriving their subsistence from one 
father, and first receiving the power and dominion of fabrication, produce 
other second and third fabricators from themselves, till through a dimi¬ 
nution proceeding according to .[appropriate] measures, they evolve the 
•whole demiurgic number, the cause of which indeed, the demiurgic monad 
comprehends in itself. 

The orderly progression, however, of multitude becomes at length ap¬ 
parent. And thus the three ruling fathers of wholes, separate their pro¬ 
ductions, by first, middle, and last boundaries of fabrication, and are all 
of them total, but they are fabricators! and fathers of parts totally; 
through being in continuity indeed with the monad, not changing the 
form of production; but on account of diminished progression, not pos¬ 
sessing an energy impartibly extended to all things. And the one demi¬ 
urgus indeed, being arranged prior to the triad, comprehends in himself 
uniformly the productions of all [the demiurgi]. But these three fathers 
multiply the unical dominion and power of the first demiurgus, divide 
hjs impartible production, and lead forth into secondary natures the 
stable energy of the father. And the exempt monad indeed compre¬ 
hends in itself the all-perfect measure of the triad, according to supreme 
union; but the triad unfolds into light from itself the undivided power 
of the monad. 

Plato, therefore, celebrates indeed, in other dialogues, these three fabri¬ 
cators and fathers, but particularly in the Gorgias, adducing as a witness 
of the theory concerning them, divinely-inspired poetry, he refers the 
whole progression of them to Saturn the father of the intellectual Gods, 
and from thence gives to them their first production into light. He 
exempts, however, the demiurgic intellect from the triadic division of 
them, coarranges it with the father, and says, that they have an intellec¬ 
tual dominion secondary to him. He likewise calls them the sons of Sa¬ 
turn, but indicates that they are allotted their progression from Jupiter. 
For there is a twofold Jupiter both according to Plato, and all the theology, 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CttAP. VI. 


OF PLATO. 


21 


as I may say, of the Greeks; the one indeed convolving the end of the- 
intellectual triad to the beginning; but the other being allotted the sum¬ 
mit of the Ruling triad. And the one being the demiurgus of wholes 
totally; but the other being allotted the first parts of divided fabrication. 
And the one indeed being arranged prior to the three fathers; but the 
other being the first of the three, and proximate to the remaining fathers. 
Whence, also, I think that many who discuss these particulars are igno¬ 
rant that Jupiter the demiurgus of the universe, is not the first of the three 
fathers, and that Saturn the leader and ruler of the intellectual kings, is 
not the same with the demiurgic intellect. For of those who immediately 
suspend the triad' of the ruling fathers from the paternal kingdom of 
Saturn, some indeed refer the whole fabrication of things to Saturn him¬ 
self ; but others ascribe to the summit of the triad the generation of 
wholes. Is not, however, each of these impossible ? For the one abiding 
in himself, and converting to himself every thing which has proceeded, is 
exempt from demiurgic production; but the other being divided oppo¬ 
sitely to the total * fathers, will not be the impartible fabricator of wholes. 
For it is necessary that the whole and all-perfect demiurgus of the world, 
should neither be connumerated with the many 1 demiurgi, nor be the 
same with the cause which is stable, and perfectly established in itself. 
For he has a subsistence contrary to the cause which recalls that which 
has proceeded, and again exhibits it unemanent from itself. To be present 
likewise to all things by no means accords with that nature which ener¬ 
gizes separately, and takes away its generative power. How, therefore, 
can he who converts his own children to himself, and shuts his own 
progeny in himself, possess the same power with the demiurgus who 
unfolds all things into light, and produces them into multitude? And 
how can he who is allotted the universe in conjunction with the remaining 
demiurgi, be uniformly the cause of the universe? 

For, if you are willing, consider each of these three demiurgi, and 
survey what will happen from this assertion. For we say that the first 

* For ■nu oAijf, it is necessary to read tpij oAo»*. 

* For r»i$ «Am$, it is necessary to read nn 


Digitized by boogie 



22 ON THE THEOLOGY BOOK Vf, 

of them is the cause of essence, and of existence to the fabrications in the 
world ; but that the second is the source of the motion, life, and generation 
of sensibles; and that the third is the Cause of the divided production of 
form* Of partible circumscription, and of the circular conversion of wholes 
to their One principle. "We likewise definitely assert these things, admit¬ 
ting that the fabrication of each of the three extends to the whole world. 
But surveying the peculiar mode of fabrication in each, we say that the 
first is the effector of essence, the second of fife, and the third of intellect. 
And that the first is the cause of hyparxis, the second of motion, and the 
third of conversion. Hence, the whole world, so far as it participates of 
being, is produced from the first father; but so far as it subsists through 
motion, and is generation, it receives its progression from the second 
father; and so far as it is perfectly divided, and after all-various division, 
is converted to its proper principle, it is produced from the third father. 


CHAPTER VII. 


These things, therefore, being thus determined, we may see how in the 
Timaeus, the demiurgus and father of this universe, at one and the same 
time impartibly constitutes the world, gives to it essence, and supplies it 
with existence, fashioning bodies, generating souls in the middle of an 
impartible and partible essence, and constituting intellects ingenerably 
p. e. without generation and indivisibly, from the first genera. And 
farther still, besides these things, he distributes different motions to souls 
and bodies, divides each of them all-variously, according to harmonic 
reasons, binds them by analogies, and converts them to himself, and his 
own will. How, therefore, can we any longer rank such a demiurgus as 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP/ Hi. 


OF PLATO. 


this in the same order with one of these three fathers. For those thiqgs 
which they are said to give to the universe divisibly, he constitutes im- 
partibly from himself. Nor does he produce some things prpcedaneously, 
and others according to accident, but by his very being he generates 
essence, supplies motions, and extends the divisions of mundane forms, 
and after the progression pf other things, converts all things to himself, 
abiding in his own accustomed manner. 

In the second place, therefore, we say that the three demiurgi differ 
from each other, because the first paternally comprehends the rest, and is 
the father of this whole triad. But the second is the power of the triad, 
and participates of the extremes according to the peculiarity of powers. 
And the third is the intellect of the triad, and contains the paternal, and 
intellectual power Qby participation]. And in short, the first is the father 
of both; but the second is the power of both; and the third is the intellect 
of both. How, therefore, can the demiurgus of wholes be the same with 
one of the above mentioned fathers? For he, as Timteus says, is the 
father of all the world, and is allotted in himself a paternal power and 
divine intellect, converting all things to the watch-tower of himself. 
Again, therefore, we find that the partible peculiarities of the three 
demiurgi, preexist in him impartibly and uniformly. And as the demiur¬ 
gic triad participates of union with him, on account of the uncircumscribcd 
transcendency of the monad, thus also the monad antecedently and 
occultly comprehends in itself the triad, according to the power of cause. 
Nor is it proper to confound these with each other, but it is requisite t*> 
exempt the monad from the triad, and to suspend the triad from the 
monad. And neither ought we to make the three fathers, the rulers of 
total fabrication, nor to rank the first of them in the same order with the 
one demiurgus. For a coordinated entirely differs from an exempt cause* 
And that which produces all things according to comprehension perfectly 
differs from that which is similarly present to ad things, and is equally 
distant from all things. Besides this also, multitude is every where sus¬ 
pended from its proper monad. And as the one precedes the total orders 
of things, so likewise each order of the Gods has its progression from a 
monad; since also, each God is allotted a union which antecedes the 


Digitized by boogie 



24 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


multitude he contains. But if the whole genus of the Gods, and each 
God proceed after the same manner, it is also necessary that each of the 
divided orders should have the same mode of subsistence. 

In the third place we say that both Plato and the ancient theology of 
the Greeks assert, that these three demiurgi divide the uniform kingdom 
of their father Saturn. And that one of these three every where arranges 
and adorns the first of wholes, another the middles, and another the 
extremities of wholes; and that each is allotted this order, not in 
fabrication only, but also in the providence of partial souls. For of 
these, some indeed are arranged and perfected under the first, prior to 
generation ; but others, that give completion to generation, are arranged 
under the second ; and others, that require purification after generation, 
are perfected under the third. Moreover, the first detniurgus, as it is 
written in the Timaeus, produces the whole world. For he constitutes 
the circulation of the same , and arranges and adorns the circulation of the 
different, and all sublunary natures as far as to the earth, which he 
fabricated to be the guardian of night and' day, being immoveably fixed 
about the axis which is extended through the poles of the universe. He 
also fills the whole parts of the world with their proper numbers, and 
gives generation to all of them, both to those that revolve manifestly, and 
to those that become manifest when they please. Again, be defines the 
whole period to partial souls, the measures of their descent into genera¬ 
tion, the vicissitudes of the present life, and their restitutions to their 
kindred star,* and he is also said to unfold to them all the laws of Fate, 
and to point out to them the nature of the universe. Hence, he is not 
one* of these three fathers, nor is he co-arranged with them, but is 
perfectly exempt from the triad. According likewise to the proper 
prerogative of his empire, he is expanded separately above each, and in 
common above all of them. And the operations indeed, of these fathers, 
are divided about him, and are distinguished by more partial boundaries. 
Put his fabrication is uncircumscribed, is one whole, and is impartible, 

* The word awrgov is omitted in the original, 

* n is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. VIII. 


OF PLATO. 


35 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Let it therefore, from these things be manifest/ that the demiurgic 
monad, is exempt from the ruling lathers, and that according to one 
undivided cause he generates beings eternally. But if Jupiter is 
according to Plato, the one and whole fabricator of the only-begotten 
•world, as we have before demonstrated, and we grant these things with¬ 
out being deceived, and if, as it is now said, and Socrates in the Gorgias 
teaches us, the first of the demiurgi that divide the kingdom of Saturn, 
is in a similar manner called Jupiter, there will be according to this 
theory a twofold Jupiter, the one being an intellectual God prior to the 
three fathers; but the other being of a ruling, assimilative, and principal 
nature, and arranged at the summit of the three. For Jupiter, Neptune, 
and Pluto, divide, says Plato, the kingdom of their father, three leaders 
of wholes subsisting from one great king as it were, and producing the 
one fountain of the demiurgic series, into one all-perfect principal triad, 
which Plato also indidating, denominates the providence divided in the 
three a kingdom, attributing the first-effective, and the uniform to the 
Gods prior to these. If these however, are not the only orders of Jupiter, 
but there is also another Jovian multitude, how this proceeds will be 
evident in what follows. For all these three fathers participate of the 
same appellation, and are after the same manner celebrated by poets 
inspired by Phoebus; but one is called simply Jupiter, another marine 
Jupiter, and another subterranean Jupiter. The leader however of the 
three, possesses primarily the paternal dignity in the triad, and the 
appellation of the great Jupiter. For on account of the supreme union 
which he is allotted with the fontal demiurgus, who is beyond the three, 
he also participates of the same name as the total Jupiter, without any 
distinction. And on this account, I think,‘Socrates, in the Cratylus, 
unfolding to us the arcane and mystic discipline concerning the Gods, 
from names, and at one time co-arranging Jupiter with Saturn, ahd at 
Proc. Vol. II. D 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



2 6 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


another with the remaining demiurgi, does not think it worth while to 
speak twice about the same things, but in the intellectual conceptions 
about the all-perfect demiurgus, he also thinks fit to. deliver the arcane 
discipline concerning the first of the three demiurgi, through the truth of 
names. For in a certain respect, it was not possible for him to do other¬ 
wise who shows that the theory in things accords with names; since also, 
the father of this triad, is inseparably united to the whole demiurgus. 
But of these things enough. 

If you are willing however, we will add the following observations to 
what has been said. For perhaps some one may apprehend that the 
fable in the Gorgias, gives to the three sons of Saturn, a progression from 
Saturn proximately, but not, as we have said, through the demiurgic 
monad as a medium. For again, the three are said to divide the 
kingdom of Saturn, but not of the whole demiurgus and father. That 
we may not however, ignorantly wander beyond measure from the 
conception of Plato, and the truth of things, in consequence of following 
fabulous fictions, we must affirm from the beginning, that both the whole 
demiurgus, and this triad of the ruling fathers, proceed from the father of 
the intellectual Gods. But the whole demiurgus proceeding from a 
whole, impartibly participates of his father. For he abides in the allness 
of his power, and imitates, if it be lawful so to speak, his uniform and 
unmultiplied nature, by being monadic and whole, and the father of things 
first, middle and last. But the three demiurgi, in a divided manner 
participate of, and proceed from their generating cause, being divided 
indeed from each other, but dividing his unical providence. And Saturn 
indeed, is a God one and numerous, establishing multitude in himself, 
and occultly comprehending it in appropriate boundaries. But Jupiter 
expresses the paternal monad, and produces the unical nature of it into 
the providence of wholes. And the three sons of Saturn unfold into light 
the multitude which is there, in the all-perfect boundary of the triad. 
Hence also they are said to divide the kingdom of their father,' which 
Jupiter possessed indivisibly. Hence, if it be requisite to speak boldly, 


* For nanos it is necessary to read *<ct$o$. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. VIII. 


OF PLATO. 


37 


he indeed is a proceeding father, hastening to arrange and adorn, and 
being parturient in order to the generation of wholes. But they 
distribute his providence. This however, is the same thing as to say 
they distribute ihe providence of Jupiter. For the progression to them 
was from each of these divinities, from Saturn indeed, according to the 
from which but from Jupiter according to the by which , 1 

For Jupiter indeed, unfolds them into light; but they proceed from the 
Saturnian adyta. 

If again, you are willing [jo consider the affair] according to the 
Parmenides of Plato, since in the Saturnian order there are both whole¬ 
ness and parts, if you assume the subsistence there of that which is in 
another, according to whole, but of that which is in itself, according to 
parts, Jupiter indeed, who is prior to the three, proceeds from his father 
according to whole; but the three demiurgi, according to parts. Hence, 
Jupiter reigns, possessing in himself, as Socrates says in the Philebus, a 
royal intellect. But they reign in a divided manner, and are allotted 
the universe according to parts. Hence therefore, the Elean guest in the 
Politicus, celebrates these two intellectual kings, one indeed, being the 
cause of the unapparent life to wholes, and of the other circulation, but 
the other being the source of the manifest order of things, and of the 
present period; and he attributes to Jupiter the cause of both these, 
periods. But atone time indeed, he ascribes this cause to Jupiter, as 
leading all things in the universe to the kingdom of Saturn ; but at 
another, as binding to himself the providence of secondary natures. For 
he is united to his father by intellectual bonds, of which Socrates makes 
mention in the Cratylus. He is likewise a whole extended to a whole, 
and as it were adapts himself by his own light to the light of his father, 
and possesses a second dominion. Hence also, he is said to define the 
providence of his father. The Athenian guest however [in the Laws,] 
extending us to the one demiurgic kingdom, to the law, and the total 
justice which are there asserts, “ that God, as it is said, possesses the 
beginning, middle, and end of all beings, and bounds all things by a 

1 *<p'ou signifies an occult, but vtfov, a manifest progression. 


Digitized by ^ooQie 



28 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


circular progression according to nature, in a direct path.” For because 
we do not think it right to consider Plato here as speaking of the first 
God, or of any other of the intellectual or intelligible fathers, but of the 
whole demiurgus, it is sufficient for those who are moderately able to 
understand things of this kind, that he is said to bound all things in a 
direct path, and to proceed circularly according to nature. It is also 
sufficient, that Justice is said to be the attendant of this God, being the 
avenger of those who transgress the divine law. For the first God, and 
all the Gods who are established above the perfective order, are exempt 
from this rectilinear, and also from the circular progression, as Parmeni¬ 
des teaches us. They likewise transcend all motion. But the first that 
proceeds after motion, is the whole and all-perfect demiurgus. To this 
divinity therefore, it pertains to bound wholes in a direct path, to 
proceed circularly, and to be followed by Justice. For we say indeed, 
that the thing which follows, follows that which is moved, 

Moreover, the Gods who are secondary to the demiurgus, have not a 
unical dominion over wholes as he has, nor do they antecedently assume 
the beginnings, middles and ends of all beings. But some of them 
indeed, preside over partial natures totally, as these three fathers; but 
others preside over wholes partibly, as those who pour upon all things 
the rivers of life, in a divided manner; and others preside over parts 
partibly, as the last of the demiurgi, and who are conversant with the 
world. The one and impartible demiurgus of wholes therefore, alone 
comprehends in himself, the beginning, middle, and end of all beings, 
and equally rules over all secondary natures according to one cause. 
But Justice follows him, bounding the desert of the whole of things, and 
circumscribing each thing in its proper limits. And these things the 
Athenian guest manifests in the above-mentioned words; but Orpheus 
clearly refers them to the whole demiurgus. For he says that total 
Justice follows him, now reigning over, and beginning to arrange and 
adorn the universe. 


Justice th* abundant punisher of crimes, 
Aid and defence of all things, follows Jove. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. VIII. 


OF PLATO. 


# 


29 ' 


Moreover, that Jupiter comprehends the beginnings, middles and ends of 
wholes, the theologist says, in addition to these things, 


Jove’s the beginning, and the middle’s Jove, 
And all things flow from Jove’s prolific mind. 


And it appears to me that Plato looking to all the Grecian theology, and 
particularly to the Orphic-mystic discipline says, that God, according to 
the ancient assertion, possesses the beginning, middle, and end of all 
things, bounding the whole of things in a direct path, and proceeding 
circularly according to nature, and that he has Justice for his attendant, 
through which every thing that departs from the providential empire of 
Jupiter is converted to it, and obtains an appropriate end. Through 
these things therefore, we haye reminded the reader, that the Athenian 
guest also looking to the whole demiurgus, proclaims things of this kind 
to his pupils. If however, these things are rightly determined, it is 
indeed entirely necessary to exempt the one demiurgus, according to 
essence, from these three [demiurgi]. For if one of them indeed, compre¬ 
hends the beginnings of every thing in the world, but another the 
middles, and another, every where convolves the ends, is it not necessary 
that he who uniformly rules over the universe, should be established 
above divided causes ? But, the Athenian guest gives to him a power 
generative of this triad [of demiurgi]. For if he comprehends the 
beginnings, middles, and ends of the whole of things, according to the 
primary cause indeed, he generates the demiurgus, who arranges and 
adorns first natures; but according to middle causes, the demiurgus 
who gives completion to the middle boundaries of fabrication; and 
according to the end, the demiurgus who adapts an appropriate produc¬ 
tion to the last of things. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



30 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


CHAPTER IX. 


The Athenian guest therefore, does all but clearly say, that the 
distribution to the three son! of Saturn, the measures of providence, and 
in short, progression, are suspended' from the great Jupiter* and that it 
is he who supemally defines their allotments, and uniformly comprehends 
all of them in himself. Moreover, with respect to the assertions, that he 
bounds all things in a direct path, and that he proceeds circularly 
according to nature, the former of these, manifests the progression of 
wholes from him; for the direct is a symbol of progression; but the 
latter manifests the conversion of wholes to him. For he being 
intellectually converted in, and to himself, convolves all things to the 
watch-tower of himself. But if the straight and the circular first 
subsist in the perfective Gods, the demiurgus of wholes is filled indeed 
from thence, but fills the natures posterior to himself with the powers 
that proceed from him. And as according to the triple cause of wholes, 
he constitutes the triad of demiurgi in conjunction with his father, thus 
also according to these twofold powers, he generates twofold [orders of] 
Gods; one indeed, which adorns a sensible nature, according to the 
straight which is in him ; but the other which elevates all things to him, 
according to the circular. Moreover, because he proceeds indeed from 
the whole fabrication, (i. e. from Rhea) but participates of the perfective 
triad, he connects this straight and circular with tnotion. For to bound 
according to the straight, and to proceed circularly, designate motion ; 
the former indeed, being significant of motion proceeding to all things, 
and adorning all things with boundaries, forms and reasons; but the 
latter, of motion convolving to itself, and calling upward all things to 
itself. 

Again, therefore, Plato placing in the one demiurgus the cause of the 


1 For it is necessary to read *£>ign}Tai. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. IX. 


OF PLATO. 


31 


triad, exempts him, who abides as it were in himself, from production 
according to parts ; but attributes to the triad a division according to 
the demiurgus. For Timaeus also, by placing in him a paternal cause, 
a generative power, and a royal intellect, theologizes the same things 
about him as the Athenian guest. The paternal, indeed, is every where 
principal; but power belongs to the middle; and intellect closes the 
end of the triad. For power, according to the Oracle, is with them ; 
[i. e. with father and intellect], but intellect is from him, [i. e. from the 
father]. Hence, of the natures which have proceeded, one is the father 
of the whole triad, but another the intellect of it. And one indeed is 
allotted the beginning of total fabrication; but another, gives completion 
to the middle of the generation of wholes; and another, bounds the end 
of it. Nor must we here omit to observe the accuracy of Plato, but 
survey 1 how the Athenian guest magnificently celebrates the extremities 
of the three demiurgi, by more singular names, calling one the beginning, 
and the other the end, but that which is between the extremes even in 
causes, he manifests through multitude. For he denominates it middles ; 
since power also, as being co-ordinate with the infinite, or rather being 
a certain infinity, is the cause of multitude and division to wholes. 
Hence also, of the three demiurgi, one indeed, is the cause to mundane 
natures of a stable * collocation ; but another, of generation proceeding 
to all things; and another, of the circulation of things to the principle 
of their progression. 

Let us, however, return whence we digressed, to the discussion 
concerning the first demiurgus, in which it was said, that Jupiter, 
Neptune, and Pluto divide the kingdom of their father. For prior to 
these, the demiurgus received the kingdom of his father in an undivided 
and uniform manner. For both the demiurgic monad and the triad, 
were thence allotted their progression from the beginning, and their 
dominion over secondary natures; but the former impartibly, and the 
latter partibly ; and the former monadically, but the latter triadically. 


‘For manjo’ojft«v, I read «n<rx«\|/®/x»v. 

* For yovipov, it is necessary to read povifiou. 


\ 


Digitized by boogie 



32 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


That you may not, therefore, think that these three proceed after the same 
manner from the father, as the one king who is prior to the three, 
Socrates, [in the Gorgias] in the form of a fable, says that they divide 
the kingdom of the father, and on this account require secondarj' laws, 
and a subordinate order, and which is adapted to parts. For the law 
under Saturn, and the law of Jupiter who recently possesses the kingdom 
[of his father] appear to be by no means adapted to the providence of 
those powers who produce a partial and various form of life. And do 
you not see how Socrates gives to total-Jupiter and to Saturn an exempt 
transcendency, and connects one law with both kingdoms; but to the 
three demiurgi that divide the kingdom, he definitely assigns as it were 
another polity, and more various laws commensurate to the subjects of 
their providential care? For he says that Pluto, and the curators were 
present enquiring of Jupiter respecting the second legislation ; but that 
he placed over partible lives, other judges, and laws adapted to these 
lives. Again, therefore, Jupiter, who definitely assigns things of this 
kind, and who generates the three judges, is not the same with the 
Jupiter who is prior to the three [demiurgi]. For the latter was together 
with his father according to a prior law, and the simplicity of a divine 
life; but the former together with Pluto, leads into order and bound the 
variety of partial natures, and is the leader of secondary laws. 

The divine law, therefore, is with the intellectual kings, Saturn and 
Jupiter; and also Justice the avenger of those who transgress the divine 
law, as the Athenian guest says. But other more various laws are with 
the three sons of Saturn, and also judges co-ordinate to such like laws, 
as it is written in 'the Gorgias. And there indeed, [i. e. with the intel¬ 
lectual kings,] all things are impartibly, and unitedly; but here, [i. e. 
with the three sons of Saturn], all things subsist in a divided and partible 
manner. And the things which are there being primary, the law indeed 
is more Saturnian. But Justice follows the great Jupiter. And the 
laws indeed pertaining to secondary natures, confer perfection under the 
first of the sons of Saturn. But the judges give completion to the 
empire of the third of these sons. And Pluto participates from the 
second Jupiter of the separation of the laws; in the same manner as the 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. X. 


OF PLATa 


S3 


total Jupiter receives from Saturn the one law which is to be the co-ad¬ 
ministrator with him in the total fabrication of things. In short, the 
Jupiter who is co-arranged with Neptune and Pluto, is the summit of 
the ruling triad; but the Jupiter who is co-arranged with Saturn and 
the mistress Rhea, is the third of the intellectual 1 triad. Hence also, 
Socrates, in the Cratylus, at one time ascends from Jupiter to Saturn, 
and conjoins the two kingdoms ; but at another time he proceeds from 
Jupiter to Neptune and Pluto, and unfolds this one ruling triad ; just as 
in the Gorgias, he weaves together the Saturnian and Jovian order, 
when he says that there is one and the same law in both. He co-arranges 
therefore, the second and more partial Jupiter with Pluto, according to 
the apparent correction of the prior law, and the distribution of the 
second laws. And thus much may suffice concerning these particulars. 


CHAPTER X.* 

It now remains that we should begin to speak about these three 
fathers, following the mystic narrations of Plato, since all of them are 

1 For vtciQCL$y it is necessary to read votgag. 

1 The following observations were written in the margin of the manuscript copy of this work 
of Proclus, by some scholiast or commentator: For end and that which is perfected, and the 
possession of beginning, middles and end, first subsist in the intelligible and at the same time intel¬ 
lectual Gods. And on this account figure, also, there presents itself to the view. This tried, 
therefore, in the whole assimilative series is analogous to intelligibles and intellectuals, as having 
from them # the beginning, middles, and end. For the deraiurgus produced this triad according 
to the similitude of the perfective triad, and connected the straight and the circular with motion. 
For to bound in a direct path, fend to proceed circularly, are definitive of motion, as was said by 
Proclus in the Chapter prior to this. And as this triad ha9 these properties fromintelligibles and 
intellectuals, thus also the whole series of assimilative Gods possess them from tliis triad, Hence 
this triad of partial demiurgi, is analogous to the intelligible and intellectual fathers, i. e. to the 
perfective power.” 

* For ette it is necessary to read «*' *vtwv. 

Proc. Vol. II. E 


Digitized by boogie 



34 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VL 


suspended from the demiurgic monad, and present themselves to our 
view as the second [in rank] after it. These three leaders, therefore, of 
wholes, and rulers, are emitted indeed from the intellectual fathers, and 
are divided" according to them; but they are unfolded into light in all the 
partible orders, of the Gods. For among the rulers they are allotted the 
first order, and are analogous to the intelligible and intellectual fathers, 
in the whole assimilative series, and having made a second progression 
in the liberated Gods, they rule over the universe. Together also with 
the mundane Gods, they give completion to the apparent order of things,, 
being allotted in one way an essence in the heavens, but in another way 
distributing the total parts in the sublunary region, but every where 
energising paternally and demiurgically, expanding the one fabrication* 
and adapting it to parts. 

With respect, however, to the allotment and distribution of them, in the- 
first place, if you please, it is according to the whole universe, the first of 
them producing essences, the second lives and generations, and the third 
administering formal divisions. And the first indeed establishing in the 
one demiurgus all things that thence proceed ; but the second calling all 
tilings into progression ; and the third converting all things to itself.. In* 
the second place, the allotment and division of them are according to the 
parts of the universe. For the first of them adorns the in erratic sphere, 
and the circulation of it; but the second governs the planetary region* 
and perfects the multiform, efficacious, and prolific motions in it; and the 
last administers the sublunary region, and intellectually perfects the ter¬ 
restrial world. Again, in the third place, we may survey in that which is 
generated, these three demiurgic progressions; since Timaeus also here 
makes mention of the offspring of Saturn. Jupiter, therefore, administers 
the summit of generated natures, and governs the spheres of fire and air. 
But Neptune all-variously moves the middle and very-mutable elements, 
and is the inspective guardian of every moist essence,, which is beheld in 
air and water. And Pluto providentially attends to the earth, and to 
every thing in the earth. Hence also he is called terrestrial Jupiter. 

In the fourth place, therefore, in the whole of generation, Jupiter indeed 
is allotted the summits, and the parts which are raised above others, in. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XI. 


OF PLATO. 


35 


which also are the allotments of happy souls, as Socrates says in the 
Phaedrus, because they then live under Jupiter, beyond generation. But 
Neptune is allotted cavities, and cavernous places, with which generation, 
motion, and the incursion of concussions are conversant. Hence, they 
call this God, the earth-shaker. And Pluto is allotted the places under 
the earth, various streams, Tartarus itself, and in short, the places in 
which souls are judged and punished. Whence also, of souls themselves, 
they say that such of them as have not yet proceeded into generation, but 
abide in the intelligible, are Jovian; but that such as are conversant with 
generation, are arranged under Neptune ; and that such as are purified 
and punished after generation, and wander under the earth, according to 
a journey of a thousand years, or which are again converted and led back 
to their principle, are perfected under Pluto. 

In the fifth place, therefore, we must say that the allotments of these 
divinities, are divided according to the centres of the universe. And Ju¬ 
piter, indeed, has the eastern centre, as being allotted an order analogous 
to fire; but Neptune, the middle centre, which pertains to vivification, 
and according to which especially generation enjoys celestial natures; 
and Pluto the western centre, since we say that the west is coordinate 
to earth, as being nocturnal, ami the cause of the unapparent. For 
shadow is from earth, and earth is the privation of light from west to 
east. In short, according to every division of the world, we admit that 
the first and most leading parts are Jovian; but we say that the middle 
parts pertain to the kingdom of Neptune; and we consider the last parts 
as belonging to the empire of Pluto. 


# 


CHAPTER XL 


Through these things, therefore, the triad of the ruling fathers has 
been celebrated by us. Let us, however, survey another order in this 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VL 


36 

progression, prolific, and vivific, and which is delivered by Plato in a 
divinely-inspired manner. For the proximate decrements and genera¬ 
tions from all the intellectual fathers, are unfolded into light in the assimi¬ 
lative Gods. For here the partible progressions exist of things which there 
subsist uniformly, since it is lawful for progeny which every where 
are allotted an order inferior to their causes, to give multitude to the 
monads, and to multiply the stable hypostases of them, and to render the 
energies of the simplicity, which is in first natures, more composite. As, 
therefore, from the paternal monad [Saturn] a triad subsists of ruling 
demiurgi, thus also from the vivific fountain [Rhea] which is allotted 
the middle centre in the intellectual Gods, the vivific order of the assimila¬ 
tive Gods is emitted. And here also there is a triad connectedly contained 
by one monad; since the paternal triad also subsists according to 
one perfect intellect, and was, as we have said, monadic. After the same 
manner, therefore, the triad which is the supplier of life is monadic,, being 
indeed full of prolific power, and full of undefiled perfection. It likewise 
participates of the whole vivification, and through the rivers of life, fills- 
all secondary natures with generative goods, and produces the vivific 
light, into the unenvying and exuberant participation of subordinate 
essences. And it converts indeed all tilings to itself, but is present to all 
things, and imparts to them its own appropriate powers. It likewise- 
pervades from on high, as far as to the last parts of the world, but every 
where preserves the union of itself umningled with its participants. And 
it embosoms indeed the generative, perfect, and beneficent light of the 
demiurgic monad ; but weaves together with the third father [Pluto] the 
order of life; and coarranges the boundaries of wholes in a becoming 
manner . 1 In short, it extends itself from the middle to all the genera of 
rulers, both the first and the last. And together with them indeed, it 
perfects all secondary natures, and coarranges that which is generative, 
with the demiurgus. In addition to these things also, it illuminates all 
things with an analogous power, and connects the undefiled with the con- 
vertive peculiarity. For stable power pertains indeed to the demiurgic 
geuera, but undefiled purity to the elevating genera. 

* for h $vrm(> it is necessary to read iionui;. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XI. 


OP PLATO. 


37 


Plato, therefore, in the same manner as Orpheus, calls this triad by one 
name; but iii a certain respect he also indicates the multitude of the 
powers it contains. For all the theology of the Greeks denominates the 
second vivification Cork, (i. e. Virginal) and conjoins it with the whole 
vivific fountain. Plato also says, that it has its hypostasis from this 
fountain, and energizes together with it. For effects are never divulsed 
from the providence of their causes. But wanderings indeed, and inves¬ 
tigations, [belong to the powers that energize providentially, just as *] par¬ 
ticipations according to periods pertain to the subjects of providential 
energy. The divine cause, however, of a partible life [i. e. Proserpine] 
conjoins herself from eternity, with the whole vivific fountain [i. e. with 
Ceres] which theologists call the mother of the ruling Goddess. And 
Plato every where conjoins Proserpine with Ceres. And he preesta¬ 
blishes indeed, the latter as a generative cause; but he celebrates the 
former as being filled from the latter, and filling secondary natures. Since,, 
however, the Ceric order is twofold, one indeed shining forth above the 
world, where it is also coarranged with Jupiter, and constitutes with 
him the one demiurgus of partible natures [i. e. Bacchus], but the other, 
and which is secondary, shining forth in the world, where also it is said 
to be ravished by Pluto, and to animate the extremities of the universe, 
which are under the administration of Pluto,—this being the case, Plato j 
perfectly unfolds to us both these, at one time indeed conjoining Proser¬ 
pine with Ceres, but at another with Pluto, and evincing that she is the 
wife of this God. For the rumour of theologists who delivered to us the 
most holy mysteries in Eleusis, says, that above indeed, Proserpine abides 
in the dwellings of her mother, which her mother had fabricated in inac¬ 
cessible places, exempt from the universe, but. that beneath she governs 
terrestrial concerns in conjunction with Pluto, rules over the recesses of 
the earth, extends life to the extremities of the universe, and imparts soul 
to things which are of themselves inanimate, and dead. Where also you 
may wonder that Proserpine associates with Jupiter indeed and Pluto,, 
the former, as fables say violating, but the latter ravishing the Goddess,. 

1 It appears to me that after xai m {Jjjnjo-aj in the original, there are wanting the words tcm 
upovoovmw, axnrtp' 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



36 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


but is not connected with Neptune. For he alone of the sons of Saturn, 
is not conjoined with Proserpine. [The reason, however, of this is,] that 
Neptune possessing the middle centre in the triad, is allotted a vivifiq 
dignity and power, and is characterized according to this. From him- 
self, therefore, he has the vivific cause, animates the whole of his proper 
allotment, and fills it with middle life from his own peculiarity. For 
Pluto indeed is the supplier of wisdom and intellect to souls according 
to Socrates in the Cratylus. But Jupiter is the cause of existence to 
beings, as the father of .the triad. Proserpine, therefore, being coarranged 
with the extremes, and prior to the world, with Jupiter indeed paternally, 
but in the world with Pluto, according to the beneficent will of. the 
father, in the former case she is said to be violated by Jupiter, but in the 
latter, to be ravished by Pluto, in order that the first and last of fabrica¬ 
tions may participate of vivification. For as the whole fountain of life 
fRhea] being conjoined with the whole, according to one impartible cause, 
illuminates all things with life, thus also Proserpine, weaving in conjunc¬ 
tion with the leaders of the universe, things first, middle, and la6t, illu¬ 
minates them with the vivification of herself. 

Moreover, we may know from Plato, through these signs, the union of 
the whole triad, since denominating it Core (i. e. a virgin or Proserpine) 
he celebrates it with Ceres. But again, we must survey where it is that 
he indicates the division of the triad. For there are three monads in it, 
and one of them is arranged, as being the highest, according to hyparxis, 
but another is arranged according to th^power which is definitive of life, 
and another according to vivific intellect. And theologists indeed are 
accustomed to call the first of these Coric, (i. e. virginal) Diana, but the 
second Proserpine, and the third, Coric Minerva. I speak, however, of 
the authors of the Grecian theology, since among the barbarians [i. e. 
the Chaldeans] the same things are manifested through other names. 
For they indeed call the first monad, Hecate, but the middle monad. 
Soul, and the third. Virtue. Since, therefore, these things are made 
known to us after this manner by the names of the Greeks, Plato indeed 
indicates the order of Coric Minerva, by denominating Minerva Mistress, 
celebrating her as Core, asserting that she is the cause of the whole of 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XI. 


OF PLATO. 


39 


virtue, and calling her the lover of wisdom, and the lover of war, and alsa 
Ethonoe, as being intelligence in manners. For all these names suffici¬ 
ently represent to us her intellectual and ruling nature, and that power 
of her which promptly supplies the whole of virtue. But in the same 
dialogue, he indicates the order of Proserpine, celebrating her- as Phere¬ 
phatta* and employing this name, which is likewise used by all other, 
theologists. These things he manifests in the Cratylus* where he unfolds 
the truth concealed in the name of Pherephatta. And in the same 
dialogue he indicates the order of Diana, by calling her skilful in virtue. 
For it is evident that the whole triad being united to itself, the first 
[monad] of the triad,' unically comprehends the third, the third is con¬ 
verted te the first, and the middle has a power extending to both. There 
are, therefore, these three vivific monads, viz. Diana* Proserpine, and our 
mistress Minerva. And- the first of these indeed is- the summit of the 
whole triad, and. which also-converts to herself the third.. But the second 
is a power vivific of wholes. And the third is a divine and undefiled 
intellect, comprehending in me, in a ruling manner, total virtues. Timaeus, 
therefore,, manifests this*, calling the third> monad (Minerva) philosophic, 
as being full of intellectual knowledge, and true wisdom; but'philopole- 
mic, as the cause of undefiled power, and the inspective guardian.of the 
whole of fortitude. And again, the Athenian guest, calls her Core,, as - 
being a virgin, and as purifying from all conversion to externals.. 

If, however, you are willing, we will survey the triad of Core, from 
what is said in the Cratylus concerning Pherephatta. She is called* 
therefore, wisdom, and is said t® come into contact with that which is 
generated and borne along: she also produces fear in those that hear her 
name* and excites astonishment in the multitude. With respect to the 
appellation of wisdom, therefore,.it ia evident that it is a sign [of the cha¬ 
racteristic property} of Minerva, and the summit of virtue. For if in us* 
all the sciences are the first of the virtues, how is it possible that wisdom 
should not be rightly denominated, the first-effective cause of all the 
virtues? And if philosophy pertains to her, so far as she is wisdom, and 


* For t putf here, it it necessary to read'T^aJoj. 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



40 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


immaterial intelligence* but not because she is indigent of wisdom, (for 
no one of the Gods, says Diotiraa, philosophizes), on tins account, there¬ 
fore, she is not indigent of wisdom; and the intellectual good of the 
ruling order entirely pertains to her. But to come into contact with that 
which is borne along, and with generation, will in a particular manner be 
adapted to soul. For it is soul that knows every thing which is gene¬ 
rated, and continually communicates with it She, likewise, in a certain 
respect comes entirely into contact with that which is borne along. 
Moreover, the incommensurability of Pherepbatta with multitude, and 
the terrour and astonishment which she excites, are indicative of the 
power in her which is exempt from all things, which is unapparent to 
the many and unknown. For the Barbarians also [i. e. the Chaldeans,] 
call the Goddess who is the leader of this triad, dire and terrible. Hence 
Plato does not more clearly indicate these things to us about this mighty 
Goddess [than the Barbarians Q but he announces names adapted to 
the theology concerning her. 

To the Core, therefore, that is beneath, and that associates with 
Pluto, all the above-mentioned particulars are inherent according to 
participation, and, as some one might say, according to similitude to the 
total Core; but they are inherent in the ruling Core, according to the 
first hypostasis. And in reality these three Goddesses are consubsistent. 
As, likewise, the whole vivific deity comprehends in herself the fountains 
of virtue and soul, which the demiurgus also imparts to the world, 
causing it to subsist perfectly, thus too, this deity [Core] possessing the 
primary cause' of all the partible forms of life, possesses likewise the 
principle of souls, and of the virtues, and on this account, the ascent to 
partial souls [such as ours], is through similitude, and virtue is a 
similitude to the Gods. Hence also, the form of each of these, I mean 
of virtue and soul, pre-subsist in the assimilative Gods ; since, likewise, 
the immortality of souls is inferred by Socrates, from their similitude to 
divinity. If, therefore, they are allotted immortality essentially, it is indeed 
necessary that the cause which assimilates them [to divinity] should prima¬ 
rily be in the Gods. For they are assimilated to their fountain. But they 
participate of similitude from the assimilative causes. Hence in these, the 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XI. 


OF PLATO. 


41 


cause of such an immortality of souls as this, shines forth. On this account 
also, Socrates arguing from similitude says, it is fit that souls should govern 
and despotically rule over bodies, since they are allotted the power of 
, governing and despotically ruling, from the same cause from which they 
derive their similitude [to divinity.] The one cause itself, therefore, of 
all the partible forms of life, pre-exists in the assimilative rulers. But 
one, whole, and impartible virtue exists prior to all the virtues which 
afford a similitude [to a divine nature.] And neither is the essential 
similitude of souls, nor the similitude of virtue, derived from any other 
source than that of these rulers and principles. 

Since, however, there are, as we have said, triple monads in Core; 
and one, indeed, establishes all things in itself; but another leads all 
things into generation ; (for it belongs to soul to generate) and another 
converts all things to itself; (for this is the illustrious work of virtue) 
and since all things are perfectly pre-arranged in Core,—this being the 
case, the monad which associates with Pluto, participates, indeed, in a 
certain respect of the extremes, but is particularly allotted its progression 
according to the middle. Hence also, it is called Proserpine, because it 
comes into contact, as we have observed, with generation and things 
which are borne along. For the unmingled and the virginal were adapted 
to the extremes. But mixture, and a contact with generated natures, 
are adapted to the middle, which rejoices in progressions and multipli¬ 
cations. This ravishment therefore, of Core, is indeed perfectly estab¬ 
lished in Proserpine. But she also imparts herself, and the vivification 
proceeding from herself to the last of things. Hence likewise, Socrates 
in the Cratylus co-arranges Proserpine with Pluto, but every where ranks 
total Core with Ceres, and comprehends her in the name of Core. The 
power however, which proceeds from her to the realms beneath, he 
comprehends in the name of Proserpine. For the psychical .nature is in 
this power essentially; but the remaining things are in it, as we have 
said, according to representation, and not primarily. And thus much 
concerning the vivific triad, since Plato has delivered to us but few 
auxiliaries about it, from which as from firestones rubbed against each 
other, it is possible to enkindle the light of truth. 

Proc. Vol. II. i F 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



42 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


i 


CHAPTER XII. 


In the third place, let us discuss the elevating, among the ruling Gods, 
and the triad which converts all things to their principle. For since 
there are three intellectual monads, as we have said, which are pre¬ 
arranged in the Gods prior to these, three triads of the ruling Gods 
proceed conformably to those monads ; the paternal triad indeed, 
conformably to the first intellectual monad; (whence also they are called 
the sons of Saturn, and are said to have divided the kingdom of their 
father) but the vivific triad conformably to the middle monad ; (whence 
also we are accustomed to co-arrange Core with Ceres as with a 
precedaneous cause) and the convertive triad, conformably to the third 
monad. Hence likewise we establish the peculiar cause of this triad in 
the demiurgus. For all the triads of the ruling Gods, are suspended 
from the demiurgic monad, and the progression to all of them is from 
this. One of them however, he constitutes in conjunction with his father; 
another in conjunction with the vivific Goddess; and another from the 
fountain in himself. For in the all-perfect demiurgus there are many 
fountains, which exist prior to all the second and third generations. For 
there the fountain of ideas subsists, according to which he adorns the 
universe, fashions the several particulars in it with forms and reasons, 
and arranges, and leads them into bound and morphe. For the fountain 
of souls likewise, and the fountain of all the intellectual Gods which 
proceed from him, are there. For he possesses a royal soul, and a royal 
intellect, according to the power of cause, as Socrates says in the 
Philebus. For there also the fontal sun subsists. Hence Timaeus, after 
the generation of the seven bodies, and their position into total circu¬ 
lations, says, that the demiurgus enkindled that light which we now call 
the sun in the second of the revolutions from the earth, as affording an 
hypostasis to the sun from his own essence. For that which enkindles 
the whole sun, produces it, and constitutes that which is enkindled. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. Xlt. 


OF PLATO. 


43 


The demiurgus therefore, possessing, and comprehending in himself 
the solar fountain, generates likewise in conjunction with the principles 
and rulers of wholes, solar powers, and the triad of solar Gods, through 
which all things are elevated, perfected, and filled with intellectual goods; 
from one 1 monad indeed, participating unpolluted light, and intelligible 
harmony, but from the remaining two, efficacious power, acme, and 
demiurgic perfection. How therefore, does Plato deliver to us these 
divine orders, and where does he indicate concerning them? Here then, 
he comprehends the whole triad through one name, in the same manner 
as he does the triad prior to it. And as there he manifests the whole 
genus of the vivific principles by the name of Core, so likewise in these, 
he denominates the whole triad Apolloniacal. But he indicates the 
multitude in this triad bv the many powers of this God. 

In the first place therefore, let us survey how Plato, in the same 
manner as Orpheus, considers the sun to be in a certain respect the same 
as Apollo, and how he venerates the communion of these Gods. For 
Orpheus clearly says that the sun is the same with Apollo, and asserts 
this (as I may say) through the whole of his poetry. But the Athenian 
guest' indicates this through the union of these divinities, constructing a 
common temple to Apollo and the sun, and at one time making mention 
of both, but at another, of one only, in consequence of their subsisting ' 
according to one union. But he says as follows: “ Every year after the 
conversions of the sun from summer to winter, it is requisite that the 
whole city should assemble in the temple common to the sun and Apollo, 
consecrating three of the citizens to the God.” In these words therefore, 
speaking in common about both these divinities, that it is fit there should 
be a temple of Apollo and the sun, into which it is necessary the whole 
city should assemble, after the summer solstice, he discourses in what 
follows about both, as if they were one, adding, that three of the citizens 
should be consecrated to the God; thus recurring from the division to 
the union of both. But elsewhere, he latently indicates the communion 
of them with each other. And again, in what follows, at one time he 

* The word (um{ is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by boogie 



44 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


says that the citizens [consecrated to the God] should offer common 
first fruits to the sun and Apollo, but at another to the sun alone, in 
consequence of Apollo being in the sun. According to Plato therefore, 
there is a kindred conjunction of these divinities, a communion of powers, 
and an ineffable union. 

Socrates also in the Cratylus, proposing to discover the essence of 
Apollo from his appellation, ascends to the simplicity of his hyparxis, to 
his power of unfolding truth into light, and to his intellect which is the 
cause of knowledge, thus sufficiently indicating to us the unmultiplied, 
simple, and uniform nature of the God. But in the [6th book of the] 
Republic, arranging the sun analogous to the good , and sensible light, to 
the light proceeding from the good to the intelligible, and calling the light 
which is present to the intelligible from the goody truth, connecting like¬ 
wise intellect and the intelligible with each other, he evidently collects 
together these two series, I mean the Apolloniacal and the solar. For 
each of these is analogous to the good .' But sensible light, and intellec¬ 
tual truth, are analogous to superessential light. And these three lights 
are successive to each other, viz. the divine, the intellectual, and sensible 
light; the last indeed pervading to sensibles from the visible sun; but 
the second extending from Apollo to intellectuals; and the first, from the 
good to inteliigibles. 

Again therefore, these Gods are demonstrated to be connascent with 
each other, according to their analogy to the good. But together with 
union, they have also a separation adapted to them. Hence by poets 
inspired by Phoebus, the different generative causes and fountains of 
them are celebrated, from which being allotted their hypostasis, they are 
separated from each other. But they are likewise celebrated by these 
poets, as mutually connascent and united, and are praised by the 
appellations of each other. For the sun vehemently rejoices, to be 
celebrated in hymns as Apollo. And Apollo when he is invoked as the 
sun, benevolently causes the light of truth to shine forth. If therefore, 
the hyparxes of these divinities are united to, and subsist together with 


* For tw ayatm, it is necessary to read t» uyuito. 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. XIJ. 


OF PLATO. 


45 


each other, but many powers of Apollo are delivered to us by Plato 
himself, and are happily allotted an appropriate theory, it is certainly 
proper to collect from these by a reasoning process, the solar progres¬ 
sions. But I say these things, looking to Socrates in the Cratylus, and 
his conceptions through images, which are there delivered, of the 
Apollooiacal powers. For the name of this God being one, unfolds all 
his powers, to the lovers of the contemplation of truth. This therefore is 
a very illustrious indication of the Apolloniacal peculiarity, viz. to collect 
multitude into one, to comprehend number in unity, to produce many 
things from one, and through intellectual simplicity to convolve to 
himself all the variety of secondary natures, and by one hyparxis to 
unite in one, multiform essences and powers. This Socrates says happens 
to the name Apollo, it being sufficient to signify in one, the various and 
different powers of the God, so that receiving his last image, and the 
most obscure representation from him, it is assimilated to bis unific, and 
collective hyparxis, and contributes to our recollection of the Apolloniacal 
peculiarity. This one name therefore, possesses occultly many indications 
of the powers of the God. And by this simplicity indeed, which is 
exempt from multitude, the truth which the God through prophesy 
unfolds to secondary natures, is presented to our view. For the simple is 
the same with the true. But by the representation [in his name] of 
dissolution and liberation, the purifying and undefiled nature of the God 
is signified, and also his power which is the saviour of wholes. By his 
emission of arrows, his power is indicated which is subversive of every 
thing inordinate, confused, and incommensurate, through a cause which 
is the source of the jaculation of arrows. And by his revolution, the 
harmonious motion of wholes, and the symphony which coalesces in itself, 
and binds all things, are indicated. Referring therefore, these four 
powers of the God to forms adapted to the powers, we may thus 
accommodate them to the solar monads. Hence the first of these 
monads is enunciative of truth and the intellectual light which subsists 
occultly in the Gods themselves. But the second is subversive of every 
thing confused, and exterminative of all disorder. And the third renders 
all things commensurate and friendly to each other, through harmonic 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



46 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


reasons. An undefiled however, and most pure cause presides over these 
monads, illuminating all things with perfection, and a subsistence 
according to nature, and expelling the contraries to these. 

Of the solar triad, therefore, the first monad, indeed, unfolds intel¬ 
lectual light, and announces it to all secondary natures, fills all things 
with total truth, and elevates them to the intellect of the (jods. And 
this we say is the employment of the prophetic power of Apollo, viz. 
to lead forth into light the truth comprehended in divine natures, and 
to perfect that which is unknown to secondary natures. But the second 
and third monads, emit efficacious and demiurgic acme, in order to the 
production of wholes, and perfect energy, according to which they 
adorn indeed every thing sensible, but exterminate the inordinate and 
indefinite from the universe. And one of these monads is analogous to 
the production in wholes through music, and to the harmonious provi¬ 
dence of things that are moved. But another is analogous to the power 
which is subversive of all disorder, and of the confusion and tumult 
which are contrary to form, and to the arrangement of wholes. And 
the remaining monad which supplies all things with an unenvying and 
exuberant communication of what is beautiful, which extends the bene¬ 
ficial, and imparts true blessedness, closes indeed the solar principles, 
but guards its triple progression. In a similar manner also, it illuminates 
ascending natures, with the perfect and intellectual measure of a happy 
life, presiding in the sun analogous to the purifying and Poeonian powers 
of the king Apollo. 

From what is written likewise in the Republic concerning the sun, we 
may be able to collect the same things by a reasoning process. For 
Socrates there gives to it a transcendency exempt from every thing 
generated, and says that it is established above things which are borne, 
along in a sensible nature; just as the good is perfectly exempt from 
intelligibles. He likewise says that the sun generates sense, that which 
is sensible, and generated natures, just as the good produces essence and 
true being, and is antecedently the cause of intellect and intelligibles, 




Digitized by 


Google 


CHAP. XII. 


OF PLATO. 


47 


If, therefore, this sensible world is generated and generation, as Timseus 
says, and a divine generated' nature, as it is asserted in the Republic, 
but the sun is beyond generation, as Socrates affirms, and in short, is 
allotted $n essence different from sensibles, it is perfectly evident that it is 
allotted a supermundane order in the world, and exhibits an unbegotten 
transcendency in generated* natures, and an intellectual dignity in 
sensibles. Hence, Timseus also delivers a twofold progression of the 
sun from the demiurgus, one indeed being co-arranged with the other 
planets, but the other exempt, supernatural, and unknown. For the 
demiurgus, when producing the seven bodies of the planets, and placing 
them in their proper circulations, at the same time constitutes the sun 
with the other planets arranging the moon the first from the earth, but 
the sun in the second circulation ; and after these, he enkindles a light 
in the solar sphere, similar to none of the others ; nor does he receive 
this light from the subject matter, but himself produces and generates it 
from himself, and extends as it were from certain adyta to mundane 
natures, a symbol of intellectual essences, and unfolds to the universe 
that which is arcane in the Gods that are above the world. Hence also 
the sun when he [first] appeared, astonished the [mundane] Gods, and 
all of them were desirous to dance round him, and to be filled with his 
light. This world likewise is beautiful and solar-form. 

As we have said, therefore, from the fabrication [of the universe,] in 
the Timaeus, the sun is demonstrated to possess this order beyond 
sensibles, and to be allotted an essence above every thing which is 
generated, but every thing in the world receives from him, perfection and 
essence. Hence also, Socrates in the Republic calls the sun the offspring 
of the goody the demiurgus of a generated nature, and the author of all 
mundane light. These things, therefore, we must likewise understand 
analogously about the ruling order of the God; for they are thence 
communicated to this visible sun. And on this account, here also, the 

* For 6e$ov voijTov, it is necessary to read 9«ov yevwjrov; every perpetually circulating body being 
thus denominated by Plato. 

a For voVjr otf here, it is necessary to read ywijroif. 


Digitized by 


Google 



48 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


sun is allotted an exempt transcendency with respect to the Gods in the 
world, because he possesses a precedaneous hypostasis among the leaders 
and rulers of wholes. 

Farther still, in those Gods likewise, the first effective cause of light 
subsists, generating those supermundane and intellectual rays, through 
which souls, and all the more excellent genera obtain an elevating 
progression. With these Gods also, there is the demiurgic duad which 
produces both simple and composite natures, those that are of a more 
ruling, and those that are of an inferior order. And in short, this 
demiurgic duad governs the twofold co-ordinations of the world. Hence 
those who are wise in divine concerns call this primary cause of light, 
and the demiurgic duad hands, as being efficacious, motive, and fabri- 
cative of wholes. But they establish them to be twofold, the one indeed 
being dexter, but the other sinister ; which things also Timaeus admits 
to be primarily in the celestial periods, and says that this division is 
derived from the first demiurgus. If, therefore, the demiurgic monad 
constituted the solar order prior to the world, why is it wonderful that in 
that order he should establish this division according to the right and 
left ? For Socrates also calls the motive powers of the Parcae hands, and 
says that the eldest of the three moves the universe with both her hands; 
so that we must not refuse to transfer the name of hands to divine 
concerns. Moreover, will not likewise the last of the solar principles 
according to Plato be that from which the interpreters of divine concerns 
say, a happy life, and unpolluted fruits are derived to wholes ? Since he 
calls the sun the offspring of the good , and this essentially pertains to it. 
For it is evident that as the good extends felicity to all beings, thus also 
the sun extends to mundane natures measures of felicity adapted to 
each, and gives completion to this through similitudes, and a tendency 
to the whole demiurgus. Hence also I think, felicity is said to consist 
in an assimilation to divinity. And felicity pertains to all the Gods in 
the world, according to the one ruling cause of them. For thence 
perfection and blessedness flow upon all things. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XIII. 


OF PLATO. 


49 


CHAPTER XIII. 


And thus much, following Plato, we have collected bj a reasoning 
process, concerning these particulars. We shall add, however, to what 
has been said, the theory pertaining to the unpolluted Gods, among the 
ruling divinities. For Plato also gives us an opportunity of mentioning 
these, since it is necessary that the rulers and leaders of wholes should 
subsist analogous to the intellectual kings, though they make their pro¬ 
gression in conjunction with division and a separation into parts. For as 
they imitate the paternal, generative, and convertive powers of the intel¬ 
lectual kings, thus also it is necessary that they should deceive the immu¬ 
table monads in themselves, according to the ruling peculiarity, and 
establish over their own progressions secondary causes of a guardian 
characteristic. And the mystic tradition indeed of Orpheus, makes 
mention of these more clearly. But Plato being persuaded by the mys¬ 
teries, and by what is performed in them, indicates concerning these 
' unpolluted Gods. And in the Laws indeed he reminds us of the inflation 
of the pipe by the Corybantes, which represses every inordinate and 
tumultuous motion. But in the Euthydemus, he makes mention of the 
collocation on a throne, which is performed in the Corybantic mysteries; 
just as in other dialogues he makes mention of the Quretic order, speaking 
of the armed sports of the Curetes. For they are said to surround and 
to dance round the demiurgus of wholes, when he was unfolded into light 
from Rhea. In the intellectual Gods, therefore, the first Curetic order is 
allotted its hypostasis. But the order of the Corybantes which precedes 
Core, (i. e. Proserpine) and guards her on all sides, as the theology says, 
is analogous to the Curetes in the intellectual order. If, however, you 
are willing to speak according to Platonic custom, because these divi¬ 
nities preside over purity, and preserve the Curetic order undefiled, and 
also preserve immutability in their generations, and stability in their pro- 

Proc. Vol. II. G 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



60 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


gvmions f into the worlds, on this account they were called Cory bantes. 
For nMfw, to koron , is every where significant of purity, as Socrates says 
in the Cratylus; since also you may say, that our mistress Core was no 
otherwise denominated than from purity, and an unpolluted life. But in 
consequence of her alliance to tills order, she produces twofold guardian 
triads, one indeed in conjunction with her father, but the other herself, by 
and from herself, imitating in this respect the whole vivific Goddess. For 
site constitutes the first Curetes. 

Every where, therefore, the guardian and undefiled order is thus deno¬ 
minated by the Grecian theology. Above, however, it is more simple 
and impartible; but beneath, among the ruling Gods, it presents itself 
to the view with division and variety. Hence the Corybantes require the 
Minerval mouad, and in a particular manner they are in want of the 
third Minerval mouad, which unites their progression, sustains their 
armed motion, and in short, converts them to their proper principles. 
Moreover, this number the triad, is adapted to these guardian powers, as 
being perfect, and uniformly comprehending the beginning, middle, and 
end of secondary natures; for every thing which guards, hastens on all 
sides to comprehend that which is guarded. The triad also preserves the 
es&eoces, powers, and energies of secondary natures, firm and unmoved. 
In the intellectual Gods indeed the three [unpolluted] monads, were 
divided about the three fathers ; but here the triad is said to guard Core 
on all sides, since she also has precstablishcd triple monads in herself, as 
we before observed. All these monads, therefore, are preserved immu¬ 
table through the guardianship of the unpolluted Gods, both in abiding 
and proceeding. And what else l>esidcs this guardian genus of Gods is 
fit to be coarranged with prolific powers? For this coarrunguuent is 
necessary, in order that these guardian deities may sustain all the progres¬ 
sions of these powers, and the multiplications in their generations, and 
may manifestly render their motions immutably established in them¬ 
selves. And on this account indeed the Gods fill all things with them¬ 
selves, aud generate all things, and do not depart from any thing either 

• For it is necessary to read vfntos. 


Digitized by ^ooQie 



CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


51 


of first or last natures. But by being in themselves, they are present to 
all things, and filling themselves, they fill ail secondary natures. And 
neither does their inflexibility remain unprolific, nor does their fecundity, 
receive any thing from subordinate natures, but prolific abundance, and 
immutable power, are in them connuscently conjoined. These things 
liavc l>een briefly asserted concerning the undefiled deity, who is coar¬ 
ranged with the ruling Gods, both by Plato, and the Grecian theologists. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


Again, resuming [the same subject, 3 let us discuss in common such 
things as Parmenides delivers to us concerning the whole order of Gods 
that are called assimilative rulers and leaders. For it is necessary, as we 
have before observed, to refer the whole divided theory [respecting the 
Gods] to the common and one mystic doctrine of Parmenides. For 
there we shall find the connexion of the divine orders, and their common 
powers delivered to us by Plato in a continued series. The same and the 
different, therefore, define for us the peculiarity of the demiurgic order; 
And according to these, we have unfolded in what has been before said, 
the paternal and prolific cause of the demiurgus, his unpolluted fountain, 
and the separative power in him, conformably to which he divides his 
own kingdom from that of Saturn. Since, however, the whole order of 
the assimilative Gods, is suspended from the demiurgic monad, subsists 
about, is converted to, and perfected by it, it is indeed necessary to refer 
the signs of this order to the demiurgic signs, and to give to the former a 
well-ordered generation proceeding in measures from the latter. For 
thus the coherence of the divine genera with each other, will become 
more apparent, and the evolution into light of secondary from more 


Digitized by ^ooQie 



52 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


ancient natures, will through these very things 4)6001116 perfectly known 
to us. 

What, therefore, are the peculiarities of this order, which is celebrated 
as of a ruling and leading nature by others, 1 but is demonstrated by ar¬ 
guments to be of an assimilative nature ? Every thing then which is 
assimilative, imparts the communication of similitude, and of communion 
with paradigms to all 1 the beings that are assimilated by it. Together 
with the similar, however, it produces and commingles the dissimilar; 
since in the images [of the similar] the genus of similitude is not 
naturally adapted to be present, separate from its contrary. If, there¬ 
fore, this order of Gods assimilates sensibles to intellectuals, and produces 
all things posterior to itself according to an imitation of causes, it is in¬ 
deed the first-effective cause of similitude to natures posterior to itself. 
But if it is the cause of this, it is also of the dissimilitude which is coor¬ 
dinate with similitude. For it is necessary that all things which partici¬ 
pate of the similar, should also participate of the dissimilar. And this 
order of Gods indeed imparts the similar in a greater degree than the 
dissimilar to the progeny that are more proximate to their principles; 
but it constituted the essence of things that proceed farther from their 
principles, according to dissimilitude rather than similitude. 

For, in short, similitude will have in itself an hypostasis analogous to 
the paternal causes, and to the causes which convert to principles. But 
the hypostasis of dissimilitude is analogous to prolific causes, and to those 
that preside over multitude and division. For similitude indeed proceeds 
analogous to intelligible bound, 5 but dissimilitude to intelligible infinity. 
Hence the former is collective, but the latter separative of progressions. 
Since, however, every divine nature begins its own energy from itself, 
and though its energy is directed to secondary natures, and it imparts 
its own peculiarity to things subordinate, yet it establishes and defines 
itself according to that energy, prior to other things;—this being the case, 

' For u* oAXjjAcov, it is necessary to read vx' «AAaw. 

* For wwnj;, it is necessary to read *<m •». 

* For nap* ti, it is necessary to read x*p* t«. 


Digitized by 


Google 




CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


5S 


that which supplies other things with the participation of the similar' and 
the dissimilar, from itself, will entirely possess in itself this similitude ' 
and dissimilitude. It is also mingled from both these, though here simi¬ 
litude is emitted in a greater degree, and there dissimilitude. For gene¬ 
rative are united to paternal causes, and unpolluted causes to those that 
hasten to proceed to every thing. Twofold coordinations likewise of the 
divine genera, are connected with each other, energize together with, and 
subsist in each other. For the genus of the ruling Gods, is similar and 
dissimilar to itself, and to other things. But being similar and dissimilar 
to itself, it conjoins itself * to, and separates itself from its principles, 
preserving the proper boundaries of progression. That, however, which 
is similar and dissimilar to other things, converts and congregates other 
things to itself, and separates them from itself. Such, therefore, are the 
peculiarities of these Gods. 

But that the similar and the dissimilar proceed from the demiurgic 
monad, and the signs which there preexist, into this order, Parmenides 
sufficiently demonstrates to us. For the demiurgic same and different, 
are the antecedently-existing causes, as he says, of the similitude and 
dissimilitude in this order. Since, however, though this order of Gods is 
the summit of the partible genera, and of genera which energize partibly, 
yet it has a total transcendency with respect to them, in order that being 
in continuity with the total orders of the Gods, its progression may not 
be separately allotted its generation from divided causes, but that each of 
the opposites, as it were, may proceed from the whole demiurgus. For 
the similar is from same and different, and the dissimilar receives its hy¬ 
postasis from both these; and thus each participates of the whole demi-' 
urgic monad. And this is an indication, of total 1 hyparxis, viz. to refer 
each of the parts that are, as it were different, to the whole. Sameness, 
therefore, and difference generate similitude; but the one indeed pater¬ 
nally, and the other in an unpolluted manner; and the one generatively, 

1 It is necessary here to supply the word o/tuov. 

* For uana, it is necessary to read mum. 

* For it is necessary to read oAunjf. 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



54 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


but the other separatively. And again, each constitutes dissimilitude in 
a manner appropriate to itself. And thus the genera of the assimilative 
Gods are varied, subsisting as paternal, generative, and collective of 
wholes. For they are allotted their evolution into light, doubled accord¬ 
ing to preexistent causes. And the demiurgic duad energizing through 
each of the causes that are preestablished in him, makes a progression 
from each into secondary natures. The whole conclusions, likewise, are 
dyadic, (or pertaining to the duad) but they are comprehended by the 
demiurgic tetrad in pre-arranged boundaries. And the multitude of the 
assimilative progressions is convolved to union, by the simplicity of the 
intellectual genera. 

Each also of the progressions, has indeed one progression supernatural 
and unknown to the multitude, but the other apparent and known to all. 
I mean, for instance, that the similar, so far as it is constituted by differ¬ 
ence, has a progression from thence difficult to be known; but that so 
far as it proceeds from sameness, it exhibits a manifest reason of cause. 
After the same manner, dissimilitude has difference for the manifest 
principle of its proper hyparxis; but sameness, for its principle difficult to 
be known. Hence also Parmenides beginning from things unknown to 
the multitude, and which are alone apparent to science and intellect, 
ends in things which are known to all men, and are effable. For in the 
Gods themselves, the ineffable precedes the effable. And the latent and 
unknown mode of their hypostasis, precedes that which is known accords 
ing to progression. And thus much concerning these Gods from the 
Parmenides of Plato, 


CHAPTER XV, 


Making, however, another beginning, let us discuss the orders that 
follow successively. Since the partial orders of the Gods, therefore, are 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XV. 


OP PLATO. 


55 


divided in a threefold manner, according to the all-perfect measure of 
the triad, proceeding supernally from the first intelligibles, as far as to 
the last of things, measuring and defining all things as the Oracles say,— 
the ruling Gods, indeed, are allotted the first and highest rank [among 
the partial orders,] making their progression proximately after the 
intellectual order, elevating secondary natures and conjoining them with 
the demiurgus of wholes, unfolding all impartible and united intellectual 
goods to things subordinate, and connecting and containing exemptly, 
their essence and perfection. But the Gods who give completion to the 
sensible world are allotted the last order, and close the end of the divine 
progression. These divide the universe, and obtain perpetual allotments 
and receptacles in it, and through these weave one and the best polity 
of the world. Between these mundane Gods, however, who are our 
rulers and saviours, and the supermundane leaders, those Gods subsist 
who preside over the separable and at the same time inseparable order 
of sensibles, and define according to this their proper progression, being 
at one and the same time exempt from the Gods in the universe, and 
co-arranged with them. And they are expanded, indeed, above the 
allotment which is adequate to the divided parts of the world, and 
supernally ascend into many numbers of the mundane Gods ; but they 
make a progression sub-ordinate to the government which extends to all 
things and to wholes. 

For in short, being the media between the supermundane and mundane 
Gods, they in a certain respect communicate with both, and have an 
indissoluble communion with both, being mundane, and at the same 
time supermundane according to order. And above indeed, they are 
united by the ruling leaders, but beneath, they are produced into multi¬ 
tude by the junior Gods, as Timaeus says. For they ride on the 
mundane Gods, and are in an undefiled manner established on their 
summits; but they are suspended from the supermundane Gods, arid 
subsist about them. They are also more united than the former; but 
are more multiplied than the latter. And they divide indeed, the whole 
monads of the supermundane Gods, into perfect numbers; but they 
collect the multitudes and the numbers of the mundane Gods into united 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



56 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


bounds, converting these Gods to their exempt principles, but calling 
forth the Gods that are above the world into the generation and 
providential care of sensible natures, and immutably preserving in 
themselves the middle form of empire. For the middle bonds give 
completion to all the genera of the Gods. Thus in intelligibles, between 
the intelligible and occult order, and the paradigmatic triad, and all¬ 
perfect multitude, the intelligible centre subsists, being parturient indeed, 
with multitude and the first (forms,) but vanquished by the uniform 
comprehension of the first order. Again, in intelligibles and intellectuals, 
the connective genus extending from the middle to all the extremes, 
conjoihs and binds all their essences, powers and providential energies. 

After the same manner therefore, in these orders also, viz. in the kings 
exempt from, and in those that are co-arranged with the universe, those 
Gods that emit in themselves uniformly the peculiarities of both these 
kings, afford a communication to them with each other. Whence also 
it belongs to them to transport first to second natures, to convert 
second to first natures, to unite both by an indissoluble connexion, and 
to guard the whole order in the world. The immutable, therefore, the 
inflexible, the indissoluble in providential energies, dominion over wholes, 
the administration of many partible allotments of the Gods at once, and 
the elevating to supermundane perfection many of their progressions and 
orders, pertain to these Gods. Hence, we are accustomed to celebrate 
this genus of Gods as liberated, in consequence of being freed from all 
division according to parts <; * as supercelestial, in consequence of 
proximately establishing itself above the Gods in the heavens; as 
undejiled , in consequence of not verging to subordinate natures, nor 
dissolving its exempt transcendency by a providential attention to the 
world ; as elevating , in consequence of extending the mundane Gods to 
the intellectual and intelligible place of survey; and as perfect, in 
consequence of illuminating all the celestials with the measures of perfec¬ 
tion. Since therefore, this order is in continuity with the assimilative 
rulers, but is arranged prior to the mundane Gods, it is indeed proper to 

1 It Is necessary here to substitute xai for to. 


Digitized by ooQie 



CHAP. XVI. 


OF PLATO. 


57 


evince that the theology pertaining to it' is suspended from the doctrine 
concerning the ruling Gods, and at the same time affords from itself the 
principles of the conceptions about the sensible Gods. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Tub intelligible king * therefore, of all intellectuals, luminously emitting 
from himself the first causes, and which measure wholes, according to the 
all-perfect triad in himself, defines all wholes as far as to the last of things, 
and triples the progressions of the Gods from himself, so as to generate 
indeed three orders, but refer each of them to one monad, and an 
intelligible transcendency. On this account he constitutes three collec¬ 
tive, three connective, and three perfective causes of all intellectuals; 
extending the triadic light to all things, and imparting by illumination 
the perfect in the progressions of its proper offspring, to the beginnings, 
middles, and ends of all separated natures. But again, the demiurgus 
and father, imitating his father and grandfather,’ to the latter of whom 
he extends his total intelligence, being the same in intellectuals, as he is 
in intelligibles, and terminating the genus of the intellectual fathers, in 
the same manner as his grandfather closes the paternal profundity of 
intelligibles, produces from himself three orders of Gods. And as the 
total progressions were divided from his grandfather triadically, so the 
partial progressions are perfected on account of him, according to the 
triad. Hence, there are also three orders from the demiurgus; but they 
proceed according to the end adapted to each. And one of them indeed, 

* Instead of wtgi ourov, it is necessary to read mgi camp. 

1 i. e. Phanes, or in Platonic language animal itself, subsisting at the extremity of the . 
intelligible order. 

1 i. e. Imitating Saturn and Phanes. 

Proc . Vol. II. H 




Digitized by t^OOQLe 



58 


ON THE THEOLpGY 


BOOK VI. 


is supermundane alone; another is mundane; and another is in a 
certain respect the middle of both. They are likewise allotted the triple 
proximately from the paternal cause; but each derives the peculiarity of 
hyparxis from definite principles, and a diminution proceeding according 
to measures. For they have neither an hypostasis of equal dignity, as 
mathematical monads have in the triad, nor a disorderly difference of 
dignity, but they receive the difference of a subordinate essence, and 
arrangement in their generation from the first causes. And thus, the 
ruling Gods indeed, are allotted the highest order in the partial pro¬ 
gressions, and the exempt cause of the proceeding natures. But the 
liberated Gods are allotted the second order, being arranged iudced 
under the ruling, but riding on the mundane Gods. And the mundane 
Gods are allotted the third order, being elevated through the liberated, 
but united by the ruling, to the intellectual Gods. In what manner 
however, the Gods in the world and all the mundane genera participate 
of the ruling Gods, we have already shown. 

But each of the mundane genera enjoy the energy of the liberated 
governors of the universe, according to a measure adapted to each, and 
especially such as are able to follow the powers of these Gods. For in 
the Gods themselves, we may perceive a twofold energy, the one indeed, 
being co-arranged with the subjects of their providential care, but the 
other being exempt and separate. According therefore, to the first of 
these energies, the mundane Gods govern sensibles, and convolve, and 
convert them to themselves; but according to the other, they follow the 
liberated Gods, and together with them are elevated to an intelligible 
nature. And on this account, the Elean guest, makes the periods of the 
whole world, and of each of the Gods in it to be twofold. For, he says, 
that the sun, and each of the heavenly bodies, subsist according to both 
these circulations, viz. the intellectual and the mundane; or, if you are 
willing so to speak, according to the power which is motive of secondary 
• natures, and the power which ascends in conjunction with the liberated 
Gods. 

Moreover, he says, that our souls, and all the natures that have a life 
separate from bodies, at one time live according to that elevating 


a 


Digitized by ooQie 



CHAP. XVI. 


OF PLATO. 


59 


progression, and at another according to the mundane ; and now indeed 
we proceed from youth to old age, since we have departed from a 
flourishing and undefiled life, and are borne to earth, and generation 
but then on the contrary, we proceeded from old age to youth. On whieh 
account, we were led round to a flourishing, intellectual, and liberated 
form of energy. Hence also, the corporeal-formed nature [with whieh we 
are connected,] was gradually obliterated, and whatever causes us to 
tend downward, and renders us inseparable from the universe. But an 
incorporeal, and immaterial nature shone forth, and was filled with the 
Gods who are the leaders of a life of this kind.. 

If also, you are willing, we may collect the same thing by a reasoning 
process, from what is written in the Phaedrus. Socrates, therefore, says 
in that dialogue, that the soul which is perfect and winged, revolves on 
high, and governs the whole world; and that this will be the case with 
our soul, when it arrives at the summit of a happy life. But this is in 
a much greater degree present with the genera superior to us, and with 
the Gods themselves. For our souls obtain this end, and this true 
blessedness, through the Gods. For whence do you think, and from 
what other causes, is a disencumbered energy, and which has dominion 
over wholes, imparted to us, and to the genera in the world more 
excellent than us, but from the liberated Gods ? For each of the mundane 
Gods obtains the administration of its allotment, and of the proper 
series over which it rulesj and which it constitutes about itself, according 
to the will of the father. For the demiurgus arranges under the several 
mundane Gods, the herds of daemons, and partial souls, as Timaeus says. 
But to energize through the whole world, is a supernatural good, and the 
peculiarity of the exempt government of the supercelestial Gods. Hence, 
from these this good is imparted to the mundane Gods, and to our souls. 
Or how can that which is partial extend its proper energy to the whole? 
And how departing from its own divided peculiarity, can it change its 
life? For that which directs its energy to the universe, withdraws itself 
from an energy which is arranged in a part. We must not therefore 
say, that this divine good is by any means present to mundane natures 
from any other source than these Gods, who establish their kingdom 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



60 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


proximately above the world. As, therefore, the progression to all 
things through similitude, and the conversion according to similitude to 
causes, are imparted from the assimilative rulers to the celestial Gods, 
to the more excellent genera, and to us, thus also, that which is liberated 
from partial natures, which is disencumbered and which tends sponta¬ 
neously to many energies, is an impression derived from the liberated 
rulers. And thus much concerning the providence of these rulers which 
pervades to all things, and the goods which they impart to subordinate 
natures. But we shall add to what has been before said, the peculiarity 
of their essence, according to which they are allotted this order. 



CHAPTER XVII. 


From the intellectual 1 Gods, therefore, (j.e. from the assimilative 
rulers] an immaterial and divine intellect is suspended. But a separate 
atid total intellect is an intellect of this kind. Hence also these Gods 
are called intellectual. For according to their hyparxes, they are 
beyond essence and multitude; but according to the participations of 
them which receive the illumination of a progression of this kind, they 
are called assimilative. For because they have, intellectual hypostases, 
and perfect powers, since intellect is the last of their participants, and 
the intellectual peculiarity defines their whole essence,—hence they are 
allotted this appellation. Of the mundane Gods, indeed, an intellectual 
nature participates primarily, an undefiled soul also participates of them, 
and that portion of the world together with which they render the whole 

' The Greek scholiast observes on this part of the text of Proclus as follows: “ By the intellec¬ 
tual, Proclus means the ruling Gods ; but by an immaterial and separate intellect the whole 
demiurgus. And by essence he means a partial hypostasis, such as that of soul, of a daemon, and 
of the intellect which is coordinate to partial souls.” 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. XVII. 


OF PLATO. 


61 


world, an intellectual and divine animal, emitting the splendour of 
themselves as far as to bodies, and imparting to these a vestige of their 
own peculiarity. It is necessary, therefore, that the orders which are 
between both these, should rejoice in certain additions, by which they 
are more multitudinous than the intellectual Gods, and in progressions 
into participants; but that they should be more singular and simple 
than the mundane Gods. For the diminutions of the divine essences 
multiply the receptacles that are suspended from them. Hence, together 
with the intellectual peculiarity, these Gods assume the psychical power, 
in order that by the incorporeal nature, they may have the supermun¬ 
dane [property,] but by the psychical, they may be more manifold than 
the intellectual Gods. 

For again, considering the affair in another way, since soul presents 
itself to the view, and the one fountain of whole souls, in pure [intellec¬ 
tuals,] and constitutes all things in conjunction with the demiurgus, is 
it not necessary that the supermundane Gods should participate of the 
psychical peculiarity ? For the Gods that are divided about the world, 
arc not filled with the unical soul without a medium, but through other 
more total media, which do not proceed out of the monad, [i. e, out of 
.Juno, or the crater,] and possess an eternal life. From thence, therefore, 
that is, from the crater of souls, the presence of soul is derived to the 
ruling and liberated Gods. For the demiurgus Jupiter also, as Socrates 
says in the Philebus, possessing in himself a royal soul, and a royal 
intellect, according to the reason of cause, and generating according to 
the whole of himself those Gods that are of a ruling characteristic 
among the supermundane and mundane divinities, entirely likewise 
imparts the intellectual and the psychical peculiarity. But the super¬ 
mundane Gods indeed, being primarily unfolded into light, participate 
more of an intellectual essence. Hence also, the psychical peculiarity is 
in them occultly. But the Gods who are allotted the middle order, 
cause the psychical peculiarity, indeed, to shine forth, yet subsisting 
with a more abundant separation [than in the supermundane Gods.] 
The mundane Gods, however, perfectly unfold the psychical peculiarity 
into light; since intellect also, was indeed occultly in the first intel- 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



68 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


lectuals, but exhibits a forerunning light in the middle, and shines forth 
in the last intellectuals. And the supermundane Gods, indeed, being 
perfectly [supermundane] derive the power of soul from the intellectual' 
crater, or the royal soul in the demiurgus; but they pre-establish in 
themselves another monad of the divided psychical genera. The liberated 
however, now communicating in essence With the mundane Gods, have 
the psychical peculiarity from a twofold source, i. e. from the fountain of 
total animations, and from the assimilative principle. And in the last 
place, the mundane Gods receive the illuminations of all the divinities 
prior to them. Hence also, they rule over the universe, imitating the 
liberated Gods, adorn sublunary natures with forms, and assimilate them 
to intellectual paradigms, imitating the ruling Gods. They likewise 
pour forth the whole of the life which is inseparable [from body,] from 
the one fountain of souls, establishing it as an image [of the life which is 
separate from a corporeal nature] and conjoin themselves to this 
fountain. 

In short, all the genera * being mingled by the demiurgus in the 
fountain of souls, in order to the generation of the different ranks of 
souls, some of these ranks have one thing, but others a different thing at 
hand. And in some indeed, the essential has dominion over the remain¬ 
ing genera; in others sameness; and in others difference. But those 
souls that are connascent with the assimilative Gods, have ’ their whole 
hypostasis according to essence. Hence they are near to an intellectual 
hyparxis, and are allotted in the genera of souls, an intelligible and occult 
transcendency. But those 4 that are co-arranged with the liberated Gods, 
characterize their proper progression, according to sameness. Hence 
also, they are consubsistent with the Gods that bind together and 
oongregate the supermundane and mundane Gods. And those souls that 
are co-divided with the mundane Gods, define the essence of themselves 
according to difference: and on this account also, the demiurgus, in 

1 For rMyrov here, it is necessary to read votgw. 

* viz, The genera of being, essence, sameness, difference, motion and jpermaneney. 

* For ««x«rov, k » necessary to read t^waty. 

* For e» 8«, it U necessary to read euSi. 


Digitized by boogie 



dHAP. XVII. 


OF PLATO. 


63 


constituting the soul of the universe, is safd to co-adapt difference to 
other souls by force. 

Moreover, the separation into parts in these, the union through 
harmony, and the energy according to time are effected through the 
illuminations of difference. But [in the souls] above these essence and 
sameness subsist, with which there are eternal life, and a union of powers. 
And thus much concerning these particulars. 

From what has been said, however, we may collect by a reasoning 
process, that intellect, essence, and intellectual life, are suspended from 
the liberated Gods. In them also soul, and the nature of the super¬ 
celestial souls shine with a forerunning light. For they are established 
above the celestial Gods who ride in bodies, just as the celestial Gods 
are exempt from the sublunary divinities, and from those who are allotted 
the government of matter. If, however, the genus of the liberated Gods 
is of this kind, they are very properly said to belong to the partial orders, 
in the same manner as the Gods prior to them. But they indeed are 
more total, because the psychical peculiarity was in them occultly. But 
the liberated Gods have that which is partial in providential energies 
more apparent because the psychical power also in these is more manifest, 
just as the mundane Gods who now preside over partial allotments, 
perfectly unfold into light the psychical essence. The whole, however, 
and impart ible genera of the Gods shine lorth as far as to the intellectual 
hypostasis. For intellect according to its own nature is impartible. 

The liberated leaders, therefore, being such as we have shown them to 
be, let us survey the multiform orders of them adapted to this order. 
Some of them, therefore, we call transporters , and these are such as 
unfold to secondary natures, the progressions of the assimilative genera. 
But others are elevators , who draw upward the mundane orders, to a 
separate energy. Others are colligators , who administer equally the 
communion of the extremes. Others are undejiled , and these are such 
as entirely obliterate matter, and impart by illumination the disen¬ 
cumbered to the providential energies of secondary natures. Others are 
perfective , and these are such as are the suppliers of perfection to 
mundane natures. And others are prolific , who multiply the progressions 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



64 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


of subordinate essences. For according to these, and far more numerous 
powers, incomprehensible by our conceptions, they preside over the 
Gods in the world, and give completion to the divine genera which 
subsist between the Gods that are exempt, and those that are co-arranged 
with the parts of the universe. 

Moreover, we must assign to them energies in symphony with their 
powers, viz. such energies as are disencumbered, every where apparent, 
amputating every thing material, and corporeal-formed, emitting an idea 
undefiled, without contact, and incorporeal, and converting all secondary 
natures to themselves, and extending them to intellectual light. And 
farther still, we must ascribe to them energies that unfold the exempt 
principles of the universe, and also energies more excellent than these, 
which draw upward to the intellectual Gods, and others still more 
elevated which conjoin themselves with the intellectual Gods, and exhibit 
an essence uncoloured, unfigured, and without contact. Again, accord* 
ing to another mode, [we must admit] that some of their energies operate 
about the secondary Gods, and are collectors of their divine unities to a 
union prior to the world. But others operate about the mundane 
intellects, and extend the intellections of them from co-ordinate intel- 
ligibles to such as are first, and exempt from the universe. Others again, 
are elevators of souls to the one fountain of them. And some of their 
energies, indeed, are the leaders of divine souls themselves; but others 
preside over the genera that are more excellent than us. And others 
convolve the multitude of intelligible.[souls’] to an undefiled life. For 
being as it were certain leaders of herds, they ascend supernally into all 
the natures in the world, and as daemon Gods, they proximately rule 
over Gods, and are the leaders of the progression to the intelligible, to 
some in one, and to others in a different way, according to the order 
which is adapted to the elevated natures. For every thing [mundane] 
participates of the liberated Gods. But the participation is different. 
For it is either according to the divine, daemoniacal, and partible, or 
according to the uniform, intellectual, and psychical. For all things, as 

* By intelligible couls, we mint understand partial, but undefiled soul*. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XV1U. 


OF PLATO. 


65 

I may say, are allotted a separate' life, a disencumbered energy, a super¬ 
natural providence, and a common prefecture, from this order of Gods. 
Let the common definition, therefore, of the liberated Gods, be such as 
this. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

In the next place it follows that we should unfold the theory of Plato, 
first, that which may be obtained in other dialogues, and afterwards, the 
all-perfect doctrine concerning these Gods, which is to be found in the 
Parmenides. In the Phsedrus therefore, Socrates energizing enthusiastic 
cally, and expanding his intellect to the whole connexion of the divine 
orders, and not only mystically Surveying the mundane progressions of 
them, but also their indescribable and blessed visions, and discursive 
energies above * the world, divides indeed, in a threefold manner, all the 
separate hypostases in the world, from the subjects of their government. 
And he calls the first of these hypostases divine; but the middle 
daemoniacal; and he gives completion to the last from our souls. He 
also suspends partial souls [such as ours] from daemons. Hence he 
denominates them co-attendants, and extends them through daemons as 
media, to the divine empire. But he suspends die daemoniacal orders 
from the mundane Gods. For daemons are the attendants of these. 
He refers however, these whole divine principalities, the daemoniacal 
herds, and choirs of partial souls, to the liberated order; and he says 
that the triadic army of mundane souls is elevated under this order, to 
the intellectual and intelligible Gods, together at the same time with their 
first causes. 

Here therefore, he defines according to the measure of the dodecad 

* For x*gi***> >t >* necessary to read x»girror. 

* Instead of tov xctr^ov, it is necessary to read u* tq tw xcxr/*«■/. 

Troc. Vol. II. I 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



66 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


(i. e. the number twelve) all the liberated Gods, though the multitude of 
them is incomprehensible, and not to be numbered by human concep- 
tions; and though none of those theologists that have written any thing 
concerning them, have been able to define their whole number, in the 
same manner as they have thp ruling multitude (i. e. the multitude of 
supermundane Gods,) or the multitude of the intellectual, or intelligible 
Gods. Plato however, apprehended that the number of the dodecad is 
adapted to the liberated Gods, as being all-perfect, composed from the 
first numbers, and completed from things perfect; and he comprehends 
in this measure all the progressions * of these Gods. For he refers all the 
genera and peculiarities of them to this dodecad, and defines tliem 
according to it. But again dividing the dodecad into two monads and 
one decad; he suspends all [[mundane natures]] from the two monads, 
but delivers to us each of these energizing on the monad posterior to 
itself, according to its own hyparxis. And one of these monads indeed, 
he calls Jovian, but he denominates the other Vesta. He likewise makes 
mention of other more partial principalities, and which give completion 
to the aforesaid decad, such as those of Apollo, Mars, and Venus. 
And he suspends indeed, the prophetic form of life from the Apolloniacal 
principality; but the amatory from the principality of Venus; and the 
divisive, from that of Mars; for hence the most total and first genera of 
lives are derived; just as when he introduces into the world souls recently 
fashioned, he says that some preside over one, and others over another 
form of life. And it appears to me, that as Timaeus makes the division 
of souls, at one time supermundane, but at another mundane, for he 
distributes souls equal in number to the stars, and disseminates one into 
the moon, another into the earth, and others into the other instruments 
of time; after the same manner also Socrates prearranges twofold rulers 
and leaders of them; proximatety indeed the mundane Gods, but in a 
still higher rank than these, the liberated Gods. 

As we have said however, the twelve Gods convolve every mundane 
genus, whether it be divine, or dsemoniacal, to the vision of intelligibles, 

* For it is necessary to read wgoetwf. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XIX. 


OF PLATO. 



67 

and perfect their separate energy. They likewise comprehend - in them¬ 
selves all the supercelestial genera, so that whether there be a paternal 
genus of the liberated Gods, or a vivific, or an undefiled and guardian 
genus, they are comprehended in this number. For this number must 
not be surveyed as if it was such as twelve is in units; for number in 
the Gods is not of this kind; but it must be beheld in the peculiarity of 
hyparxis. For as the duad in the Gods presides over prolific power,' and 
the triad, over the first perfection, thus also the dodecad [in the Gods,3 
is a symbol of all-perfect progression. For since these Gods close the 
end of the powers that are unapparent and exempt from the world, and 
ride on the celestial Gods, according to each of these, the dodecad per¬ 
tains to them, viz. it belongs to them as terminating the all-perfect in the 
progression of the supermundane, and as presiding over the celestial 
Gods. For they impart to the latter a distribution from themselves into 
the dodecad, and especially guard them in this number. The ruling 
dodecad therefore, was all-perfectly supermundane; but the celestial, is 
evidently mundane only; and the dodecad of the liberated rulers 
contains the communion of the extremes, and binds the order posterior, 
to that which is prior to itself. And on this account indeed, the liberated 
Gods are perfective of the mundane Gods, and lead them upward. 
But they are proximately suspended from the ruling Gods, are emitted 
from them, and administer the indissoluble connexion of both. [i. e. of 
the supermundane and mundane Gods.] 


CHAPTER XIX. 


That we may not however present the reader with our conceptions, 
but may unfold to the utmost of our power the theory of Plato, to the 


1 For ivafof, it it necessary to read Swa^iais. 


Digitized by boogie 



68 


ON TJ1E THEOLOGY - 


BOOK VI. 


lovers of the contemplation of truth, let us consider by ourselves, where 
those leaders must be arranged, which Socrates*celebrates in the Phae-. 
drus, and with whom it is fit to connumerate, and with what orders of 
Gods, it is proper to co-arrange the great ruler of those leaders, who 
drives a winged chariot. For it is necessary either to give to him an 
intellectual, or an assimilative, or a liberated, or a mundane order. For 
these are the decrements accompanying the progression of the great God 
Jupiter. If however, he is the intellectual Jupiter, whom we have 
denominated the demiurgus of the universe, and have made Plato bear 
testimony to our assertion, how is he the leader of the above mentioned' 
dodecad ? And how is he divided oppositely to the principality of Vesta? 
For the demiurgic monad closes indeed, the intellectual breadth, "but is 
exempt from all other numbers, and uncoordinated with all [the monads 
of other, numbers.] For it neither was, nor is lawful for effects to have 
an hypostasis opposed in division to their causes. It is not therefore 
proper to make twelve leaders of wholes, but to make the number of 
causes to be one, as Timaeus says. Moreover, Jupiter the demiurgus is 
exempt' from the universe, as being himself the author of the apparent 
order of things. But the first of the twelve leaders, is said by Socrates 
to drive a winged chariot in the heavens. How therefore, can he who is 
connected with the world, and who approximates to the Gods in the 
heavens, be considered as the same with him who is exempt from all 
[mundane natures,] and who abides, as Timaeus says, in his own accus¬ 
tomed manner? 

Farther still, this Jupiter indeed, presides over a philosophic life, and 
souls [that follow him] perpetually lead this life. But another God 
presides over the prophetic, amatory, and poetic life. The demiurgus of 
wholes, however, contains in himself the paradigms of all lives; and as 
he uniformly comprehends the essence of souls, after the same manner 
also, he comprehends all the different mutations of their lives. He is 
not, therefore, divisibly the cause of the lives in the soul, but pre-estab¬ 
lishes according to one demiurgic cause, all the periods of souls, all the 


* For eftfnjTw, it is necessary to read 



Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XIX? 


OF PLATO. 


<59 


Variety, and all the measures of life. And as the mundane sun is not 
the cause of some tilings, but the demiurgus of others, but of whatever 
the sun is the author, the demiurgus is in a greater degree the fabricator, 
and precedaneous cause,—thus also in the lives of souls, it is not proper 
to refer the cause to the demiurgus in a divided manner. For the 
demiurgic monad, presides as the impartible, common, and one cause 
of all lives; but the divisions according to lives, and the different 
paradigms of mundane natures, pertain to the Gods posterior to him. 

If, however, some one should think that we ought to abandon this 
hypothesis, but that we should assert this Jupiter, and the other leaders 
to be mundane, where must we arrange the Gods that follow him ? For 
Socrates says, “ that the army of Gods and daemons divided into eleven 
parts, follows Jupiter.” For there are more comprehensive and partial 
orders of Gods in the universe than these, and some of them have the 
relation of leaders, but others of followers. The magnitude, however, 
of the principality celebrated by Socrates, does not manifest to us a 
transcendency co-arranged with, but exempt from mundane natures. 
For in incorporeal causes, the great , imparts a peculiarity of this kind to 
those to whom it is present. And as Love being not simply called a 
daemon by Diotima, but a great daemon, is demonstrated to be expanded* 
above all daemons, and is a god, but is not arranged in the genus of 
daemons, thus also Jupiter, being celebrated as the great leader, not as 
the mundane leader of mundane natures, but as exempt from, and , 
transcending the mundane order, is allotted this appellation. But if 
Jupiter is exempt from the Gods in the world, it is necessary that the 
other leaders also should have an essence antecedent to £hose that follow 
Jupiter. For all of them are allotted a ruling dignity. But if the other 
leaders are arranged as mundane, and Jupiter alone is a leader beyond 
these, again we must transfer the whole principality from the dodecad, 
to the Jovian monad. It is necessary, however, to attribote a ruling 
power to all of them, and to preserve to Jupiter the principal authority 
among them. 

It remains, therefore, that a principality such as this of the Gods, 
must either be that of the assimilative Gods, or of those that are allotted 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


fO * 

a liberated dominion in the universe, as we say it must. If, however, 
we should admit it to belong to the assimilative orders, it will be the 
leader of a demiurgic triad, but not of the dodecad which is now 
celebrated. The Jupiter, therefore, who is among the assimilative Gods, 
and whom we have before unfolded, is the first of the sons of Saturn, 
For these sons, as Socrates says, in the Gorgias, divide the whole 
kingdom of Saturn. And the first of them indeed is the author of first, 
the - second of middle, and the third of last natures. The division, 
therefore, of mundane natures being threefold, the first of the sons of 
Saturn maybe called the leader of the triadic division, and the multitude 
proximately suspended from him will be the first of the triadic division 
in the universe. But the leader of the twelve Gods, presides over an 
army distributed into eleven parts. Hence 1 the one defines his proper 
dominion in the thirds of wholes, but the other in the twelfths. And 
according to the power of comprehension, one of them defines his 
principality conformably to the triad, but the other according to the 
endecad [or the number eleven.] By no means, therefore, is each of 
these allotted the same order. The demiurgus, therefore, and saviour 
Jupiter is uncoarranged with all these. But the assimilative Jupiter 
is the leader of the division of wholes into a triad. And the mundane 
Jupiter is among the number of leaders that follow, and not of those that 
are exempt. The Jupiter, however, who is celebrated by Socrates in 
the Phaedrus, is co-arranged with the other leaders, and presides over 
those that are disposed in an orderly manner according to eleven parts, 
and not over those that receive a tripartite division; and he is also 
exempt from all mundane natures on account of the magnitude of his 
ruling transcendency . Hence he is different from all the above-men*- 
tioned orders, and exhibits in no one of them the peculiarity which is 
now presented to our view. 

It remains, therefore, that we should connumerate him with the 
liberated Gods, in order that be may be proximate to the ^mundane 
Gods; and on this account he is said to be in the heavens, and to be exempt 

' For oure, it is necessary to read auuouv. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XIX. 


OF PLATO. 


71 


from the mundane divinities. On this account, likewise, he is celebrated 
as great. For frequently media present themselves to our view, from 
the extremes being surveyed according to mixture. Since therefore, 
Jupiter is said to drive a winged chariot in the heavens, and is denomi¬ 
nated great, he is in a certain respect co-arranged with the^celestial Gods, 
and is exempt from them. But he who is at one and the same time co-ar- 
ranged with the Gods in the universe, among whom thecdestial Jupiter is 
Allotted the highest dignity, and is exempt from them, ranks among the libe¬ 
rated Gods, if in what has been before said, we have rightly determined. 
Hence, of the Gods, some are exempt from the universe; but others give 
completion to it; and others are atone and the same time allotted a 
eo-arranged, and an exempt transcendency. This great leader in the 
heavens therefore Jupiter, is liberated and supercelestial, and the whole 
dodecad shines forth in this order of Gods. For there is one aH-perffeet 
and divine number, to which the twelve leaders give completion. So 
that it is necessary the whole number should be placed in this order of 
Gods, but we must not call in a divided manner some of the leading 
and ruling Gods mundane, and others supermundane. But if the first of 
them is supermundane, the rest also will after the same manner establish 
themselves above the Gods in the world. Each also is the leader of an 
appropriate multitude, and is surrounded with a great number* of Gods 
and daemons. But partial souls rank among the last of their followers. 
For they are co-divided with daemons, and divine natures, and partici¬ 
pate of the liberated principality of the Gods, as far as they are able. 
For, as Socrates says, “ that which is willing and able always follow* the 
Gods.** Through these things therefore, we have reminded the reader, 
that the twelve leaders of wholes celebrated by Socrates in the Phsedrus, 
belong to the liberated Gods. 

* For I read 


Digitized by 


Google 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK vr. 


72 


* • 


P 

CHAPTER XX. 


In, the next place, let us show whence they derive the whole of this 
number. It is necessary therefore, that they should have their hypostasis 
from the Gods prior to them; since the progression to the assimilative 
Gods was from the intellectual fathers, and to the intellectual fathers 
supemally from the intelligible and at the same time intellectual Gods, 
just as to these the progression was from the first intelligibles. For since 
the order of the assimilative rulers is prior to that of the liberated Gods; 
as is also the triad of the intellectual kings; or rather the demiurgic 
monad establishing in itself the all-perfect measure of the division of 
wholes into the triad,—this being the case we must survey the causes of 
the generation 1 of the liberated Gods according to both these, viz. 
according to the demiurgic measure, and the genera of the assimilative 
Gods. For the different orders of them are imparted from these two. 

Moreover, if we remember what has been before observed, we gave a 
fourfold division to the middle progressions of the assimilative Gods. 
And we said, that some of them are paternal, others prolific, others of an 
elevating, and others of a guardian nature. Since therefore, the demiurgic 
monad divides progressions into first, middle, and last, in the same 
manner as the intelligible father prior to it, but the Gods posterior 
to this monad, emit the rivers of themselves tetradically to secondary 
natures,—this being the case, the dodecad of liberated Gods presents 
itself to our view, above indeed proceeding according to the triad, but 
beneath being quadruply multiplied. Hence, of the genera which give 
completion to it,' some indeed, are allotted the demiurgic and paternal 
triadically; others, the generative and vivific triadically; others, the 
elevating peculiarity triadically; and others after the same manner the 
undefiled and guardian characteristic. For all their peculiarities arc 

‘ For tqv emoytvruaw, it is necessary to read njj etnoytwymw;. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXI. 


OF PLATO. 


73 


derived from the multitude of the assimilative Gods. But the division 
of them into first, middle and last, proceeds from the demiurgic cause. 
And thus much concerning the number of the liberated Gods, whence, 
and how'it is generated. 


CHAPTER XXI. 

Since therefore, as we have before observed, there are twelve leaders 
of all the mundane Gods, of all daemons, and farther still, of such partial 
souls as are able to be extended to the intelligible, again in this dodecad, 
the mighty Jupiter and Vesta are allotted the more ruling order. But 
the principality of the rest is co-arranged with these, and has a secondary 
dignity. And Jupiter indeed, being neither the intellect of the universe, 
as some say he is, nor the intellect in the sun, nor in short, any one of 
rpundane intellects or souls, but being expanded above all these, and 
preexisting among the liberated Gods, elevates the choir of Gods, and of 
the genera superior to us that follow him, and imparts paternal good¬ 
ness to the multitude converted to him. But he is the leader of all the 
other numbers that terminate under the twelve Gods. Again however, 
Vesta indeed governs an appropriate multitude, but she neither has the 
order of the first soul, nor is that which is called the earth in the universe. 
But prior to these, she is allotted a ruling power among the supercelestial 
Gods. She imparts however, her own peculiarity to the numbers of the 
other leaders, in the same manner as Jupiter. For the leaders that are 
suspended from the decad, participate also of these two monads. 

Jupiter however, being indeed the cause of motion is the leader to all 
things of a progression to the intelligible. But Vesta illuminates all 
things with stable * and inflexible power; though Jupiter also abiding in 

‘ For ympov, it is necessary to read jtowpo,. 

Proc. Vol. II. K 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



74 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Vl. 


himself, is thus elevated to the intelligible place of survey ; and Vesta 
on account of an inflexible and undefiled permanency in herself, is con¬ 
joined to the first causes. The emission however of a different peculiarity, 
affords the difference of dominion. For since there are twofold conver¬ 
sions in the Gods (for all things are converted to themselves and to their 
principles) each form of conversion indeed, was impartibly in king Saturn. 
For according to Parmenides he is demonstrated to be in himself, and in 
another. And the latter indeed, pertains to a conversion to a more 
excellent nature, but the former implies a conversion to himself. In the 
secondary however, and more partial Gods, both these forms shine forth 
in a divided manner. And Vesta indeed, imparts to the mundane Gods 
an undefiled establishment in themselves; but Jupiter imparts to them 
an elevating motion to first natures. For Vesta belongs to the undefiled, 
but Jupiter to the paternal series ; but they are divided by a subsistence 
in self, and a subsistence in another, as we have before observed. It 
must be said therefore, that every thing stable and immutable, and which 
possesses an invariable sameness of subsistence, arrives to all mundane 
natures from the supercelestial Vesta, and that on this account all the poles 
are immoveable, and the axes about which the circulations of the spheres 
convolve themselves. It must also be said, that the wholenesses of the 
circulations are firmly established, that the earth abides immoveably in 
the middle, and that the centres have an unshaken permanency [from 
this supercelestial Vesta.] 

Again therefore, it must be admitted that all motions, separate energies, 
and the conversions of secondary to first natures, are derived to wholes 
from Jupiter. For the intellectual orders are not only united to coordi¬ 
nate intelligibles, but also to such as are exempt, on account of the 
elevating progression of Jupiter. And divine souls following the mighty 
Jupiter are extended as far as to the first causes. The attendants of these 
also are collected together with the Gods, in consequence of being 
suspended from the paternal government of Jupiter. But again, with 
respect to all the remaining leaders, each presides over his proper series f 
and imparts from himself his peculiarity to the whole multitude Isus- 
pended from him.] And one of them indeed, imparts as far as to the 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. xxir. 


OF PLATO. 


75 


last of things an unfolding, another, a prolific, and another, an immutable 
peculiarity, being themselves allotted a supercelestial order, and drawing 
upward a numerous army of partible Gods. Hence Socrates also at one 
and the same time denominates them rulers, says that they have an 
arrangement, and that their energy is directed to secondary natures, ac¬ 
cording to the order in which they are placed. Each, however, of the 
other ruling Gods whp are ranked in the number of the twelve, is a leader 
according to the order in which he is arranged. The ruling and leading 
peculiarity, therefore, alone, pertains to the supermundane Gods. 
But to be arranged, and that which is arranged itself by itself, pertain to 
the mundane Gods. For these are they who participate of order, and 1 
who are allotted order according to participation. Both these peculiari¬ 
ties, however, pertain to the liberated Gods. For they are rulers and 
leaders, as beiDg in continuity with the ruling [supermundane] Gods, and 
they are arranged and participate of order, as being proximate to the 
mundane Gods. But being the middle of both, they connect the whole 
progressions of them according to one intellectual bond. Farther still, as 
presiding indeed over the ruling order in the heavens, they come into 
contact with the mundane Gods, and as being in themselves, and extend¬ 
ed to the intelligible, they are allotted a transcendency separate from the 
universe, and exempt from their participants. Thus much, therefore, may 
suffice concerning the firRt division of these Gods. Since, however, we 
have before observed that their progression is tetradic and triadic, we 
shall concisely define' the peculiarities of the arranged triads. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


Thb&e, therefore, being arranged according to triads, as we have said, 
of the demiurgic triad, indeed, Jupiter is allotted the highest order, su- 

1 For Hfmtfiirwpttt*, it is neceteaiy to read 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



?6 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


perwally from intellect governing souls and bodies, and as Socrates says, 
taking care of all things. But Neptune here also gives completion to the 
middle of the demiurgic [triad], and especially governs the psychical 
order. For this God is the cause of motion, and of all generation. But 
soul is the first of generated natures, and is essentially motion. And 
Vulcan inspires the nature of bodies, and fabricates all the mundane seats 
of the Gods. Again, of . the guardian and immutable triad, the first 
indeed is Vesta, because she preserves the very being of things, and an 
undefiled essence. For Socrates in the Cralylus gives to her the highest 
order, as connectedly containing the summits of wholes. But Minerva 
preserves middle lives inflexible, through intellection, and a self-energizing 
life, sustaining them from [the incursions of] matter. And Mars illumi¬ 
nates corporeal-formed natures with power, and an infrangible' strength, 
ns Socrates says in the Oatylus. Hence he is perfected by Minerva, 
and participates of a more intellectual inspiration, as the poetry (jof Oi> 
pheus] says, and of a life separate from generated natures. 

Moreover, of tbe vivific triad, Ceres is the chief, entirely generating all 
mundane life, viz. the intellectual, the psychical, and that which is inse¬ 
parable from body. But Juno contains the middle of the triad, and 
imparts the generation of soul. For the intellectual goddess emits from 
herself all the progressions of the other psychical genera. And Diana is 
allotted the end of the triad, moving all natural reasons into energy, and 
perfecting the imperfection * of matter. Hence theologists, and Socrates 
in the Theaetetus, call her Lochia, (or the power that presides over births) 
as being the inspective guardian of psychical progression and generation. 
Of the remaining triad, therefore, the anagogic, or elevating, Hermes 
indeed is the supplier of philosophy, and through this elevates souls, and 
by the dialectic powers, sends upward both total and partial souls to the 
good itself. But Venus is the first-effective cause of the amatory inspi¬ 
ration which pervades through wholes, and familiarizes to the beautiful 
the lives that are elevated by her. And Apollo perfects and converts all 


* For <xfpi)Toy, it is necessary to read appijxrov. 
1 For it is necessary to read 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXII. 


OF PLATO. 


77 


things through music, convolving, as Socrates says [in the Cratylus3, and 
through harmony and rythm attracting to intellectual truth, and the light 
which is there. 

We say, however, in common respecting all of them, that establishing 
themselves above the mundane Gods, they contain all the choir of the 
liberated Gods. And souls indeed are suspended from them, but intel¬ 
lectual souls, and such as are as it were powers generative of souls. 
Hence Socrates also gives to them chariots. For Jupiter is said to drive a 
winged chariot, and the other Gods after the same manner as Jupiter use 
secondary vehicles. But what else can we say these are than supermun¬ 
dane souls, on which they ride, and which are intellectual indeed, but, 
the sources of partibility and division, from which mundane souls are 
allotted their hypostasis; a more abundant separation, and a greater 
number of parts appearing in them, in consequence of their being adapted 
to be bound through analogy ? In the liberated Gods, therefore, the 
psychical peculiarity unites itself to intellect. Hence also, Jupiter is said 
to drive a winged chariot, without division, in consequence of this chariot 
being intellectual, and not departing from an immaterial and divine 
intellect. But in the mundane Gods, divisions of horses and charioteers 
are delivered. [For Socrates says in the Phesdrus], “ AU foe horses, 
therefore, aBd chariots of the Gods are good, and consist of snch things 
as are good.” Hence an energy according to time first shines forth in 
the mundane Gods, where there is a more abundant separation of powers. 
But in the liberated Gods, time is always with eternity, and partibility 
with union. For they are the principles of souls, and the causes of 
mundane natures, and are as it were intellectual seeds abiding in the in¬ 
tellectual comprehensions of* themselves. And thus much concerning 
these things. 


Digitized by boogie 



78 * 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


I wish, however, to show from other writings of Plato what the^ecu- 
liarity is which he exhibits to us of the liberated order. In the Republic, 
therefore, teaching us the order of the universe which pervades through 
the mundane wholes, supernally from the inerraiic sphere, and which 
governs the elections of human life that are different at different times, 
this life also varying the measure of justice adapted to it, he refers the 
first-effective cause of this order to a monad and triad exempt from £the 
mundane] wholes. And to the monad indeed, he gives the power of 
dominion, extending the authority of it to all heaven, its empire being at 
one and the same time impartibly present to all things, governing all 
things indivisibly, and according to one energy, and moving wholes by the 
lowest powers of itself. Giving also to the triad a progression from the 
monad, he distributes from it into the universe a partible energy and 
production. For that which is simple and united in exempt providence, 
is educed into multitude through secondary inspection. Thus, therefore, 
the one cause of multitude possesses a greater authority, but the distri¬ 
buted cause appears to be more proximate to its effects. For all the 
variety of powers in the world, the infinity of motions, and the multiform 
difference of reasons, [i. e. of productive principles] are convolved under 
the triad of the Fates. But again this triad is extended tO'the one monad 
which is prior to the three Fates, and which Socrates denominates Ne¬ 
cessity, not as ruling over wholes by viblence, nor as obliterating the 
self-motive nature of our life, nor as deprived of intellect and the most 
excellent knowledge, but as comprehending all things intellectually, and 
introducing bound to things indefinite, and order to things inordinate. 
And farther still, he thus denominates it, as causing all things to be obe¬ 
dient to itself, and extending them to good, as subjecting them to demi¬ 
urgic sacred laws, as guarding all things within the world, and as compre¬ 
hending all things in the universe in a circle, and leaving nothing deprived 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXIII. 


OF PLATO. 


79 

of the justice pertaining to it, nor suffering it, besides this, tody from the 
divine law. 

Since, therefore, we give a twofold division to the causes of the order of 
the world, and we admit one of the causes to be monadic, but the other 
triadic, and we acknowledge that the monad is productive of the triad, 
being persuaded by Plato, and since we have shown that the triad is the 
offspring of the mouad, let us see in what order it is possible to arrange 
each of these. For wishing to learn this, we have undertaken the present 
discussion concerning them. The monad, therefore, which, as we have 
said, Socrates calls Necessity, is perfectly exempt from mundane natures, 
and by the last of her powers imparts motion to all heaven, neither being 
converted to it, nor energizing about it, but imparting an orderly circula¬ 
tion to the world, by her very essence, and by being firmly established. 
For [Socrates says3 that the spindle is moved on the knees of Necessity; 
but that she herself having royally established herself on a throne near to 
the universe, governs the heavens in a silent path. But the triad is now 
in a certain respect co-arranged with the circulations of the heavens, con¬ 
volves them with hands, and energizes about them, and no longer causes 
them to revolve by its very being alone [in the same manner as the 
monad]. For the triad is the cause of the order and circulations of the 
universe, by producing and performing a certain thing; though in this 
also there is a different energy. For Lachesis indeed moves with both 
her hands; but each of the remaining Parcae, with one hand only. This 
however we shall again discuss. But it is obvious to every one, that of 
this production which subsists according to the monad, and the tiiad pro¬ 
ceeding from it, it must be granted that the monad is established in a more 
ancient order of Gods, but the, triad in an inferior order. 

We say, therefore, that Necessity who is called the mother of the Parcae, 
first subsists in the intellectual Gods, analogous to the intelligible and 
intellectual monad of Adrastia; and that thence being unfolded into 
light in the ruling orders, she generates this triad of the Parcae. For that 
which is total in providence, energy, and the convolution of wholes by 
the very being itself of that which convolves them, are indication's of in¬ 
tellectual transcendency, To extend, likewise, impartibly production to 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



80 


ON THB THEOLOGY 


BOOK YI. 


all things, is coequaliaed with demiurgic dominion. And this Goddess 
appears to me to illuminate all the progeny of the demiurgus with an 
ineffable guard. As likewise he is the generator of wholes Impartibly, 
thus too Necessity guards inflexibly all things in herself, and compre¬ 
hends them monadically, preserving indissoluble the order which proceeds 
from the demiurgus into the world. Necessity, therefore, being allotted 
such an authority and kingdom in wholes, the triad of the Parcse rules 
over the universe in a liberated manner. For it comes into contact with 
the heavens, and for a time relinquishes the contact, as Socrates says. 
And through contact indeed, it is co-arranged with the bodies that are 
moved, and is connascent with them; but through a retention of energies, 
it is without contact, is separate from the things governed, and is exempt 
from them. Being, however, at one and the same time allotted both 
these peculiarities, it exists in the liberated Gods. For to touch, and not 
to touch, to move and not to move, as the fable relates, are not according 
to a part in the Gods, but are coexistent, and subsist with each other at 
once. For divine natures do not change their energies according to time, 
nor like partial souls, do they at one time energize separately, and at 
another providentially attend to secondary natures; but abiding in them¬ 
selves they are every where present, and being present to all things, they 
do not depart from the watch-tower of themselves. At one and the same 
time, therefore, the being without contact, and the coming into contact 
with the celestial periods, are present with the Parcse, and they also com¬ 
prehend that which is exempt and liberated from sensibles, according to 
one peculiarity, and that which is coarranged with, and allied to them. 
And on this account, they possess a liberated order with reference to the 
whole heaven. 

If, however, there is also a mundane triad of the Parcse, and a provi¬ 
dence proximate to the subjects of their government, it is not wonderful. 
For of Jupiter, and Juno, Apollo and Minerva, there are common pro. 
gressions and coarrangements, after the supercelestial allotment, and 
together with the mundane Gods. For powers which give completion 
to the last order of the Gods, approximate to the universe from all the 
liberated Gods. But Socrates, celebrating the liberated and supermun- 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXIII. 


OF PLATO. 


81 


dane kingdoms of the Parc®, has represented them to us as touching and 
not touching the whole circulations, dividing the limitation 1 of their pe¬ 
culiarities, by mutation according to time. For to relinquish [the con¬ 
tact] for a time, affords a representation of a temporal mutation of ener¬ 
gies. This, however, pertains to the concealment which is adapted to 
divine fables. For fables introducing generations of things unbegotten, 
compositions of things simple, and distributions of things impartible, 
obumbrate under many veils the truth of things. If, however, as fables 
call the transition from cause to existence, generation, denominate the 
causal comprehension of composite in simple natures, composition 
itself, and say that the division of secondary about first natures, is the dis¬ 
tribution of the latter into parts,—thus also, if we do not apprehend ac¬ 
cording to time, the alternately coming into contact with, and being 
separated from things that are moved, conformably to the apparent 
meaning of the fable, but according to the different peculiarities of the 
Parc®, * and an hypostasis mingled from the extremes, we shall be most 
near to the conception of Plato. Here, therefore, let us terminate this, 
which does not require much discussion at present. 

But let us consider the order of the Parc® by itself. For of these, 
some think that Lachesis should be arranged as the first, but others as ihe 
last of the three. And of the remaining two, some give a prior arrange¬ 
ment to Atropos, and place her in the order of a monad, but others to 
Clotho. Since, however, Plato in the Laws clearly says, that Lachesis is 
the first, Clotho the second, and Atropos the third, I think that what is 
said in the Republic should be referred to this definite order in them, and 
that we should not make any innovation by following the mutable 
opinions of interpreters. Socrates, therefore, says, that Lachesis sings 
the past, but Clotho the present, and Atropos the future; here also in a 
similar manner using an order of division conformably to their energies. 
And to Lachesis indeed he gives predominance, and a uniform dominion 
over the rest. But he gives to Clotho a dominion subordinate to that of 

1 For Ttgipogct(, I read nptypafya;. 

* For fufon, it is necessary to read Motpwv. 

Proc. Vol. II. L 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



82 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


Lachesis, but more comprehensive than the kingdom of Atropos. And 
to Atropos he attributes the third kingdom, which is comprehended by 
both the others, and is arranged under them. The multitude, therefore, are 
ignorant that Socrates uses the parts of time as symbols of the compre¬ 
hension according to cause. For the past was once the future, and the 
present, but the future 1 is not yet the past, but has the whole of its 
essence in existing in some after time. We must assume, therefore, the 
triple causes analogous to these three parts of time; and say that the 
cause which is the most perfect, and the most comprehensive of the others, 
sings the past, as the cause of the others, and the source of their energy. 
For the past is comprehensive of the future and the present. But the 
second cause is the present, * which partly comprehends, and is partly 
comprehended. For this prior to its being the present was the future. 
And the third cause, and which is comprehended by both the others, is 
the future. For this requires the present and the past, the one unfolding 
it, but the other bounding its progression. Lachesis, therefore, is the 
first-effective cause, comprehending the other causes in herself; but each 
of the remaining Parcae is comprehended by her. And Clotho indeed is 
allotted a superior, but Atropos an inferior order. And on this account, 
Lachesis indeed moves with both her hands, as giving completion in a 
greater and more total manner to those things which are effected by them 
more partially. But Clotho turns the spindle with her right, and Atro¬ 
pos with her left hand, so far as the former indeed is the primary leader 
of the energies, but the latter follows, and governs all things in conjunc¬ 
tion with the former. For in mortal animals, the right hand is the prin¬ 
ciple of motion; and in wholes, the motion to the right is comprehensive 
of the motion to the left hand. On this account, therefore, the triad of 
the Fates, in the Laws and in the Republic, is divided by Plato accord¬ 
ing to the same order, into first, middle, and last. 

And not only in the before mentioned passages, but also at the end of 
the fable, in which he leads the soul to the mortal place, and to a polity 


1 In the original to Se /uwAA ov is omitted. 

4 For Tot wagayoyra, it is necessary to read rot nctpovrou 


i 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. XXIII. 


OF PLATO. 


83 


the work of generation under the daemon allotted to it as a ruler, super- 
nally from the heavens, and the summit of the universe, he arranges souls 
under Lachesis as the first, under Clotho as the second, and under Atro- 
pos as the third. And after these, when they become perfectly situated 
under the throne of Necessity, he leads them to the plain of Oblivion, and 
the river of Negligence. It is necessary, therefore, either to disturb the 
descent of souls, and subvert the continuity of remission, which the pre¬ 
fecture of the governing daemon affords to souls, or to assign to Lachesis 
a rank more elevated than that of the other Parcae; but to give to Clotho 
the second, and to Atropos after the same manner the third rank. For 
the progression into generation beginning from more perfect natures, and 
subsiding according to a tendency to an earthly nature, originates indeed 
from Lachesis, but ends in Atropos. 

Farther still, the lots, and the paradigms of lives, are extended to souls 
from the knees of Lachesis, through the prophet as a medium. And as 
the fable before said that the whole spindle is turned on the knees of 
Necessity, thus also it suspends the providence about partial souls from- 
the knees of Lachesis, who moves the universe perpetually with her 
hands, as with more elevated powers, but in her knees possesses subordi¬ 
nate^ the causes of the psychical periods. Hence the prophet in a remark¬ 
able manner celebrates this daughter of the Goddess: “ This is the speech 
of the virgin Lachesis, the daughter of Necessity." But again, Clotho is 
said to weave things consequent to the elections made by souls, and to 
distribute to each of them an appropriate destiny. And after her, Atro¬ 
pos imparts to the webs the immutable and the definite, giving completion 
to the end of the canons of the Fates, and to the order which extends 
from the universe to us. If, therefore, Lachesis energizes in souls prior 
to their election, and after their choice is made, defines all the periods of 
them in the realms of generation, by the most beautiful boundaries; but 
the other Parcae after the election made by souls, allot them what is con¬ 
venient, and connect their lives with the order of the universe, does it not 
appear that Lachesis precedes Clotho and Atropos, and that they follow 
her, and together with her give completion to their appropriate provi¬ 
dence ? Lachesis, therefore, appears to possess the second dignity of a 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



84 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


mother with respect to the other Parcae, and to be a certain monad co¬ 
arranged with them, just as Necessity in an exempt manner comprehends 
the powers of all of them. But the other Parcae are proximately indeed 
perfected under Lachesis, but still higher than her, under Necessity. 
Such, therefore, is the order of them according to the narration of Plato. 

The symbols, however, which the fable attributes to them, magnificently 
celebrate their kingdoms. For their walking on the [celestial] circles, 
signifies their exempt and separate dominion. But their sitting on 
thrones, and not on the circles themselves, as the Sirens do, indicates that 
the receptacles which are primarily illuminated by them, are established 
above the celestial bodies. For a throne is the vehicle and receptacle of 
those that are seated on it. And all the participants of the participate 
Gods, are placed under them like vehicles, and the ^participate] Gods 
are eternally established in, ride on, and energize through them. But the 
Fates being seated at equal distances from each other, manifest the 
orderly separation of them, their remission proceeding according to ana¬ 
logy, and the distribution supernally derived to them from their mother. 
For from thence, that which is arranged in progression, and that which 
is according to desert in energies, are imparted to the Fates. 

Moreover, the having a crown on their heads, signifies that their sum¬ 
mits are surrounded with a divine light, and that they are adorned by 
prolific and undefiled causes, through which also they fill the heavens with 
generative power, and immutable purity. But their being invested with 
white garments evinces that all their externally emitted reasons, and the 
lives which they propose to themselves, are intellectual and luciform, and 
full of divine splendour. And the garments indeed appear to indicate 
the essences which participate of the Fates; but the thrones, the recep¬ 
tacles in the first firmaments. For with us also, garments are proximately 
connected with our bodies; but vehicles are apprehended to be more 
remote from us. This, however, is assumed from another theology, from 
which we are instructed in the orders that are above the inerratic sphere. 
But the assertion that one of the Fates sings the past, another the pre¬ 
sent, and the third the future, evinces that all their externally proceeding 
energies are elegant and intellectual, and full of harmony. For the Fates 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


85 


perfect the songs of the Sirens, and the very orderly and elegant motions 
of the heavens, and fill all things ’with their hymns; calling forth indeed 
the production of their mother into the universe, through intellectual 
hymns, but converting all things to themselves through the harmonious 
motion of wholes. All these particulars, however, sufficiently demon¬ 
strate to us the perfect, undefiled, and supercelestial order of the Fates. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


It remains, therefore, for us to adduce the Parmenides as a witness of 
the doctrine concerning these gods. For Plato in that dialogue most 
clearly delivers the one peculiarity of them. For after the progression 
of the assimilative orders, in which the similar and dissimilar shine forth 
to the view from intellectual sameness and difference, at one time indeed 
according to analogy, but at another according to a generation which is 
different [from that of the other orders], and difficult to be surveyed, he 
demonstrates that the one touches and does not touch, 1 both itself and 
other things. For all the divine genera after the demiurgic monad 
double their energies. For they are naturally adapted to energize both 
towards themselves, and other things, posterior to themselves, rejoicing 
in progressions, being subservient to the providence of secondary natures, 
through the will of their father, and calling forth his supernatural, 
impartible, and all-perfect production, and communicating the streams 
of it to secondary natures. Does not, therefore, this contact and division 
with things subordinate, represent to us the liberated peculiarity P For 
to touch, is an indication of alliance with us, and of a co-arranged provi- 

' In the original ou% enrropevov is omitted. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 





ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI. 


dence. But again, not to touch, is an indication of a transcendency 
exempt and separate from mundane natures. In what has been before 
said, therefore, we have demonstrated that a thing of this kind pertains 
to the genus of the liberated Gods, who at one and the same time come 
into contact with celestial natures, and are expanded above them, and 
proceed to all things with an unrestrained energy, and free from all 
habitude. On this account also, we have placed the Fates in the super¬ 
celestial order. For Socrates says that they touch the [celestial] circu¬ 
lations; and in the Cratylus he asserts that the mundane Core (or 
Proserpine) who associates with Pluto, and administers the whole of 
generation, comes into contact with a mutable essence, and that through 
this contact she is called Pherephatta. 

Farther still, in the Phaedo, teaching us what the mode of the cathartic 
life of souls is, he says “ that the soul when it does not associate with the 
body, conies into contact with [true] being.” Through all these particulars, 
therefore, he indicates that contact is the work of an inseparable provi¬ 
dence, and of a co-arranged administration; but that the negation of 
contact is the business of a prefecture, separate, unrestrained, and exempt 
from the subjects of government. The one, therefore, which touches and 
does not touch other things, is conjoined with other things, and established 
above them. Hence, at one and the same time it is allotted the power 
of things established above the world, and of mundane natures. For 
being in the middle of both, it comprehends in one the divided peculia¬ 
rities of the extremes. And moreover, it touches, and does not touch 
itself prior to other things; because there are in it multitude, a separation 
of wholeness, and the parts of wholeness, and a union collective of all the 
multitude. For if it has proceeded from its principles, and if it energizes 
partibly, it is various and multiform. For every progression diminishes 
indeed, the powers of the proceeding natures, but increases the multitude 
which is in them, and if it has not entirely proceeded, the uniform nature 
of its essence shines forth to the view, at one and the same time, with the 
multitude it contains. This genus of Gods, therefore, is co-arranged with 
the mundane Gods, and transcends the subjects of its government. It is 
also liberated, being separated from things which are perfectly divided. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


87 


Hence, if it is one and multitude, producing indeed into secondary na¬ 
tures the many rivers of the fountains, but surpassing partible allotments, 
it will at one and the same time touch and not touch itself. On account 
of its separate union indeed, it is not in want of contact; but on account 
of its progression into multitude, it touches itself. “ For it comprehends 
many things in itself, and touches itself, so far as it is in itself," says 
Parmenides. In short, so far as it is without contact, it is separate; 
but so far as it proceeds from itself, and is again established in itself, it 
touches itself. And so far indeed, as it is in other things, it comes into 
contact with other things ; but so far as it is uncoarrahged with others, 
and so far as it has not a co-ordinate number in them, it is separated from 
/ them. At one and the same time therefore, this genus of Gods is uniform 
and multiplied, and is uniformly varied. It also abides and proceeds, 
and is participated by more imperfect natures, and is imparticipable, 
existing prior to them. All these particulars, however, are the elements 
of the supercelestial order, presenting to our view an hypostasis mingled 
from perfectly divided peculiarities. And thus much concerning the 
essence land hyparxis of these Gods, which Parmenides exhibits to us in 
the above citation. 

It is necessary, however, to assume from the things placed before us, 
the causes of the generation of these Gods. Since it is demonstrated, there¬ 
fore, that these divinities are according to union itself beyond all partible 
separation, and contact, they will have their progression from the one. 
For union is thence derived to all things, from the first unity, which is 
exempt from all multitude, and all division. But in consequence of 
their having pre-assumed the power of touching themselves, according to 
a subsistence in self they derive their existence from the unpolluted 
Gods. For the subsistence in self in the first of the intellectual fathers, 
was the symbol of a cause inflexible, and which immutably sustains 
multitude from secondary natures. If, therefore, this one touches itself, 
on account of a subsistence in self, it establishes multitude in the one , 
and contains parts in wholeness, on account of undefiled power in 


1 In the original %iegirrov tarty is wanting. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



88 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VL 


progression. And in the intellectual fathers, indeed, a subsistence in 
self primarily shines forth to the view, and comprehends contact 
causally, as was demonstrated to us through the first hypothesis. But 
in the liberated Gods, a subsistence in self is according to participation. 
Contact, however, is in this one according to essence, and is consub- 
sistent with the multitude it contains. 

Farther still, {the one] being in other things touches other things; but 
not being co-arranged with them according to any common number, it 
is separated from them. By this, therefore, Parmenides appears indeed 
to form his reasoning from a subsistence in another; since that the one 
touches itself, was before demonstrated, through a subsistence in itself. 
It is, however, wonderful that a subsistence in another is, in the first 
progression, * superior to a subsistence in self, but in the participation of 
the liberated Gods is subordinate to a subsistence in self. For we say, 
that for a thing to come into contact, and be co-arranged with other 
things, is in every respect more imperfect than for it to convert 
multitude to itself. We must, therefore, say that the liberated Gods 
have their progression from the demiurgic and the assimilative order. 
Hence Parmenides does not say that the one is in another thing, but in 
other things. But other things are primarily suspended from the 
^demiurgic] monad; but secondarily from the assimilative Gods. The 
liberated Gods, therefore, from thence receive their subsistence in others. 
For the demiurgic one being same and different, imparts to them 
sameness and union exemptly. But the assimilative one illuminates 
them with a separate similitude. But the one of the liberated Gods 
subsists now with others, so far as it is co-arranged with them, and 
proximately presides over them. Again, however, because it differs from 
the mundane unities, it is allotted the whole of its appropriate number 
exempt from others. And thus other things participating of no number 
which - is common with this one, cannot proximately participate of it. 
Hence the progression to the liberated Gods, is from the first causes, and 
from causes that are arranged near.to them. For their progression is 


3 For vsgioSu, it is necessary to read irgooSw. 



Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


89 


from the one ; since as the one is exempt from intelligibles, thus also the 
liberated Gods are exempt from sensibles. And their progression is 
likewise from the undefiled order. For they have not the disencumbered 
from any other source than that of immutable power, and the demiurgic 
cause. Being likewise generated from the assimilative Gods, they 
receive a communion with other things, and from themselves they are 
established above others. For they establish their appropriate number 
above the subsistence of other things. And thus much concerning these 
Gods may be assumed from the Parmenides. But we have elsewhere 
accurately explained the several particulars relating to them, and there 
is no occasion to write the same things in the present treatise [as we 
have there written]. 


JProc, 


Voi. II. 


M 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



90 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


BOOK VII. 


CHAPTER I. 

The mundane Gods, or those divinities who give completion to the 
sensible world, are assigned the last order of deific progression, as we 
are informed by Proclus in the preceding book. They also divide the 
universe, and obtain perpetual allotments and receptacles in it, and 
through these weave one and the best polity of the universe. Each of 
the mundane genera likewise enjoy the energy of the liberated governors 
of the universe, according to a measure adapted to each, and especially 
such as are able to follow the powers of these Gods. For in the Gods 
themselves we may perceive a twofold energy, the one indeed being 
co-arranged with the subjects of their providential care, but the other 
being exempt and separate. According, therefore, to the first of these 
energies, the mundane Gods govern sensibles, and convolve and convert 
them to themselves; but according to the other, they follow the 
liberated Gods, and together with them are elevated to an intelligible 
nature. The mundane Gods also perfectly unfold the psychical pecu¬ 
liarity into light; and receive the illuminations of all the divinities prior 
to them. Hence too, they rule over the universe imitating the liberated 
Gods, adorn sublunary natures with forms, and assimilate them to 
intellectual paradigms, imitating the ruling Gods. They likewise pour 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP, i- 


OF PLATO. 


91 


forth the whole of the life which is inseparable from body, from the one 
fountain of souls, establishing it as an image of the life which is separate 
from a corporeal nature, and unite themselves to this fountain. 

Again, the world is said by Plato in the Timaeus to. be the image of the 
eternal, i.e. of the intelligible Gods. For it is filled from them with deity, 
and the progressions into it of the mundane Gods, are as it were certain 
rivers and illuminations of the intelligible Gods. These progressions also 
the world receives, not only according to the celestial part of it, but 
according to the whole of itself. For in the air, the earth and sea, there 
are advents of terrestrial, aquatic, and aerial Gods. Hence the world is 
throughout filled with deity; and on this account is according to the 
whole of itself the image of the intelligible Gods. Not that it receives 
indeed these Gods themselves; for images do not receive the exempt 
essences of the total Gods ; but illuminations poured from thence on the 
secondary orders, to the reception of which they are commensurate. 

Farther still, of the mundane Gods, some are the causes of the 
existence of the world ; others animate it; others again harmonize it thus 
composed of different natures ; and others, lastly, guard and preserve it 
when harmonically arranged. And since these orders are four, and each 
consists of things first, middle and last, it is necessary that the disposers 
of these should be twelve. Hence Jupiter, Neptune, and Vulcan, fabricate 
the world; Ceres, Juno and Diana animate it; Mercury, Venus, and 
Apollo harmonize it; and lastly, Vesta, Minerva, and Mars, preside 
over it with a guardian power. But the truth of this may be seen in 
statues as in enigmas. For Apollo harmonizes the lyre; Pallas is 
invested with arms; and Venus is naked; since harmony generates 
beauty, and beauty is not concealed in objects of sensible inspection. 
Since, however, these Gods primarily possess the world, it is necessary 
to consider the other mundane Gods as subsisting in these; as Bacchus 
in Jupiter, Esculapius in Apollo, and the Graces in Venus. We may 
likewise, behold the spheres with which they are connected ; viz. Vesta 
with earth, Neptune with water, Juno with air, and Vulcan with fire. 
But the six superior Gods we denominate from general custom. For 
Apollo and Diana are assumed for the sun and moon ; but the orb of 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


92 


Saturn is attributed to Ceres; aether to Pallas; and heaven is common 
to them all. And thus much concerning the mundane Gods in general, 
the sources of their progression, their orders, powers, and spheres. 1 


CHAPTER II. 


The division, however, of the mundane Gods is into the celestial and 
sublunary. And of the celestial, the divinity of the inerratic sphere hats 
the relation of a monad to the divinities of the planets. But the triad 
under this monad consists of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars; of which the 
first is the cause of connected comprehension, the second of symmetry, 
and the third of division and separation. And again, with respect to the 
sublunary deities, the moon ranks as a monad, being the cause of all 
generation and corruption. But the triad under it, consists of the 
divinities who preside over the elements of air, water and earth. Between 
these are the planets that revolve with an equal velocity. And of these, 
the sun indeed unfolds truth into light, Venus beauty, and Mercury the 
symmetry of reasons or productive principles, conformably to the analogy 
of the three monads mentioned by Plato in the Philebus, as subsisting in 
the vestibule of the good. It may also be said that the moon is the cause 
of nature to the mortal genera, being the visible image of the fontal 
nature existing in the goddess Rhea. But the sun is the fabricator of 
all the senses, because he is the author of seeing and of being seen. 
Mercury is the cause of the motions of the phantasy; for the sun gives 
subsistence to the essence of the phantasy, so far as it is the same with 
sense. But Venus is the cause of the appetites of that irrational part of 
the soul which is called desire; and Mars, of those irascible motions 

* Vid. Sallust, de Diis et Mundo, Cap. 6. 


\ 



Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. II. 


OF PLATO. 


9 3 


which are conformable to nature. Jupiter also, is the common cause of 
all vital, and Saturn of all gnostic powers. For all the irrational forms 
may be divided into these. The causes, therefore, of these, are antece¬ 
dently comprehended in the celestial Gods, and in the spheres with 
which they are connected. 

The allotments also of the mundane Gods are conformable to the 
divisions of the universe. But the universe is divided by demiurgic 
numbers, viz. by the duad, triad, tetrad, pentad, hebdomad, and 
dodecad. For after the one fabrication of things by the demiurgus, the 
division of the universe into two parts, heaven and generation (or the 
sublunary region), gives subsistence to twofold allotments, the celestial 
and the sublunary. After this, the triad divides the universe, to which 
Homer alludes when he says that Neptune is allotted the hoary deep, 
Jupiter, the extended heavens, and Pluto, the subterranean darkness. 
But after the triple distribution, the tetradic follows, which gives a 
fourfold arrangement to the elements in the universe, as the Pythagoreans 
say, viz. the celestial and the ethereal, above the earth and under the 
earth. The universe also receives a division into five parts. For the 
world is one and quintuple, and is appropriately divided by celestial, 
empyreal, aerial, aquatic and terrestrial figures and presiding Gods. 
After this follows its division into seven parts. For the heptad beginning 
supernally from the inerratic sphere, pervades through all the elements. 
And in the last place is the division of the universe by the dodecad, viz. 
into the sphere of the fixed stars, the spheres of the seven planets, and 
the spheres of the four elements. 

Moreover, the allotment of angels and daemons is co-suspended from 
the divine allotments, but has a more various distribution. For one 
divine allotment comprehends in itself many angelic, and a still greater 
number of daemoniacal allotments; since every angel rules over many 
daemons, and every angelic allotment is surrounded with numerous 
daemoniacal allotments. For what a monad is in the Gods, that a tribe 
is among daemons. Here, therefore, instead of the triad we must assume 
three compositions, and instead of the tetrad or dodecad, four or twelve 
choirs following their respective leaders. And thus we shall always 


Digitized by boogie 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


94 

preserve the higher allotments. For as in essences, powers and energies, 
progressions generate multitude; thus also in allotments, such as are 
first, have a precedency in power, but are diminished in multitude, as 
being nearer to the one father of the universe, and the whole and one 
providence which extends to all things. But secondary allotments, have 
a diminution of power, but an increase of multitude. And thus much 
concerning allotments in general. 

Since, however, according to a division of the universe into two parts, 
we have distributed allotments into the celestial and sublunary, there 
can be no doubt what the former are, and whether they possess an 
invariable sameness of subsistence. But the sublunary allotments are 
deservedly a subject of admiration, whether they are said to be perpetual 
or not. For since all things in generation are continually changing and 
flowing, how can the allotments of the providential rulers of them- be said 
to be perpetual? For things in generation are not perpetual. But if 
their allotments are not perpetual, how is it possible to suppose that 
divine government can subsist differently at different times? For an 
allotment is neither a certain separate energy of the Gods, so that 
sublunary natures changing, we might say that it is exempt and remains 
immutable, nor is it that which is governed alone, so that no absurdity 
would follow from admitting that an allotment is in a flowing condition, 
and is conversant with all-various mutations; but it is a providential 
inspection, and unrestrained government of divinity over sublunary 
concerns. Such being the doubts with which this subject is attended, 
the following appears to be the only solution of the difficulty. 

We must say then, that it is not proper to consider all the natures that 
are in generation and generation itself, as alone consisting of things 
mutable and flowing, but that there is also something immutable in these, 
and which is naturally adapted to remain perpetually the same. For 
the interval which receives and comprehends in itself all the parts of the 
world, and which has an arrangement through all bodies, is immoveable, 
lest being moved it should require another place, and thus should proceed 
from one receptacle to another ad infinitum. The etherial vehicles also 
of divine souls with which they are circularly invested, and which imitate 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. ir. 


OF PLATO. 


95 


the fires in the heavens, have a perpetual essence, and are eternally 
suspended from these diviue souls themselves, being full of prolific 
powers, and performing a circular motion, according to a certain 
secondary revolution of the celestial orbs. And in the third place the 
wholeness (oxsrw) of the elements has a permanent subsistence, though 
the parts are all-variously corrupted. For it is necessary that every form 
in the universe should be never failing, in order that the universe may be 
perfect, and that being generated from an immoveable cause, it may be 
immoveable in its essence. But ever} 7 wholeness is a form; or rather it 
is that which it is said to be through the participation of one all-perfect 
form. 

And here we may see the orderly progression of the nature of bodies. 
For the interval of the universe is immoveable according to every kind 
of motion. But the vehicles of divine souls alone receive a mutation 
according to place; for such a motion as this, is most remote from 
essential mutation. And the wholeness of the elements admits in its 
parts the other motions of bodies, but the whole remains perfectly 
immutable. The celestial allotments also which proximately divide the 
interval of the universe, co-distribute likewise the heavens themselves. 
But those in the sublunary region, are primarily indeed allotted the 
parts which are in the interval of the universe, but afterwards they make 
a distribution according to the definite vehicles of souls. And in the 
third place, they remain perpetually the same according to the total 
parts of generation. The allotments of the Gods therefore do not 
change, nor do they subsist differently at different times ; for they have 
not their subsistence proximately in that which may be changed. 

How therefore do the illuminations of the Gods accede to these ? How 
are the dissolutions of sacred rites effected ? And how is the same place 
at different times under the influence of different spirits? May it not be 
said, that since the Gods have perpetual allotments, and divide the earth 
according to divine numbers, similarly to the sections of the heavens, the 
parts of the earth also are illuminated, so far as they participate of 
aptitude. But the circulation of the heavenly bodies, through the figures 
which they possess produce this aptitude; divine illumination at the 


Digitized by boogie 



96 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


same time imparting a power more excellent than the nature which is 
present to these parts of the earth. This aptitude is also effected by 
nature herself as a whole inserting divine impressions in each of the 
illuminated parts, through which they spontaneously participate of the 
Gods. For as these parts depend on the Gods, nature inserts in such of 
them as are different, different images of the divinities. Times too 
co-operate in producing this aptitude, according to which other things 
also are governed; the proper temperature of the air ; and in short, every 
thing by which we are surrounded contributes to the increase and 
diminution of this aptitude. When therefore conformably to a concur¬ 
rence of these many causes, an aptitude to the participation of the Gods 
is ingenerated in some one of the natures which are disposed to be 
changed, then a certain divinity is unfolded into light, which prior to 
this was concealed through the inaptitude of the recipients ; possessing 
indeed his appropriate allotment eternally, and always extending the 
participation of himself, similarly to illuminations from the sun, but not 
being always participated by sublunary natures, in consequence of their 
inaptitude to such participation. For as with respect to partial souls 
such as ours, which at different times embrace different lives, some of 
them indeed, choose lives accommodated to their appropriate Gods, but 
others foreign lives, through oblivion of the divinities to whom they 
belong; thus also with respect to sacred places, some are adapted to the 
power which there receives its allotment, but others are suspended from 
a different order. And on this account, as the Athenian guest in Plato 
says, some places are more fortunate, but others more unfortunate. 

The divine Iamblichus however, doubts how the Gods are said to be 
allotted certain places according to definite times, as by Plato in the 
Timeeus, Minerva is said to have been first allotted the guardianship of 
Athens, and afterwards of Sais. For if their allotment commenced from 
a certain time, it will also at a certain time cease. For every thing which is 
measured by time is of this kind. And farther still was the place which 
at a certain time they are allotted, without a presiding deity prior to this 
allotment, or was it under the government of other Gods ? For if it was 
without a presiding deity, how is it to be admitted that a certain part of 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. HL 


OF PLATO. 


97 


the universe was once entirely destitute of divinity ? How can any place 
remain without the guardianship of superior beings ? And, if any place is 
sufficient to the preservation of itself, how does it afterwards become the 
allotment of some one of the Gods ? But if it should be said that it is 
afterwards under the government of another God, of whom it becomes 
the allotment, this also is absurd. For the second God does not divulse 
the government and allotment of the former, nor do the Gods alternately 
occupy the places of each other, nor daemons change their allotments. 
Such being the doubts on this subject, he solves them by saying that the 
allotments of the Gods remain perpetually unchanged, but that the 
participants of them, at one time indeed enjoy the beneficent influence 
of the-presiding powers, but at another are deprived of it. He adds that 
these are the mutations measured by time, which sacred institutes 
frequently call the birth-day of the Gods.’ 


CHAPTER III. 

In the next place, it is necessary to observe of the mundane Gods 
that they do not obtain the rank which they hold in the universe from 
any habitude or arrangement towards bodies; for they are all of them 
essentially liberated from body, unrestrained in their energies, and have 
no proximity or alliance to a corporeal nature. For bodies are ministrant 
to them, and are subservient to the generation of mutable essences. 
Hence they are not in bodies, but rule over them externally ; so that 
they arc not changed together with them. Farther still, they impart 
from themselves to bodies, every good which they are capable of re¬ 
ceiving. but do not in return receive any thing from bodies; and 
consequently they do not receive certain peculiarities from them. For 

* Vid. Procl. in Tim. p. 45. 

Proc. Von. II. N 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



98 


ON THE THEOLOGY" 


BOOK VI& 


if indeed they had a subsistence like the habits of bodies, or like material 
forms, or were corporeal after any other manner, it might perhaps be 
possible for them to be transmuted together with the differences of bodies. 
But if they antecedently subsist separate from bodies, and are essentially 
unmingled with them, what reasonable distinction can they derive from 
a corporeal nature ? To which may be added, that such an hypothesis 
makes bodies to be better than the divine genera, if they afford a seat t® 
more excellent causes, and essentially insert in them characteristic 
peculiarities. He therefore, who co-arranges the allotments and distribu? 
tions of the governors with the governed, will evidently ascribe authority 
and dominion to better natures. For because the presiding powers 
possess such peculiarities, on this account they chuse such an allotment^ 
and give it essentially a specific distinction ; but the allotment.itself is 
not assimilated to the nature of the recipient* 

With respect indeed to partial souls $uch as ours it is requisite to admit 
that such as is the life which it emitted before it was inserted in a human; 
body, such also will be the organie body with which it is connected, and: 
such will be the nature consequent to it, and which receives from the • 
soul a more perfect life. But with respect to the natures superior to^ 
man, and which have dominion as wholes, it must be admitted, that: 
inferior are produced in more excellent natures, bodies in incorporeal, 
essences, and fabrications in the fabricators of them, and that being, 
circularly comprehended in them,, they are governed according to 
invariable rectitude. The circulations therefore of the celestial orbs are 
primarily inserted in the celestial circulations of the etherial soul, in. 
which they are perpetually inherent. And the souls of the spheres being, 
extended to the intellect which they participate, are perfectly compre¬ 
hended by, and are primarily generated in it. Intellect also, both that 
which, is partial, and that which is universal, are comprehended in the 
more excellent genera. Since therefore secondary natures are always 
converted to such as are first,, and superior natures as paradigms are the 
leaders of those that are subordinate,, both essence and form are derived 
from more excellent beings to those of an inferior rank, and the latter are 
primarily produced in the former, so as to derive from them order and. 



Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. III. 


OF PLATO. 


99 


\ 


measure, and the properties by which they are characterized ; while on 
the contrary such properties do not flow from subordinate natures to 
such as have a precedency and a greater dignity of essence. 

In short, neither are the Gods held in subjection by certain parts of 
the world, nor are terrestrial natures destitute of their all-preserving 
influence; but superior powers at the same time that they comprehend 
all things in themselves, are not comprehended by any thing. And 
terrestrial natures having their very being in the plenitudes of the Gods, 
when they become adapted to divine participation, immediately prior to 
their own proper essence manifestly possess the Gods which latently 
pre-subsisted in it . 1 

Farther still, divinity whether it is allotted certain portions of the 
universe, such as the heavens or the earth, or sacred cities and regions, 
or certain groves and sacred statues, illuminates all these externally, viz. 
without any alliance to the things themselves, in the same manner as the 
sun externally enlightens all things with its rays; except that in the 
latter instance, die illuminating cause is locally, but in the former is 
impassively, unextendedly, and in short incorporeally external. As there¬ 
fore, the solar light comprehends in itself the illuminated objects, thus 
also the power of the Gods, externally comprehends its participants. 
And as light is present with the air, without being essentially mingled 
with it; which is evident from no light remaining in the air, when once 
the illuminating source has departed, though heat is present with it when 
that which heated is entirely withdrawn ; thus also the light of the Gods 
illuminates in a separate manner, and being firmly established in itself, 
pervades totally through all things. Indeed, this visible light of the sun, 
is one, continued, and is every where the same whole, so that it is not 
possible for any part of it to be separated and cut off from the rest, nor 
to inclose it on all sides, nor divulse it from its source. After the same 
manner therefore, the whole world being partible, is divided about the 
one impartible light of the Gods. But this light is one and every where 
the same whole, and is impartibly present to all the natures that are able 

1 Vid. Jamblich. de Mytteriis Sea. I. Cap. 8. 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 





100 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


book vn. 


to partake of it. It likewise fills all things through an all-perfect power,, 
and bounds in itself wholes, by a certain infinite causal transcendency ; 
is every where united to itself, and conjoins the terminations with the 
beginnings of things. But all heaven and the world imitating this light,, 
is circularly convolved, is united to itself, conducts the elements in their 
circular motion, causes all things to be in, and tend to each other, and 
ends to have juxtaposition with their principles, and produces one con¬ 
nexion and consent of wholes with wholes. 

He therefore who. surveys this visible image of the Gods (the world) 
thus united in itself, will be ashamed to have a different opinion of the 
Gods the causes of k, and to introduce in them divisions, obstructions, 
and corporeal circumscriptions. For if there is no ratio, no habitude of 
symmetry, no communion of essence, no connexion either according to- 
power or energy, between the adorning cause and adorned effect; if this- 
be the case, in the former there is neither a certain extension according 
to interval, nor any local comprehension,, or any partible interception,, 
nor any other similar innate equalization in the manner in. which the 
Gods are present. For in things which are of a kindred nature either 
according to essence or power, or which are in a certain respect similar 
in species, or homogeneous, a certain mutual comprehension or retention, 
may be perceived; but what coercion, or transition through the universe,, 
or partible circumscription, or local comprehension, or any thing else of 
the like kind can there be in natures perfectly exempt from the whole of 
things? For the participants indeed of the divinities are such,that some 
of them participate etherially, others aerially, and others aquatically of a, 
diviue nature. And this the ancients perceiving, employed in their, 
divine operations, adaptations and invocations, conformably to a division, 
of this kind. And thus much concerning, the distribution of the Gods , 
in the world.* 


* Vid. Jamblich. de Myst. Sect. I. Cap. 9* 


V 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 





CHAP. IV. 


OF PLATO. 


101 


CHAPTER IV. 


If, however, the mundane as well as the supermundane Gods are in¬ 
corporeal, it may be asked how the visible celestial orbs can be Gods ? 
To this we reply, that the celestial Gods are not comprehended by bo¬ 
dies, but that they contain bodies in their divine lives and energies; that 
they are not converted to body, but that the body which is suspended 
from their essence is converted to a divine cause; and that body is no¬ 
impediment to their intellectual and incorporeal perfection, and is not 
the cause of any molestation to them by its intervention. Hence it does* 
not require an abundant care and attention, but spontaneously and after 
a certain manner self-motively follows the divinities with which it is con¬ 
nected, not being in want of any manuduction, but by its elevation to the 
one of the Gods, is also itself uniformly raised by itself. 

Indeed, a celestial body is allied in the most eminent degree to the - 
incorporeal essence of the Gods. Tor as the latter is characterized by 
unity, so the former is simple. As that is impartible, this is indivisible. 
And as that is immutable, this after a similar manner is unchanged in< 
quality. If also it is admitted that the energies of the Gods are uniform,, 
this body likewise has one circulation. Besides this, itimitates the same¬ 
ness of the Gods, by its perpetual and invariable motion according to, 
and towards the same things, conformably to one reason and order. It 
likewise imitates the divine life of the Gods by the life which is connas- 
cent with the etherial bodiesi Hence, neither is a celestial body so con¬ 
stituted as if composed of contrary and different natures, as is the case 
with our bodies;, nor does the soul of the celestial Gods so coalesce with, 
die body suspended from it, as to form one animal from the two; but the 
animals of these divinities are perfectly similar and united to the Gods from' 
whom they depend; and are throughout whole, uniform, and free from, 
all composition. For more excellent natures always subsisting with in¬ 
variable sameness in themselves, but inferior- being suspended from the 



Digitized by boogie 



102 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


dominion of superior beings, yet so as never to draw down this dominion 
to themselves, wholes likewise being collected into one order and one 
perfection, and after a certain manner all things in the celestial Gods 
being incorporeal and throughout divine, because the divine form univer¬ 
sally predominates in them,—this being the case, one total essence in the 
nature of these divinities every where prevails. And thus the visible 
celestial orbs are all of them Gods, and are after a certain manner incor¬ 
poreal. * 

If, therefore, these divinities as being incorporeal, intellectual, and 
junited, ride as it were in the celestial spheres, they have their origin 
in the intelligible world, and there intellectually perceiving the divine 
forms of themselves, they govern the whole of heaven according to one 
infinite energy. And if being present to the heavens in a separate man¬ 
ner, they lead its perpetual circulations by their will alone, they are 
themselves unmingled with a sensible nature, and are consubsistent with 
the intelligible Gods. Indeed, the celestial orbs, those visible statues as 
it were of the Gods, are generated from, and subsist about, the intelligible 
Gods, and being thus generated are established in them, and have the 
image elevated to them which from them also receives its perfection. 
The divine intellectual forms also which are present to the visible bodies 
of the Gods, have a subsistence prior to them in a separate manner; but 
the unmingled and supercelestial intelligible paradigms of them, abide in 
themselves, containing all things simultaneously in one, according to the 
eternal transcendency of their nature. 

Hence there is one common indivisible bond of them according to 
intellectual energies. There is also the same bond between them accord¬ 
ing to the common participations of forms, since there is nothing to in¬ 
tercept them, nor any intervening medium. Indeed, an immaterial and 
incorporeal essence, being neither separated by places nor *subjects, nor 
defined by any divisible circumscriptions of parts, immediately coalesces 
in sameness; and the elevation of wholes to the one , and the universal 
dominion of the one, collects the communion of the mundane Gods with 
the divinities that presubsist in the intelligible world. 

1 Yid. Jamblich. de Myst. Sect. I. Cap. 17. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. IV. 


OF PLATO. 


103 


Farther still, the intellectual^ conversion of secondary to first natures, and 
the gift of the same essence and power from the primary to the second¬ 
ary Gods connects their congress into an indissoluble one. In things of 
different essences indeed, such as soul and body, and in things of differ¬ 
ent, species, such as material forms, and those natures which in any other 
way are separated from each other, the connascerit union is adventitious, 
being derived from supernal causes, and lost in certain definite periods 
of time. But the higher we ascend, to the sameness of first causes, both 
according to form and according to essence, and the more we raise our¬ 
selves from parts to wholes, by so much the more shall we discover and 
survey that union which is eternal, precedaneous and more principal, 
and which contains about and in itself difference and multitude. 

Since, however, the order of all the Gods consists in union, and the 
first and second genera of them, and the multitude which germinates 
about them coexist in unity; since also every thing in them is characterized 
by the one; hence the beginning, middle, and end of their essence consubsistS 
according to the one. It is not proper, therefore, to enquire whence unity 
extends to all things inthem; for their very being, whatever it may be, 
consists in the one . And secondary genera indeed remain with invariable 
sameness in the one of the first genera. But the latter impart from them¬ 
selves union to the former; while all of them possess in each other the 
communion of an indissoluble connexion. 

From this cause, therefore, the perfectly incorporeal Gods, are united 
to the sensible Gods who are connected with bodies. For the visible Gods • 
themselves are external to bodies, and on this account are in the intelli¬ 
gible world. And the intelligible Gods on account of their infinite union.* 
comprehend in themselves the apparent divinities ; while in the mean 
time both these are established according to a common union and one 
energy. In a similar manner, this likewise is the illustrious prerogative 
of a deific dause and orderly distribution, that the same union of all; 
things pervades from on high as far as to the end of the divine order.. 
And thus much concerning the contact of the sensible with the intel¬ 
ligible Gods . 1 

* Vid. Jamblich. de Myst. Sect. I. Cap. 19. 


Digitized by boogie 



104 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


CHAPTER V. 


What has been above delivered concerning the mundane Gods is 
perfectly conformable to the doctrine of Plato, as delivered by him in tlte 
Timaeus, in the speech 1 of the demiurgus to the junior Gods. For it is 
there said, “ When, therefore, all such Gods as visibly revolve, and all 
such as become apparent when they please, were generated, he who fa¬ 
bricated this universe thus addressed them : Gods of Gods, of whom I am 
the demiurgus and father, whatever is generated by me is indissoluble, 
such being my will in its fabrication. Indeed every thing which is bound 
is dissoluble; but to be willing to dissolve that which is beautifully har¬ 
monized and well composed is the property of an evil nature. Hence, 
so far as you are generated, you are not immortal, nor in every respect 
indissoluble, yet you shall never be dissolved, nor become subject to the 
fatality of death; my will being a much greater and more excellent bond 
than the vital connectives with which you were bound at the commence¬ 
ment of your generation. Learn now, therefore, what I say to you indi¬ 
cating my desire. Three genera of mortals yet remain to be produced. 
Without the generation of these, therefore, the universe will be imperfect; 
for it will not contain every kind of animal in its spacious extent. But 
it ought to contain them, that it may be sufficiently perfect. Yet if these 
are generated and participate of life through me they will become equal 
to the Gods. That mortal natures, therefore, may subsist, and that the 
universe may be truly all, convert yourselves according to your nature to 
the fabrication of animals, imitating the power which I employed in your 
generation. And whatever among these is of such a nature as to deserve 
the same appellation with immortals, which is called divine, obtains sove¬ 
reignty in them, and willingly pursues justice and reverences you,—of 
this I myself will deliver the seed and beginning. It is your business to 

1 See the 5th Book of this work, in which this speech is admirably discussed by Proclus, 
though not so fully as in these extracts. 


\ 


Digitized by {jOoq le 



CHAP. V. 


OF. PLATO. 


105 


accomplish the rest; to weave together the mortal and immortal nature; 
by this mean fabricating and generating animals, causing them to increase 
by supplying them with nutriment, and receiving them back again when 
dissolved by corruption." 

As the commentary of Proclus on this speech most admirably unfolds 
its recondite meaning, and is at the same time replete with the most inter¬ 
esting information respecting the mundane Gods, I shall give the following 
extracts from it, in which the most magnificent exuberance of diction is 
combined with the greatest fecundity and scientific accuracy of concep¬ 
tion. 

“ The scope of this speech (says Proclus) is to insert demiurgic power 
and providence in the mundane genera of Gods, to lead them forth to 
the generation of the remaining kinds of animals, and to place them over 
mortals, analogously to the father of wholes over the one orderly distribution 
of the universe. For it is necessary that some things should be primarily 
generated by the demiurgic monad, and others through other media; the 
Demiurgus, indeed, producing all things from himself, at once and eter¬ 
nally, but the things produced in order, and first proceeding from him, 
producing together with him the natures posterior to themselves. Thus, 
for instance, the celestial produce sublunary Gods, and these generate 
mortal animals; the Demiurgus at the same time fabricating these in 
conjunction with the celestial and sublunary divinities. For in speaking 
he understands all things, and by understanding all things he also makes 
the mortal genera of animals; these requiring another proximate gene¬ 
rating cause, so far as they are mortal, and through this receiving a 
progression into being. But the character of the words is enthusiastic, 
shining with intellectual intuitions, pure and venerable as being perfected 
by the father of the Gods, differing from and transcending human con¬ 
ceptions, delicate and at the same time terrific, full of grace and beauty— 
at once concise and perfectly accurate. Plato, therefore, particularly 
studies these things in the imitations of divine speeches; as he also 
evinces in the Republic, when he represents the Muses speaking sublimely, 
and the prophet ascending to a lofty seat. He also adorns both these 
speeches with conciseness and venerableness, employing the accurate 
Proc. Vol. II. O 


Digitized by 


y Google 



io6 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


powers of 'colons, directly shadowing forth divine intellections through 
such a form of words. But in the Words before us he omits no ttansceil- 
dency either of the grand and robust in the sentences and the names 
adapted to these devices, or of magnitude in the conceptions and the 
figures which give completion to this idea. Besides this, also, much 
distinction and purity, the unfolding of truth, and the illustrious prero¬ 
gatives of beauty, are mingled with the idea of magnitude, this being 
especially adapted to the subject things, to the speaker, and to the 
hearers. For the objects of this speech are, the perfection of the universe, 
an assimilation to all-perfect animal [i. e. to its paradigm], and the gene¬ 
ration of all mortal animals; the maker of all things, at the same time, 
presubsisting and adorning all things throqgh exempt transcendency; 
but the secondary fabricators adding what was wanting to the formation 
of the universe. All, therefore, being great and divine, as well the 
persons as the things, and shining with beauty and a distinction from 
each other, Plato has employed words adapted to the form of the speech. 

“ Homer, also, when energizing enthusiastically, represents Jupiter 
speaking, converting to himself the two-fold co-ordinations of Gods; 
becbming himself, as it were, the centre of all the divine genera in the 
world, and making all things obedient to his intellection. But at one 
time he conjoins the multitude of Gods with himself without a medium, 
and at another through Themis as the medium. 

But Jove to Themis gives command to call 

The Gods to council. 

** This Goddess pervading every-where collects the divine number, and 
converts it to the demiurgic monad. For the Gods are both separate 
from mundane affairs, and eternally proyide for all things, being at the 
same time exempt from them through the highest transcendency, and 
extending their providence every-where. For their unmingled nature is 
not Without providential energy, nor is their providence mingled with 
matter. Through transcendency of power they are not filled with the 
subjects of their government, and through beneficent will, they make all 
things similar to themselves; in permanently abiding, proceeding, and in 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. V. 


OF PLATO. 


107 


being separated from all things, being similarly present to all things. 
Since, therefore, the Gods that govern the world, and the daemons the 
attendants of these, receive after this manner unmingled purity, and 
providential administration from their father; at one time he converts 
them to himself without a medium, and illuminates them with a separate, 
unmingled, and pure form of life. Whence also I think he orders them 
to be separated from all things, to remain exempt in Olympus, and nei¬ 
ther convert themselves to Greeks nor Barbarians; which is just the same 
as to say, that they must transcend the two-fold orders of mundane 
natures, and abide immutably in undefiled intellection. But at another 
time he converts them to a providential attention to secondary natures, 
through Themis, and calls upon them to direct the mundane battle, and 
excites different Gods to different works. These divinities, therefore, 
especially require the assistance of Themis, who contains in herself the 
divine laws, according to which providence is intimately connected with 
wholes. Homer, therefore, divinely delivers two-fold speeches, accompa¬ 
nying the two-fold energies of Jupiter; but Plato, through this one 
speech, comprehends those two-fold modes of discourse. For the Demi- 
urgus renders the Gods unmingled with secondary natures, and causes 
them to provide for, and give existence to, mortals. But he orders them 
to fabricate in imitation of himself: and in an injunction of this kind, 
both these are comprehended, viz. the unmingled through the imitation 
of the father, for he is separate, being exempt from mundane wholes; 
but providential energy, through the command to fabricate, nourish, and 
increase mortal natures. Or rather, we may survey both in each; for in 
imitating the demiurgus, they provide for secondary natures, as he does 
for the immortals; and in fabricating they are separate from the things 
fabricated. For every demiurgic cause is exempt from the things gene¬ 
rated by it; but that which is mingled with and filled from them is 
imbecil and inefficacious, and is unable to adorn and fabricate them. 
And thus much in common respecting the whole of the speech. 

“ Let us then, in the first place, consider what we are to understand 
by “ Gods of Gods/' and what power it possesses: for that this invocation 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



108 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V1L 


is collective and convertive of multitude to its monad, that it calls up¬ 
wards the natures which have proceeded to the one fabrication of them, 
and inserts a boundary and divine measure in them, is clear to those who 
are not entirely unacquainted with such-like discourses. But how those 
that are allotted the world by their father are called Gods of Gods, and 
according to what conception, cannot easily be indicated to the many; 
for there is an unfolding of one divine intelligence in these names.” 
Proclus then proceeds to relate the explanations given by others of these 
words; which having rejected as erroneous, he very properly, in my opi¬ 
nion, adopts the following, which is that of his preceptor, the great. 
Syrianus. “ All the mundane Gods are not simply Gods, but they are 
wholly Gods which participate: for there is in them that which is sepa¬ 
rate, unapparent, and supermundane, and also that which is the apparent 
image of them, and has an orderly establishment in the world. And that, 
indeed, which is unapparent in them is primarily a God, this being undis¬ 
tributed and one: but this vehicle which is suspended from their unap¬ 
parent essence is secondarily a God. For if, with respect to us, man is 
two-fold, one inward, according to the soul, the other apparent, which we 
see, much more must both these be asserted of the mundane Gods; since 
divinity also is two-fold, one unapparent and the other apparent. This 
being the case, we must say, that ** Gods of Gods” is addressed to all the 
mundane divinities, in whom there is a connection of unapparent with 
apparent Gods : for they are Gods that participate. In short, since two¬ 
fold orders are produced by the Demiurgus, some being supermundane, 
and others mundane, and some being without, and others with participa¬ 
tion [of body], if the Demiurgus now addressed the supermundane 
orders, he would have alone said to them, “ Godsfor they are without 
participation [i. e. without the participation of body], are separate and 
unapparent:— but since the speech is to the mundane Gods, he calls them 
Gods of Gods, as being participated by other apparent divinities. In 
these also daemons are comprehended ; for they also are Gods, as to their 
order with respect to the Gods, whose peculiarity they indivisibly partici¬ 
pate. Thus also Plato, in the Phaedrus, when he calls the twelve Gods the 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. VI. 


OF PLATO. 


109 


leaders of daemons, at the same time denominates all the attendants of 
£he divinities Gods, adding, * and this is the life of the Gods/ All these, 
therefore, are Gods of Gods, as possessing the apparent connected with 
the unapparent, and the mundane with the supermundane. 


CHAPTER VI. 

And thus much concerning the whole conception of the speech. It 
is necessary, however, since we have said the words are demiurgic or 
fabricative, that they should be received in a manner adapted to 
demiurgic providence. But if these words are intellectual conceptions, 
and the intellectual conceptions themselves are productions, what shall 
we say the demiurgus effects in the multitude of mundane Gods by the 
first words of his speech ? Is it not evident we must say that this energy 
of bis is deific ? For this one divine intellectual conception which is the 
first and most simple proceeding from the demiurgus, deifies all the 
recipients of it, and makes them demiurgic Gods, participated Gods, 
and Gods unapparent, and at the same time apparent. For this, as has 
been said, is the meaning of “ Gods of Gods.” For the term Gods is not 
alone adapted to them ; since they are not alone unapparent; nor the 
word Gods twice enunciated, as if some one should say Gods and Gods; 
for every bond of this kind is artificial, and foreign from divine union. 

It is also necessary to observe that every mundane God has an animat 
suspended from him, according to which he is denominated mundane. 
He has likewise a divine soul, which rules over its depending vehicle; 
and an immaterial and separate intellect, according to which he is united 
to the intelligible, in order that he may imitate the world in which all 
these are contained. And by the animal suspended from him, he is 
indeed a part of the sensible universe; but by intellect he belongs to an 
intelligible essence; and by soul he conjoins the impartible life which is 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



110 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


in him, with the life that is divisible about body. Such a composition, 
however, being triple in each mundane God, neither does Plato here 
deliver the demiurgus speaking to intellects; for intellects subsist in un pro¬ 
ceeding union with' the divine intellect, and are entirely unbegotten; but 
soul is the first of generated natures, and a little after the demiurgus 
addresses these when he says, “ since ye are generated." Nor does he 
represent the demiurgus as speaking only to the animals which are 
suspended from the souls of these Gods; for they pertain to corporeal 
natures, and are not adapted to enjoy the one demiurgic intelligence, 
without a medium. Nor yet does he represent him as speaking to souls 
by themselves; for they are entirely immortal; but the Gods whom he 
now addresses are said by him not * to be in every respect immortal. If 
therefore it be requisite for me to say what appears to me to be the 
truth, the words of the demiurgus are addressed to the composite from 
soul and animal, viz. to the animal which is divine, and partakes of a 
soul. For intellect does not know the demiurgic will through reason, 
but through intelligence, or in other words, through intellectual vision; 
nor through conversion, but through a union with that intellect which 
ranks as a whole, as being itself intellect, and as it were of the same 
colour with it. But soul as being reason, and not intellect itself, 
requires appropriately to its essence the energy of reason, and a rational 
conversion to the intelligible.* To these, therefore, as being essentially 
rational, and as being essentialized in reasons, the demiurgic speech 
proceeds. And it is adapted to them in a twofold respect; first, as 
being participated by bodies; for they are Gods of those Gods; and 
secondly, as participating of intellects; for they are Gods of [viz. derived 
from] intellects which are also Gods. And they participate of intellects, 
and are participable by bodies. Hence the assertions that they are 
generated, and that they are not entirely immortal, and every thing else 
in the speech, are appropriately adapted to them, so far as they have a 
certain co-ordination and connexion with mundane natures, and so far 


1 For (jw 4wcu to mb*** roof in the original, it is necessary to read fti) ti vat x. r. A. 

* Instead of jwjto v, it is requisite to read voip-a. 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. VI. 


OF PLATO. 


Ill 


as they are participated by them. But the mandates ** learn and 
generate," and' every thing else of this kind which is more divine than; 
generated nature?, are adapted to them as intellectual essences. 

Let us in the next place attend to the meaning of the words, “ Of 
whom I am the demiurgus and father, whatever is generated by me is 
indissoluble, such being my will in its fabrication.” Plato then appears 
to give a triple division to the energy of the one demiurgus in his 
production of the junior Gods, viz. a division into the deific, into that 
which imparts connexion and into that which supplies a similitude to 
animal itself. For the address of the demiurgus evinces those to be 
Gods that proceed from him. But the assertions respecting the indis¬ 
soluble and dissoluble, by defining the measure of a medium between 
these, impart a distribution and connexion commensurate to the order of 
the mundane Gods. And the words calling on them to the fabrication 
of mortal natures, cause them to be the sources of perfection to the 
universe, and the fabricators of secondary animals, conformably to the 
imitation of the paradigm. But through these three energies the 
demiurgus elevates his offspring to all the intelligible Gods, and estab¬ 
lishes them in the intelligible triads. In the one being indeed, [or the 
summit of these triads} through the first of these energies; for that is 
primarily deified, in which the one is deity, but being is the first 
participant of it. For the one itself is alone deity, without habitude to 
any thing, and is not participable; but the one being in which there' is 
the first participation is God of God. And being is deity as the summit 
of all things; but the one of it is deity as proceeding from the one itself, 
which is primarily God. But through the second of these energies the 
demiurgus establishes his offepring in the second of the intelligible triads, 
i. e. in eternity itself. For eternity is the cause of this indissoluble 
permanency to every thing which continues perpetually undissolved. 
Hence all mundane natures are bound according to the demiurgic will, 
and have something of the indissoluble through the participation of him ; 
the natures which are primarily indissoluble being different from these, 
and those that are truly immortal subsisting for his sake. And he 
establishes them in all-perfect animal [or the third, of the intelligible 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



113 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


triads] through the third of these energies. For to this the vivific assimi¬ 
lates the mundane Gods, and inserts in them the paradigms of animals 
which they generate. And this, indeed, will be one scope of generation, 
the converting and perfecting the proceeding multitude of the Gods. 
But after the one there will be a triple design, which establishes them 
in the three intelligible orders. 

This second demiurgic intelligence, therefore, after the first which is 
deific, illuminates the mundane Gods with a firm establishment, an 
immutable power, and an eternal essence, through which the whole world, 
and all the divine allotments subsist always the same, participating 
through the father of an immutable nature and undecaying power. For 
every thing which is generated from an immoveable cause, is indissoluble 
and immutable; but all the progeny of a moveable cause are moveable. 
Hence among mundane natures, such as proceed from the demiurgic 
cause alone, in consequence of being generated according to an invariable 
sameness are permanent, and are exempt from every mutable and variable 
essence. But such as proceed both from this cause, and from other 
moveable principles, are indeed immutable so far as they proceed from 
the demiurgus, but mutable so far as they proceed from the latter. For 
those natures which the demiurgus alone generates, these he fabricates 
immutable and indissoluble, both according to their own nature, and 
according to his power and will. For he imparts to them a guardian 
and preserving power, and he connects their essence in a manner 
transcendent and exempt For all things are preserved in a twofold 
respect, from the power which he contains, and from his providential 
goodness, which is truly able and willing to preserve every thing which 
may be lawfully perpetually saved. The most divine of visible natures 
therefore, are, as we have said, from their own nature indissoluble; but 
they are likewise so from the demiurgic power which pervades through 
all things, and eternally connects them. For this power is the guard and 
the divine law which connectedly contains all things. But a still greater 
and more principal cause than these is the demiurgic will which employs 
this power in its productions. For what is superior to goodness, or 
what bond is more perfect than this, which imparts by illumination 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. ru. 


OF PLATO. 


113 


union, connects an eternal essence, and is the boundand measure of all 
things ; to which also the demiurgus now refers the cause of immutable 
power, saying, 44 such being my will in its fabrication." For he 
established his own will as a guard over his own proper works, as that 
which gives union, connexion and measure to the whole of things. 

Who the demiurgus, however, is, and who father is, has been unfolded 
by us before, and will be now also concisely shown. There are then 
these four; father alone; maker alone; father and maker; maker and 
father. And father indeed is aether Cor bound] being the first procession 
from the oue. Father and maker is the divinity who subsists according 
to. the intelligible paradigm Cat the extremity of the intelligible order,] 
and whom Orpheus says, the blessed Gods call Phanes Protogonus. 
But maker and father is Jupiter, who is now called by himself the 
demiurgus, but whom the Orphic writers would call the father of works. 
And maker alone, is the cause of partible fabrication , 1 as the same writers 
would say. To father alone, therefore, all intelligible, intellectual, 
supermundane and mundane natures are in subjection. To father and 
maker, all intellectual, supermundane, and mundane natures are subor¬ 
dinate. To maker and father who is an intellectual deity, supermundane 
and mundane natures are subservient. But to maker alone, mundane 
natures alone are in subjection. And all these particulars we learn from 
the narration of Orpheus; for according to each peculiarity of the four 
there is a subject multitude of Gods. 


CHAPTER VII. 


V , 

In the next place, the demiurgus says: 44 Every thing, therefore, 
which is bound is dissoluble, but to be willing to dissolve that, which is 

* This divinity is Vulean. 

Prop. Vol. II. P 


Digitized by boogie 



114 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII; 


beautifully harmonized and well composed, is the province of an evil 
nature.” It is requisite then to consider how the dissoluble and indis¬ 
soluble are asserted of the.Gods, and to conjoin proper modes of solution 
with Appropriate bonds. For every thing is not bound after a similar 
manner, nor is that which is bound in one way, dissolved in different 
ways. But that which is in a certain Tespect bound, has also its disso¬ 
lution according to this mode. That which is in every respect bound, 
is likewise in every respect dissolved. And that which is bound by 
itself is also by itself dissolved. But that which is bound by something 
different from itself, has also on that its dissolution depending. That 
likewise which is bound in time, is also dissolved according to time. 
But that which is allotted a perpetual bond, must also be said to be 
perpetually dissolved. For in short, dissolution is conjoined with every 
bond. Fora bond is not union without multitude; since the one does 
not require- a bond. Nor is it an assemblage of many and different 
things, ho longer preserving their characteristic peculiarities. For a thing 
bf this kind is confusion ; and that which results from them is one thing, 
consisting of things corrupted together, but does not become bound. For 
it is necessary that things that are bound should remain as they are, but 
hot be bound when corrupted. Hence a bond then alone takes place, 
when there are many things, and which are preserved, having one power 
connective and collective of them, whether this power be corporeal or 
incorporeal. If this, however, be the case, things that are bound are 
united through the bond, and separated, because each preserves its own 
proper nature. 

fivery where, therefore, as we have said, a bond has also dissolution 
connected with it. Bonds, however, and their dissolutions differ in 
subsisting in a certain respect, and simply, from themselves, and from 
-others, according to time, and perpetually. For in these their differences 
consist. We must not, therefore, wonder if the same thing is both 
dissoluhle and indissoluble; and if it is in a certain respect indisso¬ 
luble^ and in a certain respect dissoluble. So that the works of the 
father, if they are indeed indissoluble, are so, as not to be dissolved 
according to time. But they are dissoluble, as having together with 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 


chap. vn. 


OF PLATO. 


115 


a bond, a separation of the simple things of which they consist, 
according to the definite causes of things that are bound, existing in 
him that binds. For as that which is selfoubsistent is said to be so 
in a twofold respect, one, cs supplying all things from itself alone, 
but another, as subsisting indeed from itself, and also from another 
which is the cause of it, thus also the indissoluble is so, from another , 1 
and from itself; just as that which is moved is twofold, and subsists in a 
similar manner. 

To these two modes, however, two modes of dissolution are also 
opposed; viz. that which is dissoluble from another and from itself is 
opposed to that which is indissoluble from another and from itself. 
And this, indeed, is dissoluble in itself, as consisting of things that are 
separate. But in consequence of having in something else prior to itself 
the causes of its subsistence, by this cause r and according to this mode 
alone it becomes dissoluble. Again, that which is simply dissoluble in 
a twofold respect, and which contains in itself the cause of its dissolution, 
and also receives it from another, is opposed to that which is simply 
indissoluble in a twofold respect, from itself and from another. These, 
therefore, ate four in number, viz. that which is simply indissoluble from 
another and from itself. And again, that which is indissoluble after a 
certain manner in a twofold respect; that which is dissoluble after a 
certain manner in a twofold respect; and that which is dissoluble simply 
from itself, and from another.* Of these four, however, the first pertains 
to intelligibles; for they are indissoluble, as being entirely simple, and 
receiving no composition or dissolution whatever. But the fourth 
belongs to mortal natures, which are dissoluble from themselves and from 
others, as consisting of many things, and being composed by their causes 
in such a way, as to be at a certain time dissolved. And the middles 
pertain to the mundane Gods; for the second and the third of these 
four concur with them. For after a certain manner, these as being the 
works of the father are indissoluble; and they are saved from themselves 


1 mgoo it o mi tted in the original. 

* The words xea Avrof oorAcof rap’ tavrov xat mtj mgov, ture omitted in the original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



116 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


and through his will. And again, they are in a certain respect disso¬ 
luble, because they are bound by him ; and he contains the productive 
principle of those simple natures from which they are composed. Every 
thing, therefore, which is bound is dissoluble; and this is also the case 
with the works of the father. For these are, all bodies, the composition 
of animals, and the number of participated souls. But intellects which 
ride as it were in souls as in a vehicle, cannot be called the works of the 
father; for they were not generated, but were unfolded into light in an 
unbegotten manner, as if fashioned within the adyta pf his essence, and 
not proceeding out of them. For there are no paradigms of these, but 
of middle and last natures; since soul is the first of images. But the 
wholes such as animals, the participants of soul and intellect, apd 
generated natures, derive their subsistence from intellectual paradigms, 
of which animal itself is the comprehending cause. 

Bodies, therefore, are bound through analogy; for this is the most 
beautiful bond of them* But animals are bound with animated bonds. 
And souls which contain something of a partible nature are bouhd by 
media, [viz. by geometrical, arithmetical and harmonica! ratios ;J for . 
Plato calls these and all the productive principles of which the soul 
consists, bonds. Hence the indissoluble in the mundane Gods subsists 
according to nature; for each of them is generated indissoluble; such 
being the works of the father through the power, which he contains. 
They are also indissoluble from the demiurgic will, since they are of a 
composite nature, and possess the indissoluble with a bond. But there 
is likewise in a certain respect a dissolution of them, so far as they 
consist of things of a simple nature, of which the father contains in 
himself the definite causes. At one and the same time, therefore, they 
are indissoluble and dissoluble. They are not, however, so indissoluble 
as the intelligible; for that is indissoluble through transcendency of 
simplicity. But these are at the same time indissoluble and dissoluble, 
as consisting of simple natures, and as being perpetually bound. For 
all the natures that are bound being dissoluble, such as are perpetual, 
possessing through the whole of time, beauty from the intelligible, divine 
union, and demiurgic harmony, are indissoluble. But. paortal natures are 


Digitized by 


Google 



t 


CifAP. VH. OF PLATO. H7 

dissoluble alone, because they are connected with the deformity and 
inaptitude of matter. .And the former indeed are beautifully harmonised 
through the union inserted in them by their harmonizing cause; but this 
is not the case with the latter, on account of the multitude of causes which 
no longer insert in them a similar union ; 1 for their union is dissipated 
through the multitude which is mingled in their composition: so that 
they are very properly allotted a remitted * harmony. 

Hence, every thing which is bound is dissoluble. But one thing is 
thus dissoluble and indissoluble, and another is dissoluble only, just as 
the intelligible is alone indissoluble. Why, therefore, is that which is 
primarily bound at one and the same time dissoluble and indissoluble? 
Because it is beautifully harmonized, and is well composed. For from 
being well composed it obtains union ; since goodness is unific. But from 
the intelligible it obtains the beaut fully; for from thence beauty is ' 
derived. And from fabricating power it obtains harmony; for this is 
the cause of the Muses, and is the source of harniouical arrangement to 
mundane natures. Hence we again have the three causes, the final 
through the well, the paradigmatic through the beautifully ; and the 
demiurgic through the harmonized But it is necessary that a compo¬ 
sition of this kind, harmonized by the one fabricating power, filled with 
divine beauty, and obtaining a boniform union, should be indissoluble; 
for the demiurgus says, that to dissolve it is the province of an evil 
nature. 

Moreover, prior to this Plato had said, that the universe is indissoluble 
except by him by whom it was bound. If, however, it is entirely 
impossible for the universe to be dissolved by any other, but the father 
alone is able to dissolve it, and it is impossible for him to effect this, for 
•it is the province of an evil nature,—it is impossible for the universe to 
be dissolved. For either he. must dissolve it, or some other. But if 
some other, who is it that is able to offer violence to the demiurgus ? 

1 For ntm», it it necessary to read «mw«*. 

1 ** erroneously printed for mp. 

* After Tip ragafa«yfMmxyv it is necessary to supply the words ha rev xa\u «*, nj» fcj/xiovgyixrp, 
which are wanting in the original. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



118 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


For it is impossible that a dissolution of it should be effected, except by 
him that bound it. But if he dissolves it, how being good, can he 
dissolve that which is beautifully harmonized and well composed. For 
that which is subversive of these, is productive of evil; just as that which 
is subversive of evil is allotted a beneficent nature. Hence, there is an 
equal necessity that the demiurgus should be depraved, if it be lawful so 
to speak, or that this world should be dissolved, [Viz. each of these is 
equally impossible.] Such, therefore, is the necessity which Plato 
assigns to the incorruptibility of the universe. Hence, that Plato gives 
the indissoluble to the composition of the mundane Gods, be clearly 
manifests when he orders them to bind mortal natures, not with those 
indissoluble bonds with which they are connected. For if the connective 
bonds of these Gods are indissoluble, they themselves must be essentially 
indissoluble. Here, however, he says that they are not in every respect 
indissoluble. It is evident, therefore, from both these assertions, that 
they are indissoluble, and at the same time dissoluble,' and that they are 
not in every respect indissoluble, in consequence of their being appro¬ 
priately bound. But if these things are true, there is every necessity • 
that the dissolution of them should be very different from that which we 
call corruption. For that which is dissoluble after such a manner as the 
corruptible, not being indissoluble, is so far from being not in every 
respect indissoluble, that it is in every respect dissoluble. Hence it is 
not proper to say that the mundane Gods are of themselves corruptible, 
but remain incorruptible through the will of the father; but we ought to 
aay that they are in their own nature * incorruptible. 

* The words xeu Auroi are omitted in the original. 

* For mtw $wiy, it is necessary to read tutrm fwjy. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. VIII. 


OF PLATO. 


119 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Imt the next place let us attend to the meaning of the following part of 
the speech of the demiurgus to the mundane Gods, as beautifully un¬ 
folded by Proclus : “ Hence so far as you are generated, you are not 
immortal, nor in every respect indissoluble, yet you shall never be 
dissolved, nor become subject to the fatality of death j my will being a 
much greater and more excellent bond than the vital connectives with 
which you were bound at the commencement of your generation/' 
Since all the mundane Gods to whom these words are addressed consist 
of divine souls, and animals suspended from them, or in other words* 
since they are participated souls, and since the demiurgus denominates 
them indissoluble and at the same time dissoluble, in the way above 
explained, he now wishes to collect in one point of view, and into one 
. truth, all that he had said separately about them. Por at one and the 
same time he takes away from them the immortal and the indissoluble, 
and again confers these on them through a subversion of their opposites; 
For media are allotted this nature, not’receiving the nature of the 
extremes, and appearing to comprehend the whole of both. Just as if 
some one should call tire soul impartible and at the same time partible, 
as consisting of both, and neither impartible, nor partible, as being 
different from the extremes. For see how a middle of this kind may be 
surveyed in the mundane Gods. 

That is principally and primarily called immortal, which supplies itself 
with immortality; since that also is primarily being which is being from 
itself; intellect which is intellect from itself; and one which is from 
itself one. For every where that which primarily possesses any thing 
is such from itself; since if it were not so from itself but from another, 
that other would be primarily, either intellect, or life, or the one , or some¬ 
thing else; and either this would be primarily so, ov if there is nothing 
primarily, the ascent will be to infinity. Thus therefore, that is truly 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



120 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


COOK VIC. 


immortal, which is immortal from itself, and which imparts to itself 
immortality. But that which is neither vital according to the whole of 
itself, nor self-subsistent, nor possesses immortality from itself, is not 
primarily immortal, Hence as that which is secondarily being is not 
being, so that which is secondarily immortal is not immortal, yet it is not 
mortal; for this is entirely a defection or departure from the immortal, 
neither possessing a connascent life, nor infinite power. For these three 
are in a successive order: That which possesses from itself infinite life; 
that which receives infinite life from another; and that which neither 
fropi itself nor another exhibits the infinity of life. And the first indeed, is 
immortal; the second is not immortal} the third is mortal; and the 
mean is adapted to the mundane Gods. For they neither have the 
immortal from themselves, so far as they derive it from that which is 
truly and primarily immortal, and so far as bodies are suspended from 
them; nor have they a finite life; but they are filled indeed from the 
eternal Gods, and produce mortal natures. For the second fabrication is 
connected w’ith the first, proceeds about it, is governed by it, and refers 
to it the production of the mortal genera. 

Again, with respect to the indissoluble, that which is principally and 
primarily so is simple and free from all composition. For where there is 
no composition what representation can there be of dissolution? But that 
is secondarily indissoluble, which is indissoluble with a bond ; which is 
at the same time dissoluble in consequence of proceeding from divided 
causes. For it is not simply dissoluble, but dissoluble by its cause. 
For that which is bound prior to all time, is alone bound according to 
cause; but that which is ^alone causally bound, is alone causally dis¬ 
solved. And the third from that which is properly indissoluble, is that 
which was indissoluble for a certain time; because the first indeed, is 
properly indissoluble in conjunction with simplicity; but the second is 
subordinate^ so, together with composition: and the third, falling off 
from both, is in its own nature dissoluble. , 

• Neither therefore, are the mundane Gods entirely indissoluble; for 
this pertains to the most simple natures. Nor are they dissoluble accord¬ 
ing to time; for the composition of them proceeds from the demiurgic 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. VIH. 


OF PLATO. 


121 


union. As therefore in the cause union precedes things of a simple 
nature, after the same manner here also, a bond precedes dissolution; 
for it is more excellent, and the resemblance of a more divine power. 
And this is seen in souls; for there were bonds and media in them, as 
has been before observed in the generation of the soul. It is also seal in' 
bodies; for analogy is a bond. And likewise in animals; for being 
bound with animated bonds they became animals. Hence, the immortal 
and the indissoluble, do not entirely pertain to the mundane Gods; yet 
at the same time they do pertain to them. And because they are not in 
every respect present with them nor in such a manner as in intelligibles, 
immortality must be taken from them. For m the Banquet also, Plato 
does not think fit to call Love immortal, yet he does not denominate it 
mortal; but asserts it to be something between both these. For there is 
a great extent of the mortal and immortal, and they are bound together 1 
by many media. It appears likewise, with respect to the immortal, that 
one kind of it is common to all the beings that differ from a mortal 
nature,' and which consists in not being deprived of the life which it 
possesses. According to this sense of the word, Plato says that the demi- 
urgus is the cause of immortal natures, but the junior Gods, of such as are 
mortal. But another kind of the immortal is the peculiarity of intel- 
ligihles, being eternally so. And another belongs to the mundane Gods, 
which is an immortality perpetually rising into existence, and having its 
•subsistence in always becoming to be. Hence, it may be said that 
the immortal and mortal are oppositely divided without a medium, 
if the common signification of the immortal is assumed; and that they 
are not opposed to each other without a medium, if that which is primarily 
immortal is considered; and this is that which is always immortal. 
For the medium between this and the mortal, is that which is always 
becoming to be immortal. But that which is properly immortal possesses 
the whole of its life in eternity. That however which has its life evolved 
through the whole of time, and has not always one and the same indivi¬ 
sible life, this possesses an immortality coextended with the flux of 


JVoc. 


1 instead of rob fer; tvtjr ou r it is necessary to read rov tyrjrou. 


Vol. IL 


Q 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



m 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VIL 


generation, but is not immortal according to the stability of being. 
And again, the medium between the immortality of the mundane Gods 
and that of partial souls, is that which has a life always rising into 
existence, and which ascends and descends in intellectual energy, so as 
to be nearer to mortal natures, leaving indeed a more excellent intellection, 
l)ut transferring itself into one that is subordinate, and again recurring to 
its pristine condition without oblivion. And of these, the former indeed, 
is the peculiarity of the mundane Gods; but the latter, of daemons the 
attendants on these Gods. But if the nature which remains is filled with 
oblivion in descending, becomes most proximate to mortals, entirely 
destroys the true life which it contains, and alone possesses the essential 
life,—such an immortality as this belongs to partial souls. Hence, the 
demiurgus in his speech calls the immortality in these homonymous to 
that of the immortals. If however, there is any nature after these which 
casts aside its essential life, this is alone * mortal. Hence, the primarily 
immortal and the mortal are the extremes. But the immortality of the 
mundane Gods, and that of partial souls, are the sub-extremes. And the 
immortality which is truly the medium between these, is that of daemons. 
Hence too, daemons are in reality entirely of a middle nature. 


CHAPTER IX. 

* 

After this, the demiurgus sublimely addresses the mundane Gods in 
the following words : “ Learn now therefore what I say to you indicating 
my desire .’ 1 The first address to the mundane Gods, says Proclus, was 
deific of or deified the auditors; for it evinced all of them to be Gods, 
mid to be participated by the bodies in which they ride. For these very 

*• The original hu e r ro ne o u sly ptv*s instead of jmvov. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. IX. 


OF PLATO. 


123 


bodies also are Gods, as being the statues [as it were] of Gods; since 
Plato likewise calls the earth the first and most ancient of the Gods 
within the heavens. But these deified bodies are participants of th 
Gods truly so called, from which they are suspended, and which are prior 
to generation. For these bodies have, as we have observed, generation. 
But the second address to the mundane Gods, inserted in them an 
eternal power, through the participation of an indissoluble connexion. 
And the present words fill them with divine, and demiurgic conceptions, 
proceeding supernally from intelligible animal Cthe paradigm of the 
universe.] For the being instructed in the fabrication of animals, so far 
as it is mathesis or learning, is adapted to soul. But these words fill the 
multitude of Gods with the demiurgic intelligence of all the forms that 
are contained in intelligible animal. And through the word now indeed, 
the eternal is after a manner indicated ; through the word what the 
united, and convolved ; through I say , that which proceeds into multi¬ 
tude, and is disseminated about the many Gods; and through indication 
a plenitude derived from intelligible and unapparent causes is signified. 
For we only indicate in things unapparent to the multitude. But 
through all the words together it is evident that the demiurgus establishes 
himself analogous to intelligible intellect, and fills the mundane number 
of Gods with intellectual conceptions. Farther still, these words convert 
this multitude to the one demiurgic intelligence, and prior to a providen¬ 
tial attention to secondary natures, illuminate it with unmingled purity, 
and stable intellection. For as the demiurgus makes by energizing 
intellectually, and generates from inward, externally proceeding energy* 
thus also he wishes the mundane Gods first to learn and understand the 
will of their father, and thus afterwards to imitate his power. 

In the next place, the demiurgus says, “ Three genera of mortals yet 
remain to be produced. Without the generation of these therefore, the 
universe will be imperfect; for It will not contain every kind of animal in 
its spacious extent. But it ought to contain them that it may be sufficiently 
perfect. Yet if these are generated and participate of life through me 
they will become equal to the Gods.” On these words Proclus observes: 
The most total, first, and most divine of ideas, not only give subsistence 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



124 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


to such mundane , natures as are perpetuat in' an exempt manner, but 
likewise to. all mortal natures, according to one united cause. For the 
idea, of winged natures which is there is the paradigm of all winged 
animals whatever; the idea of the aquatic, of all-aquatic; and the idea 
of the pedestrial, of all pedestrial animals. But the progressions of 
intelligibles into the intellectual orders, become the sources of division to- 
.united ideas, pr-oduce into multitude total causes,, and unfold the definite 
principles of multiform natures- For there is no longer in inteHigibles 
one intellectual cause of all aerial animals; since there is not a separate 
intellection of perpetual animals of this kind; nor one intellectual cause 
of aquatic, nor in a similar manner of terrestrial animals; but the power 
of difference [in the intellectual order] minutely distributes the whole 
into parts, and monads into numbers. Hence the causes of divine 
animals*according to which the demiurges gives subsistence to the orders 
of Gods and daemons that produce generation, exist in him separate from 
the causes of mortal natures, according to which he calls chi the junior 
.Gods to generate mortal animals. For the demiurgus precedes the 
generative energy of these Gods, and. makes by merely saying that a thing. 
,k to be made. For the words of the lather are demiurgic intellections, and 
his intellections are creations; but a proximate making is adapted to the 
multitude of Gods. And again you see how the order of effective 
and generative causes is unfolded into lights For the choir of mundane 
Gods produces indeed mortal animals, but in conjunction with motion, 
and mutation.' And the demiurgus also produces them but by speaking,, 
viz. by intellection. For. he speaks indeed, intellectually perceiving* and; 
immoveably and intellectually. Animal itself also produces them; for k 
contains the one cause of all winged, of all aquatic, and of all terrestrial ! 
animals. But it produces them with silence, by its very essence and-' 
intelligibly. For., the demiurgic speecli receives indeed the paternal' 
silence* but the intellectual production, the intelligible cause, and the 
generation which subsists according to energizing, the providence' 

* For (mt* iSouXijf, I read>rr«/3oX>if. For die mundane Gods are in no part of the Timaus 
represented as consulting about the fabrication of things^ 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. IX. 


OF PLATO. 


125 


according to existence. Motion afeo receives the demiurgic words, but 
the orderly distribution which is mingled with a sensible nature, receives 
the intellectual energy. For the fabrications which exist at the extremity 
of tilings require a producing cause of this kind. Every thing therefore 
which is mutable, which is changed in quality T which is generated and 
corruptible, is generated from a cause, immoveable indeed according to 
essence, but moved according to energy. For the motion which is there 
separated from essence, here produces an essence which is moved. 
Hence, because that which makes, makes both according to essence and 
according to energy, both which are as it were woven together,.mutation 
of essence theuce derives its progression. Mortal natures therefore 
require moveable causes, and those that are very mutable, many such 
causes. For it is impossible that they should remain only-begotten; since 
the mortal genera would not have an existence. 

It is necessary however, that the mortal nature should exist, in the first 
place, in order that every thing may have a subsistence which is capable 
of being generated,, viz. both perpetual beings, and those which at a 
certain time cease to exist. For beyond these is that which in no respect 
whatever is. In the next place this is necessary,, in order that divine 
natures and being may sot be the last of things; since that which is 
generative of any thing is more excellent and more divine than the thing 
which it generates. And in the third place it is necessary in order that 
the world may not be imperfect, not comprehending every thing the 
causes of which are contained in animal itself. For the ideas which are 
there,, are the causes of every thing whether divine or mortal. Hence 
Orpheus says that the vivific cause’ of partible natures, while she. 
remained on high weaving the order of celestials, was a nymph, as being 
undefilfed^ and in consequence of this connected with Jupiter, and 
abiding in her appropriate manners; but that proceeding from her 
proper habitation, she left her webs unfinished^ was ravished, having been’ 
ravished was married, and being married generated, in order that she- 
might animate things which have an adventitious life. For the unfinished' 


* i. e. Proserpine; 


* 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



126 


\)N THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


state of her webs indicates, I think, that the universe is imperfect or 
unfinished as far as to perpetual animals. Hence Plato says, that the 
one demiurgus calls on the many demiurgi to weave together the mortal 
and immortal natures, after a manner reminding us that the addition of 
the mortal genera is the perfection of the textorial life of the universe, 
and also exciting our recollection of thtf divine Orphic fable, and affording 
us interpretative causes of the unfinished webs [of Proserpine]. 

The divine number therefore, has its proper boundary and end, and is 
perfect. But it is also necessary that the mortal nature should exist, 
and have an appropriate limit; and this triply, aerially* aquatically and 
terrestrially. For celestially, is impossible, because the summit, and the 
first genus of every order is undefiled and perpetual, in consequence of 
being assimilated to the cause which is prior to it. As therefore, the first 
of intellectuals is intelligible, and the first of angels is a God, thus also 
the first of sensibles is perpetual and divine. 

When however the demiurgus says, “ Yet if these are generated and 
participate of life through me they will become equal to the Gods,” he 
confirms what has been before asserted, that every thing which is pro¬ 
duced by an immoveable cause is unbegotten and immutable; but that 
every thing which is produced indeed by an immoveable cause, yet 
through the medium of a cause that is moved, is partly unbegotten, and 
partly mutable. For from the immoveable cause indeed it receives unity, 
but from the moveable cause multitude. And from the former it derives 
being and form, but from the latter individuality, and a flowing existence; 
through which the form or species is preserved, but the individual is 
. destroyed. 


9 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. X. 


OP PLATO. 


127 


CHAPTER X. 

After this, the demiurgus says, “ That mortal natures therefore may 
subsist, and that the universe may be truly all, convert yourselves 
according to nature to the fabrication of animals, imitating the power 
which I employed in your generation/’ A twofold scope of fabrication, 
says Proclus, is here delivered, one indeed providential, but the other 
assimilative; the one being more proximate, but the other more total* 
For to fabricate for the sake of giving subsistence to mortal natures, 
indicates providence, and the perfection* of power. For all super¬ 
plenitude of power is prolific of other things subordinate to itself. But 
to fabricate for the sake of giving completion to the universe, indicates 
an energy according to assimilative power, in order that this universe 
may be rendered similar to all-perfect animal, in consequence of being 
adorned with all the numbers of divine and mortal animals. For if all 
things were immortal, the most divine* of sensible natures would be 
unprolific. And if the universe was not filled with all the forms of life, 
it would not be perfect, nor sufficiently similar to all-perfect animal. 
That neither of these defects therefore might happen, the first demiurgus 
excites the second fabrication supernally from his own exalted place ofr 
survey. He also pours on the mundane Gods vivific and demiurgic 
power, through which they generate from themselves secondary essences, 
fill them with life, and give them a specific distinction. For the pecu¬ 
liarity of vivific deity is to vivify, but of demiurgic deity to be productive 
of form. The expression therefore “ convert yourselves ” is of an exciting 
nature, and is similar to the mandate of Jupiter to the Gods in Homer, 

Haste, to the Greek and Trojan hosts descend. * 

For as that calls them to the war of generation, so this in Plato excites 

* For T*A<Mrar«, 1) is necessary to read T»Xn#njr«. 

* For r« it is necessary to read r« ittorma. 1 Iliad xx. v. 24. 


Digitized by Google 



126 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


them to the fabrication of mortals, which they effect through motion. 
And this indeed is accomplished by all the mundane Gods, but especially 
by the governors of the world for the planets], and in the most eminent 
degree by the sovereign sun. For the demiurgus gave him dom inio n 
over wholes, fabricated him as a guardian, and ordered him, as Orpheus 
says, 

■ O'er all to rule. 

The words likewise, “ according to nature," bound their fabrication 
according to measure and the good : and besides this, spread under them 
all physical production as an instrument to their energies. This there¬ 
fore which is subservient to their will they move and govern. And in 
the third place, these words define their subsistence as media; for it 
pertains to the middle to fabricate the extremes according to nature. 
For things which sometimes have an existence are Suspended from those 
that are perpetual according to time; and the latter are suspended from 
eternal entities. And primary natures indeed are generative of media; 
but these are productive of such beings as are last in the series of things. 
The word “ yourselves " also which denotes manual operation, excites the 
divine lives themselves to fabrication. Nor ought we to wonder whence 
demiurgic power is derived to divine souls, this being the peculiarity of 
the superessential Gods. For as Orpheus, placing an intellectual essence 
in Jupiter, renders it demiurgic, thus also Plato producing words from 
the father, evinces that the souls which rank as wholes are divine and 
demiurgic. Nor must we doubt why of mundane natures 1 some are 
immortal, but others mortal, since all of them are generated according to 
intelligible causes ; for some of them proceed from one, but others from 
another proximate producing cause. And it is necessary to look to these, 
and not to paradigms alone. Nor must we investigate ideas of Socrates, 
Plato, or of any thing that ranks as a particular. For the demiurgus 
divides mortal animals according to genera, and stops at total intellec- 
Vons ; and through these comprehends every thing of a partial nature. 


-* Instead of bx vtvotv ryxixrfuani, it is necessary to read Six n rm eyxorfuow. 


Digitized by 


Google 



•OHAP. X. 


OF PLATO. 


129 


For as the demiurgus makes that which is material immaterially, and 
that which is generated ingenerably, thus also he produces mortal natures 
immortally . 1 For he makes these indeed, but through the junior Gods; 
since prior to their making, he made by intellection alone. Nor must 
we deny that mortal natures subsist also divinely, and not mortally only. 
For the things which the demiurgus now extends in his speech are 
hypostases or subsisting natures about the junior or mundane Gods, 
which the heavens primarily receive; and according to which the Gods 
fabricate the mortal genera. For the monads of every mortal-formed 
life proceed into the hearvens from the intelligible forms. But from these 
monads which are divine, all the multitude of material animals is gene¬ 
rated. For if we adopt these conceptions, we shall accord with Plato, 
and shall not wander from the nature of things. 

Again, when the demiurgus says, “ Imitating the power which I employed 
about your generation ,” we must understand by this that an assimilation 
to the one exempt fabrication of things, and a conversion to it, is the 
highest end of the second fabrication. For it is necessary that self-motive 
should follow immoveable natures, and such as are very mutable, such as 
are always moved, and that there should be perpetually a series of 
secondary beings assimilated to those that are prior to them. Since 
however there was a divine will and a divine power in the demiurgus, he 
unfolds his will to the mundane Gods through learning ; and through 
this perfects their demiurgic will. But he unfolds his power to them 
through this imitation , according to which he orders them to imitate the 
power of the one demiurgus, conformably to which they were generated 
by him. For by saying that which he wills, he imparts to them will ; 
and by saying that which he is able to effect, he supplies them with 
power. And in the last place he demonstrates them to be secondary 
fabricators imitators of tbeir father. Whether, therefore, there is a 
mundane power, or an efficacious energy of daemons, or a fortitude and 
supernatural strength of heroes, to all this the demiurgus gives subsist- 

1 ecS*v»T»s i» omitted in the original. 

Proc. Vol. 1L R 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



130 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


B0Q& Yii 


ence, and imparts it to those that give completion tQ the whole of the 
second fabrication. For the first, pqwer is in him, and the monad of 
demiurgic powers. Since, however, he is also intellect and father,, all 
things will be in him, viz. father, the power of the father, and the 
paternal intellect. Hence Plato was not ignorant of this division; and 
on. this account the demiurgus as being father, calls power his power. 
This also he manifests by adding, “ which I employed about your genera - 
tion” For the father is the cause of this in conjunction with power; 
just as father here in conjunction with the female is the cause of the 
propagation of the human species. QFor power is of a feminine 
characteristic.] 


CHAPTER XI. 


And thus much for the developement of such particulars in the speech 
of the demiurgus as relate to the junior or mundane Gods. Others, 
however, no less important respecting the fabrication of these Gods 
remain to be collected . from another part of the Timseus j and which 
accompanied with the admirable elucidations of Proclus are as follow: 
After the demiurgus had instructed souls in all that was necessary to their 
well being, and had disseminated some of them into the earth, others 
into the moon, and others into the remaining different instruments of 
time, Plato adds : “ But after this semination he delivered to the junior 
Gods the province of fabricating mortal bodies, and generating whatever 
else remained necessary to the human soul; and gave them dominion 
over every thing consequent to their fabrications.” Who the junior 
Gods are, says Proclus, must now be shown; for that the mundane Gods 
are thus denominated is evident. But it seems they are thus called by 
Plato, either from a comparison with the more ancient dignity of the 
unapparent Q. e. the intellectual] fabrication, and with the transcendency 


Digitized by 



CHAP. XI. OF PLATO. 131 

of the power in it, and the perfection of intellectual vision. For that 
which is more intellectual is with the Gods more ancient. 

“ But Jove was bom the first, and more he knows,” says Homer. Or 
they are thus denominated, because they always make generation to be 
new; and when it becomes old and imbecil through its subject nature, 
again recall it to a subsistence according to nature by their motions, 
sending into it effluxions of all-various productive principles and powers, 
and thus render it perpetually new. Or, they are thus called, because 
having intellectual essences suspended from them, they eternally energize 
with the acme of intellectual vigor. For as the poets say, Hebe pours 
out their wine, and they drink nectar, and survey the whole sensible 
world. Employing, therefore, immutable and undeviating intellections, 
they fill all things with their demiurgic providence. Or they have this 
appellation, because Curetic deity is present with them, [or deity 
belonging to the order of the Curetes,] illuminating their intellectual 
conceptions with purity, their motion with inflexibility, and supplying 
the whole of them with rigid power, through which they govern all things 
without departing from the characteristics of their nature. Or, which is 
the truest reason of all the preceding, they are thus denominated, because 
the monad of them is called the recent God. For theologists give this 
appellation to Bacchus, who is the monad of all the second fabrication. 
For Jupiter established him the king of all the mundane Gods, and 
distributed to him the first honours. On this account also, theologists 
are accustomed to call the sun a recent God , and Heraclitus says, that 
the sun is a diurnal youth , as participating of Dionysiacal power. Or, 
for a reason most appropriate to Platonic principles, they are thus 
denominated, because bodies which have generation are suspended from 
them ; and the essence of these is not allotted a subsistence in eternity, 
but in the whole of time. They are junior, therefore, not as once 
beginning to exist, but as being always generated, and as we have before 
observed, subsisting in becoming to be, or perpetually rising into 
existence. For every thing which is generated has not the whole of what 
it possesses present at once, nor a simultaneous infinity, but an infinity 
which is perpetually supplying. Thus, therefore, they are called junior. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



ON THE THEQLOQY 


133 


BOOK 


as having a subsistence contended with time, and always advancing 
into existence, and as possessing a renovated immortality. . 

Again, the delivery of the first fabrication is a communication and 
generation of demiurgic powers* exempt from every tiling which the 
second fabrication produces proximately, a progression of production, 
from the unapparent into the apparent, and a division of uniform 
power into the multiplied government of the world. But the forma* 
tion of bodies assimilates the junior Gods, to the unapparent fabri¬ 
cation. For that was the cause of bodies that rank as wholes, just 
as they are the causes of partial bodies, at the same time exhibiting a 
diminution of power. For of the body of which they are the makers and. 
formers, the demiurgus also is the causebut they are the formers of partial 
bodies, which are bodies endued with certain qualities.. Hence body 
indeed is simply unbegotten as firora time, and incorruptible as. was also> 
the opinion of Aristotle. “ For," says he, “ there would be a vacuum 
if body could be generated, external.* to the body of the uniyerse. But 
this particular body is corruptible, as being of a partial nature; for the 
wholes of the elements derived their subsistence from total fabrication. 
The accession, however, of the human soul which remained* to be 
generated, assimilates the mundane Gods to the paternal power. For it 
is the province of a father to generate life; since the first father,.and 
every father is the cause of life; the intelligible lather, indeed, of 
intelligible, but the intellectual of intellectual, and the supermundane of 
supermundane life. And hence, the mundane Gods who generate 
corporeal life are fathers.. The fabrication, however, adapted to these 
Gods, produces the nature of partial animals. For this partial animal 
which is suspended from the immortal soul,, consists of soul and body... 
But the dominion which the demiurgus gave the junior Gods, excites 
their providential inspection, their connective power, and their guardian 
comprehensions. For without these, the bodies that are fashioned, and 
the mortal form of life, would rapidly vanish into non-entity. Prior* 


* For e% ou o-cufwtTos, it is necessary to read «£« rwfAonos. 
* For Avmjfi itis requisite to read,*©**^. 


Digitized by boogie 


j 



CHAP. XII. 


OF PLATO 


133 


therefore, to the gehcration of these, the demiurgus made their ruling 
Gods to be the guardians and saviours of them. In the junior Gods, 
therefore, there are demiurgic powers, according to which they invest 
generated natures with forms; vivific powers, according to which they 
give subsistence to a secondary life; and perfective powers, through 
which they give completion to what is deficient in generation. There 
are also man}' other powers in. them besides these, which are inexplicable^ 
by our conceptions. 



CHAPTER XIR 


After this, Plato adds, “ He likewise commanded them to govern* 
as much as possible in the best and most beautiful manner the mortal 
animal, that it might not become the cause of evil to itself.” Oil these 
words Proclus observes : Of all that the one demiurgus delivers to the 
junior Gods, it must be admitted that there are three most beautiful* 
boundaries, the boniform will of him that delivers, the perfect power of 
the recipients, and tlie symmetry of both these with each other. Of the- 
demiurgic production, however, of the junior Gods themselves, three 
elements and these the greatest must be again surveyed, a reduction to 
the good, a conversion to intelligible beauty, and a liberated power 
sufficient to rule over all the subjects of its government. For as Phanes, ’* 
himself the demiurgus of wholes, rendered the whole world as much as 
possible the most beautiful and the best, thus also he was willing that 
the second fabricators should govern the mortal animal in a way the most 
beautiful and the best; pouring on-them indeed from intelligibles, 
beauty, but filling them with that bonifonn power and will, which he 
himself possessing fabricated the whole world. For thus generation also 
will participate of beauty and goodness, as far as it is naturally adapted 

1 i. e. Jupiter, who is so called in this place by Prochts, because he contains in himself by 
participation, the Phanes or Protogonus who is the paradigm of the unhrcrse. 




Digitized by 


Google 



134 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


to such participation* if the Gods by whom it is connected and contained* 
adorn it, who are themselves transcendently decorated with beauty and 
good. 

If, however, the second demiurgi have such a nature as this* nothing 
evil or preternatural is generated from the celestial Gods; nor is it pro¬ 
per to divide the Gods in the heavens after this manner* as many do, 
viz. into the beneficent and malignant; for being Gods this is impossible. 
But the mortal animal is the cause of evil to itself. For neither disease, 
nor poverty, * nor any thing else of this kind is evil; but the depravity 
of the soul, intemperance* timidity* and every vice. Of these things, 
however, we are the causes to ourselves. For though being impelled by 
others to these vices we are badly affected* yet again it is through our¬ 
selves ; since we have the power of associating with the good, and sepa¬ 
rating ourselves from the bad. According to Plato, therefore, we must 
not think that of the Gods some are malignant and others beneficent* 
but we must admit that all of them are the sources to mortals of all the 
good which they are able to receive; and that things which are truly 
evils are not produced, but are only signified by them, as we have before 
observed. For they extend terrific appearances and signs to those who 
are able to see and read .the letters in the universe, which the framers of 
mortal natures during their revolutions write by their configurations. And 
though some one should derive a certain evil from the motions of the 
celestial Gods, so as to become timid or intemperate* yet they operate in 
one way, and their influences are participated by souls in another. For 
the efflux of intellect, says Plotinus* becomes craft in him who receives 
the efflux badly; the gift of an elegant life becomes intemperance through 
a similar cause; and in short* while they produce beneficently* their gifts 
are participated by terrestrial natures, after a contrary manner. Hence 
the givers who bestow beneficently are not to be accused as the authors 
of evil, but the recipients who pervert their gifts by their own inaptitudes. 
Thus also Jupiter in Homer blames souls as in vain accusing the Gods* 
while they themselves are the causes of evils. For the Gods are the 


1 For T«y>i£ia* it is necessary to read 




Digitized by 


Google 



CBm xu. 


OF PLAtO. 


135 


sources of good, and the suppliers of intellect and life, but are not the 
causes of any evil; since even a partial nature is not the cause of evil to 
its offspring. What, therefore, ought we to think concerning the Gods 
themselves ? Is it not, that they are much more the causes of good to 
their productions; since with them there is power, with them there is a 
self-perfect nature, with diem there is universal goodness, to all which 
evil is contrary. For in its own nature it is powerless, imperfect, and 
without measure. 

In the next place Plato says, “ At the same time he who orderly dis¬ 
posed all these particulars, remained in his own accustomed manner." 
And Proclus observes, that Plato every where after having employed 
many words, summarily comprehends the multitude of them in the con- 
elusion. For he knew that in the Demiurgus, one intellectual perception 
comprehends the multitude of intellectual conceptions; that one power 
connects many powers; and that a uniform cause collects into one 
union divided causes. Hence the words [prior to these], “ Having, 
therefore, instructed souls in all these particulars,” and the words before 
us, “ He who orderly disposed all these particulars,” lead the distinct 
energy of the Demiurgus to an united cause. Farther still, the word all 
manifests that which is consummated from all its appropriate boundaries. 
But the words orderly disposed , indicate the order pervading through all 
beings, which the Demiurgus introduced to the mundane Gods, and to 
partial souls; demonstrating the former to be demiurgi, but inscribing 
in the latter the laws of Fate. Moreover, the word remained , does not 
manifest station, and inflexible intellection, but an establishment 1 in the 
one. For according to this, he is exempt from wholes, and is separated 
from the beings that intellectually perceive him. But this establishment 
itself is eternal, and always invariably permanent. These things, there¬ 
fore, are also indicated by the words accustomed and manner; the one 
exhibiting sameness of permanency; but the other the peculiarity of the 
demiurgic stability. For manner is indicative of peculiarity; since con¬ 
nective is different from immutable, and both these from demiurgic per¬ 
manency. . 

* For iSpvav, it is necessary to read ityv<nv. 


Digitized by 


Google 



136 


BOOK VII. 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


CHAPTER XIII. 


“ But in consequence of his abiding, says Plato, as soon as bis chil¬ 
dren understood the order of their father, they became obedient to it” 
When the Demiurgus speaks, says Proclus, then the junior Gods have 
the order of hearers. When he intellectually perceives, then they learn; 
for learning is dianoetic. When he abides according to union itself, 
then his children intellectually perceive. For they always receive from 
him an inferior order. And as filled indeed from him, they preserve the 
analogy of hearers with reference to him; but as evolving his one power, 
they are analogous to learners. For he who learns evolves the intellect of 
his preceptor. As being deified, however, by him, they have the analogy 
of those that perceive intellectually. For intellect becomes deific, by its 
contact ’ with the one. The father, therefore, abiding, his children very 
properly intellectually perceive. For they are intellects participated by 
divine souls, that ride in the vehicles of undefiled bodies. But they in¬ 
tellectually perceive the order of the father presubsisting in him prior to 
the arranged effects, according to which order he became all things. 
Mortal natures, therefore, were fashioned and animated by the demiurgic 
intellection alone. But the junior Gods unfold his 'total production, 
through their own jnanifestfabrication ; being filled from the demiurgic 
monad. 

In .the last place, Plato adds, “ And receiving the immortal principle 
©f mortal animal, in imitation of .their artificer, they borrowed from the 
world the parts of fire and earth, water and air, as things which they 
should restore back againand conglutinated the received parts together, 
but not with the same indissoluble bonds by which they were connected.” 
On these words Proclus admirably comments as follows : Plato indicates 
to us, the separation of the second from the first fabrication, through 

* er« 4>5 is erroneously printed for 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XIII. 


OF PLATO. 


137 




many words and steps.' For if die Demiurgus orderly disposes, but the 
junior Gods are obedient to his mandates, the former by merely com¬ 
manding is the cause of generated natures, but the latter being excited 
by the Demiurgus, receive from thence the boundary of the whole of their 
fabrication. And if, indeed, he abides in himself, but they are moved 
about him, it is evident that he is eternally the cause of things which 
subsist in time, but that they being filled from him energize according to 
the whole of time. And if he perfectly establishes himself in his own 
accustomed manner, but they proceeding from him, unfold into light this 
united and ineffable disposition of himself, they derive from him second¬ 
ary measures of fabrication. 

Moreover, he is said to have a paternal dignity, but they are denomi¬ 
nated his children, as expressing his prolific power, and his single good¬ 
ness. And he indeed, is celebrated as delivering from his exalted abode 
the principles of fabrication; but they are celebrated as receiving the 
immortal principle contributing to the orderly distribution of mortals. 
He is said to have the fountain of the vivification of perpetual natures; 
but they are the causes of the subsistence of mortal-formed animals. 
And he indeed extends himself as a paradigm to the many Gods; but 
they are said to imitate the demiurgic intellect. He is said to produce 
the whole world, and the plenitudes of it; but they are said to borrow 
parts from the fabrications of their father, in order to the completion of 
their proper works. And he indeed employs all incorporeal powers ; but 
they also employ such as are corporeal. He gives subsistence to indis¬ 
soluble bonds; but they to such as are dissoluble. And he, indeed, is 
said to insert a upion more ancient than the natures which it unites; but 
they are said to introduce an adventitious union, and which is of an origin 
posterior to this, to the beings that consist of many -contrary natures. 
And he is said to produce all things impartibly ; but they with division, 
minutely distributing the subsistence of mortal natures into small and 
invisible nails. From these things, therefore, the separation of the two 
fabrications may be assumed; but the union and contact of them may 

1 for x«i fiaitm, it is necessary to read x«t (SetUpm. 

Proc. Vox. II. S 


Digitized by boogie 



138 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VIL 


be surveyed from tiie words before usv For here a contact is. effected of 
the second with the first fabrication,; of apparent with unapparent, and 
of divided with monadic production. 

Hence it is necessary that the lowest part of the first and unapparent 
fabrication, should coalesce with the summit of the second. For thus 
also the heavens are conjoined with generation [or the sublunary region} 
the lowest of the celestial bodies exhibiting the principle of mutation; but 
the summit of the essence of sublunary natures, being moved in con- 
junction with the heavens. Hence too, here also the rational soul is 
conjoined with the mortal form of life; viz. the lowest and most partial 
of the productions of the father, with the highest of the natures generated 
by the junior Gods. For they, indeed, as being certain fathers produce 
lives; but as fabricators, bodies. And they imitate indeed Vulcan by 
the fabrication of bodies; but Juno by vivification. But through both 
these they imitate the whole Demiurgus. For he is maker and father; 
but they fashion bodies by borrowing parts from wholes. For every 
where parts derive their composition from wholes. When, however, the 
wholes are incorporeal, they remain undiminished by the subsistence of 
the parts; but when they are corporeal, the parts that are generated 
from them diminish the wholes. Hence an ablation always taking place, 
but the parts always remaining, the wholes perish. And thus generation 
will no longer exist, and the works of the first fabrication will all vanish 
through the second, which it is not lawful to assert. That nothing of this 
kind, therefore, may take place in the universe, the composite parts are 
again dissolved, in order to fill up their wholes. And the generation of 
one thing is the corruption of another; but the corruption of one thing is 
the generation of another; in order that generation and corruption may 
always remain. For if generation existed only once, it would at a certain 
rime stop, in consequence of consisting of finite things, and these being 
consumed. But these perishing corruption also would stop, all things 
being destroyed. Hence if it is necessary that one of these should exist, 
the other also will exist. Every thing, therefore, which is generated from 
the second fabrication is a composite and dissoluble, and deriving its 
composition from time, will also in time be again dissolved. The junior 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


199 


Gods, therefore, are very property said to borrow parts which sure again 
to be restored to their wholes. But they borrow them from the universe.* 
For that which they borrow is fire, earth, water and air; and they again 
restore them to the universe. * The father, therefore, wishes the wholes 
to remain which he generated and arranged. And thus much concerning 
all the fabrication of the junior Gods. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


Having, therefore, thus largely presented to the reader what pertains 
to the mundane Gods in general, it is now requisite to descend to parti¬ 
culars, and to discuss separately the peculiarities of the celestial, and 
those of the sublunary Gods. The order of the celestial Gods then con¬ 
sisting of the fixed stars and the planets, the sphere in which the former 
are placed has the relation of a monad, as we have before observed, to the 
starry deities which that sphere contains. For the first of the four ideas 
in the paradigm of the universe being an exempt monad, the multitude 
of the stars proceeding from it is comprehended by a coordinate monad, 
which is the inersatic sphere. This sphere is called by Plato in the 
Timaeus a true world, because it is more properly a world than the sublu¬ 
nary region, which always requires a foreign arrangement, and is conversant 
with unceasing mutation. It is also a world thus variegated with stars, as 
expressing intellectual variety, and receiving from thence as it were in the 
whole of itself the uniform flowers with which the intellectual world is sur¬ 
rounded, and which imitate thebeauty of the-celestial paradigms. But Plato 
very accurately says, that theDemiurgus gave this sphere a circular diatribe 


1 For irocrpof, it is necessary to read *cm;. 

* Here also for »*rpi, it is necessary to read 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



140 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Vll. 


tion about the whole of the heavens. For to distribute and to distribute 
in a circle t is adapted to this sphere; since the former signifies intellectual 
distribution, but the latter demiurgic order. Hence theologists * establish 
Eunomia in the inerratic sphere, who separates the multitude it contains, 
and always preserves each of the stars in its proper order. Hence also 
celebrating Vulcan as the maker of the heavens, they conjoin with him 
Aglaia, as causing all heaven to be splendid through the variety of the 
stars. And again, of the Seasons, they place Dice or Justice over the 
planetary region, as bringing in a circular order the inequability of the 
motions of the planets to an equability according to reason ; but of the 
Graces, Thalia, as causing their lives to be ever-flourishing. And in the 
sublunary region, they establish Irene or peace, as conciliating the 
war of the elements; but of the Graces Euphrosune, as conferring on 
every thing a facility of natural energy. 

But the planets are called the Governors of the world, (xoc-ftaxpar^pts) 
and are allotted a total power. As the inerratic sphere too, has a number 
of starry animals, so each of the planets is the leader of a multitude of 
animals, or of certain other things of this kind. Hence the doubt may 
be solved, why the one sphere of the fixed stars comprehends a multitude 
of stars, but each of the planetary spheres convolves only one star. For 
it must be said, that in the former case the sphere indeed is a monad, 
comprehending in itself an appropriate multitude, and is sufficient to the 
comprehension of a mundane multitude which ranks as the first. But in 
the latter case, the governing power is twofold, viz. the sphere, and each 
of ihe governors of the world, who is a monad co-arranged with multi¬ 
tude. The sphere itself, however, is a leader, a co-arranged monad and 
a wholeness; (0X0nj$) but each of the governors of the world is a leader 
and a monad, but is not a wholeness. Indeed, subordinate natures re¬ 
quire a greater number of leaders, and a multitude in each of the spheres 
unapparent on account of diminution. But in the sublunary region, the 
orders which are the leaders of the genera in each of the elements are still 
more numerous than those of the planets, as we learn from the G recian 
theogony. 

1 Vid. Proclum in Tim. p. 276. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XIV. 


OF PLATO. 


141 




In each of the planetary spheres, therefore, there is a number of satel¬ 
lites analogous to the choir of the fixed stars, subsisting with proper cir¬ 
culations of their own. The revolution also of these satellites is similar 
to that of the planets which they follow; and this according to Plato is a 
spiral revolution. With respect, likewise, to these satellites, the first in 
order about every planet are Gods; after these daemons revolveTn lucid 
orbicular bodies; and these are followed by partial souls such as ours. 
That in each of the planetary spheres, however, there il a multitude co¬ 
ordinate to each may be inferred from the extremes. For if the inerratac . 
sphere has a multitude co-ordinate to itself, and earth is with respect to 
terrestrial animals what the inerratic sphere is to such as are celestial, it 
is necessary that every wholeness should entirely possess certain partial 
animals co-ordinate to itself, through which also the spheres derive the 
appellation of wholenesses . * But the natures situated in the middle are 
concealed from our sense, while in the mean time those contained in the 
extremes are apparent,—one kind through their transcendently luminous 
essence, and the other through their alliance to ourselves. If also partial 
souls are disseminated about these spheres, some indeed about the sun* 
but others about the moon, and others about each of the remaining 
spheres; and if prior to souls, there are daemons giving completion to the 
herds of which they are the leaders; it is evident that it is beautifully said, 
that each of the spheres is a world. And this is conformable to the doc¬ 
trines of theologists, * when they teach us that there are Gods in every 
sphere prior to daemons, the government of some receiving its perfection 
under that of others. As for instance, with- respect to our queen the 
moon, that she contains the Goddess Hecate, and Diana; and with re¬ 
spect to the sovereign sun, and the Gods which he contains, theologists 
celebrate Bacchus as subsisting there 


1 These oAonrr**, according t6 the Platonic philosophy, have so far as they are wholes, a perpe¬ 
tual subsistence, and are the spheres of the fixed stars, the spheres of the planets, the sphere of 
air, the globe on which we live, and the ocean. See more on this subject in my Dissertation on 
the Philosophy of Aristotle. 

* Vid. ProcL i* Tim. p. 257 and 279. 


4 


v Digitized by boogie 



142 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


The sun** assessor, who with watchful eye 
Inspect* the sacred pole. 

They also celebrate Jupiter as seated there, Osiris, and a solar Pan, as 
likewise other divinities, of which the books of theologists and theurgists 
are full. From all which it is evident how true it is that each of the 
planets is the prefect of many Gods, who give completion to its proper 
circulation. * 




CHAPTER XV. 


Owing to the loss of a seventh book On the Theology of Plato, written 
by Proclus, copious information respecting the peculiarities of all the 
Celestial Gods is unfortunately not to be obtained. All that can be pro¬ 
cured, however, on this subject, and which I have diligently collected from 
Platonic writings, 1 shall now present to the philosophic reader, beginning 
in the first place with the moon. This divinity then has the relation of 
nature and of a mother with respect to generation, or the sublunary 
region. For all things are convolved and co-increased by her when she 
increases; but are diminished when she diminishes. This Goddess, too, 

* Hence, we may perceive at one view, as I have elsewhere observed, why the sun in the Or¬ 
phic hymns is called Jupiter, why Apollo is called Pan, and Bacchus the Sun ; and why the moon 
teema to be the same with Rhea, Ceres, Proserpine, Juno, Venus, &c. For from this theory it 
follows, that every sphere contains a Jupiter, Nepttme, Vulcan, Vesta, Minerva, Mars, Ceres, 
Juno, Diana, Mercury, Venus, Apollo, and in short, every deity,—each sphere at the same time 
conferring on these Gods the peculiar characteristics of its nature; so that for instance, in the sun 
they possess s solar property; in the moon a lunar one ) and so of the rest 

This theory too is one of the grand keys to the theology of the Greeks j as it shows why one 
God is so often celebrated by the appellations of another; an ignorance of the cause of which led 
Macrobius to thin k that all the Gods were nothing more than die different powers of the sun, and 
has been one great source of the idle conjectures of the mode ms about the divinities of the ancients. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAi\ XV. 


QF PLATO. 


143 

benevolently leads into light the upapparent productive principles of 
nature. She likewise gives perfection to souls through a life according 
to virtue; but imparts to mortal animals a restitution to form. 

Next to the moon is Mercury, who is the cause of symmetry to all 
mundane natures, having the relation of reason to things in generation. 
For all symmetry proceeds according to one ratio, and according to 
number of which this God is the giver. This deity, too, is the inspective 
guardian of gymnastic exercises; and hence hernia, or carved statues of 
Mercury were placed in the Palaestrae; of music, and hence be is ho¬ 
noured as the lyrist (xupou*;) among the celestial constellations; and of 
disciplines , because the invention of geometry, reasoning and discourse is 
referred to this God. He presides, therefore, over every species of disci* 
pline, leading us to an intelligible essence from this mortal abode, govern* 
ing the different herds of souls, and dispersing the sleep and oblivion with 
which they are oppressed. He is likewise the supplier of recollection, 
the end of which is a genuine intellectual apprehension of divine natures. 
Hence, among the Athenians, certain images of these tilings were pre¬ 
served ; grammar having a reference to dialectic discipline; playing 
on the harp pertaining to music; and wrestling to gymnastic, in which 
those youths that were well born were instructed. 

In the next place follows Venus, who is the cause of beauty to gene¬ 
rated natures, which is an imitation of intelligible beauty. This goddess 
also is the source of the union of form with matter; connecting and 
comprehending the powers of all the elements; and her principal em¬ 
ployment consists in beautifully illuminating the order, harmony, and 
communion of all mundane concerns. She likewise governs all the co¬ 
ordinations in the celestial world and the earth, hinds them to each other, 
and perfects their generative progressions through a kindred conjunction. 
And she unites and leads into communion the Hermaic production which 
has a remitted subsistence, and is in subjection to the solar fabrication. 

The next celestial divinity in order after Venus is the sovereign Sun, 
whose essence and dignity are so great, according-to the theology of 
Plato, as to possess a supermundane pr e r o g a tive among mundane natures. 
This Plato indicates in the Timaeas, when speaking «f the sun be says : 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



144 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VU. 


“ In order that these circles might possess a certain manifest measure of 
slowness and swiftness with reference to each other, and that the motion 
of the eight circulations might be conspicuous, the divinity enkindled a 
light which we now denominate the sun, in the second revolution from 
the earth ; that the heavens might become eminently apparent to all 
things, and that such animals might participate of number as are adapted 
to its participation, receiving numerical information from the revolution 
of a nature similar and the same/’ On these words Proclus admirably 
comments as follows: * Plato here delivers the one ruling cause of the 
generation of apparent time. For as the Demiurgus gives subsistence 
to unapparent time, thus also the sun to the time which is apparent, and 
which measures the motion of bodies. For through light he leads into 
visibility every temporal interval, gives bound to all periods, and exhibits 
measures of restoration to a pristine state. Deservedly, therefore, is the 
sun a manifest measure, as especially unfolding the progression 1 of time 
according to number, intp the universe. For it has a more accurate 
period than that of the five planets, its motions being less anomalous than 
theirs; and also than that of the moon, by always terminating at the same 
point, its progressions to the north and the south. But if it has a more 
accurate period, it is deservedly a measure of measures, and from itself 
bounds 1 the periodic measures of the other planets, and the swiftness of 
their motions with reference to each other. It also in a greater degree 
imitates the perpetual permanency of eternity, by always revolving after 
the same manner. In this way, therefore, it differs from the planets. 

After another manner, likewise, the sun is a more manifest measure than 
the measure of the inerratic sphere. For though this sphere has a certain ap¬ 
propriate measure* a proper interval, and one immutable number of its pe¬ 
culiar motion, yet the solar light causes this measure and all the evolution of 
apparent time to be manifest and known. Hence Plato says, “ In order 
that there might be a certain manifest measure.” For though there is a 


' Vid. ProcL in Tim. Kb. 4. p. 863. 

* For fftpaftw, it is necessary to read wpo«tw. 

* For m, it is necessuy to read tpty, 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XV. 


OF PLATO. 


145 


certain measure in the other planets, yet it is not clear and manifest. But 
the sun unfolds into light both other intelligibles and time. You must 
not however on this account say that the solar light was generated for 
the sake of measurement. For how is it possible that wholes should sub¬ 
sist for the sake of parts ; governing natures for the sake of the governed; 
and perpetual for the sake of corruptible natures ? But we should rather 
say that light possessing an evolving power unfolds total time, and calls 
forth its supermundane monad, and one measure into the measurement 
of the periods of bodies. And this makes time to be, as it were, sensible. 
Hence, it is the light of the sun which causes every thing that is moved to 
have a clear and manifest measure. And this indeed is its whole good. 
After wholes, however, it likewise benefits parts in a secondary degree. 
For it imparts the generation of number, and measure to the natures. 
which are adapted to participate of these. For irrational beings indeed 
are destitute of these; but the genera of daemons who follow the periods 
of the Gods, and men become partakers of them. The supply of good, 
therefore, through the solar light, beginning supernally from wholes, de¬ 
scends as far as to parts. And if beginning from visible natures, you are 
willing to speak of such as are invisible, the light of the sun gives splen¬ 
dor to the whole world, causes a corporeal-formed nature to be divine, 
and wholly filled through the whole of itself with life. But it leads souls 
through undefiled light, imparts to them a pure and elevating power, and 
governs the world by its rays. And it likewise fills souls with empyrean 
fruits. For the order of the sun is supernally derived from supermundane 
natures. Hence Plato does not here fabricate the solar light, but says 
that the Demiurgus enkindled it, as giving subsistence from his own 
essence to this sphere, and emitting from the solar fountain a life extended 
into interval and continually renewed. And this also is asserted by theo- 
logists concerning the supermundane firmaments. 

On this accouht, it appears to me that Plato delivers a two-fold gene¬ 
ration of the sun; one indeed in conjunction with the seven governors of 
the world, when he fashions the bodies of them, and inserts them in their 
circulations; but the other according to the enkindling of light, through 
which he imparts to the sun supermundane power. For it is one thing 
Proc. ' Voh. ft. T 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



146 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


td generate the bulk Of the sun itself by itself, and another in conjunction 
with a rulihg characteristic, through which the sun is called the king' of 
every visible nature, and is established analogous to the one fountain of 
gdod. For as this fountain being better than the intelligible essence, 
illuminates both intellect and the intelligible, thus also the sun being 
better than a visible nature, illuminates both that which is visible and 
sight. But if the sun is beyond a visible essence, it will have a super¬ 
mundane nature. For the world is visible and tangible, and has a body. 
Hence, we must survey the sun in a twofold respect; viz. as one of the 
seven planets, and as the leader of wholes; and as mundane and super¬ 
mundane, according to the latter of which he splendidly emits a divine 
light. For in the same manner as the good luminously emits truth which 
deifies the intelligible and intellectual orders; as Phanes in Orpheus 
sends forth intelligible light which fills with intelligence all the intellec¬ 
tual Gods; and as Jupiter enkindles an intellectual and demiurgic light 
in all the supermundane Gods; thus also the sun illuminates every thing 
visible through this undefiled light. The illuminating cause too is always 
in an order superior to the illuminated natures. For neither is the good 
intelligible, nor Phanes intellectual, nor Jupiter supermundane. In con¬ 
sequence of this reasoning, therefore, the sun being supermundane emits 
the fountains of light. And according to the most mystic doctrines, the 
wholeness of the sun is in the supermundane orders; for in them there 
is a solar world, and a total light, as the Chaldaean oracles 1 assert, and 
which I am persuaded is true. 

That the stars, however, and the whole of the heavens receive their 
light from the sun may easily be perceived. For that which is common 
in many things derives its subsistence from one cause; and in one way 
indeed from an exempt, but in another from a co-arranged cause. But 
this cause is that which primarily participates of that form. The primary 

* According to the Chaldalc dogmas, as explained by Psellus, there are seven corporeal worlds, 
one empyrean and the first; after this three etherial *, and then three material worlds, viz. the in- 
erratic sphere, the seven planetary spheres, and the sublunary region. They also assert that there 
are two solar worlds \ one which is subservient to the etherial profundity; the other zonaic, be¬ 
ing one of the seven spheres. 


Digitized by 


Google 





OF PLATO. 


CHAP. XVI. 


147 


participant. However, is that in which either primarily or especially 
this form exists. If, therefore, light especially subsists in the sun, this 
will be the first light; and from this that which is in other things will be 
derived. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Conformably, also, to this doctrine of Plato concerning the sun, the 
emperor Julian sublimely theologizes about this divinity in his very 
elegant oration to him, from which the following is an extract. The ap¬ 
parent and splendid orbicular sun is the cause of well-being to sensible 
natures. And whatever we have asserted as flowing from the mighty 
intellectual sun among the intellectual Gods, * the same perfections the 
apparent sun communicates to apparent forms; the truth of which will 
be clearly evinced by contemplating invisible natures from the objects of 
sensible inspection. And in the first place, is not light the incorporeal 
and divine form of that which is diaphanous in energy ? But whatever 
that which is diaphanous may be, which is subjected to all [the elements, 
and is their proximate form, it is certain that it is neither corporeal nor 
mixed, nor does it display any of the peculiar qualities of body. Hence, 
you cannot affirm that heat is one of its properties, nor its contrary cold; 
you can neither ascribe to it hardness nor softness, nor any other tangi¬ 
ble difference; nor attribute taste or smell as peculiarities of its essence. 
For a nature of this kind, which is called forth into energy by the inter¬ 
position of light, is alone subject to the power of sight. But light is the 
form of a diaphanous essence which resembles that common matter the 
subject of bodies, through which it is every where diffused ; and rays are 
the summit, and as it were flower of light,, which is an jnqorporeal 

‘ Viz. The s^pwrowdape God«. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



148 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


nature. According to the opinion of the Phoenicians, however, who are 
skilled in divine science and wisdom, the universally-diffused splendour 
of light is the unmingled energy of an intellect perfectly pure. And this 
doctrine will be found agreeable to reason, when we consider that since 
light is incorporeal, its fountain cannot be body, but the pure energy of 
intellect, illuminating in its proper habitation the middle region of the 
heavens: and from this exalted situation scattering its light, it fills all the 
celestial orbs with powerful vigour, and illuminates the universe with 
divine and incorruptible light. 

Whatever, likewise, we first perceive by the sight, is nothing but a 
mere name of honourable labour, unless it receives the ruling assistance 
of light. For how can any thing be visible, unless, like matter, it is 
moved to the artificer that it may receive the supervening investments of 
form? Just as gold in a state of simple fusion is indeed gold, but is net 
a statue or an image till the artificer invests it with form. In a similar 
manner all naturally visible objects cease to be apparent, unless light is 
present with the perceiver. Hence, since it confers vision on the 
perceiver, and visibility on the objects of perception, it perfects two 
natures in energy, sight and that which is visible. Perfections, however, 
are form and essence; though perhaps an assertion of this kind is more 
subtle than is suited to our present purpose. 

Of this, however, all men are persuaded, both the scientific and the 
illiterate, philosophers and the learned, that day and night are fabricated 
by the power of this rising and setting divinity; and that he manifestly 
changes and convolves the world. But to which of the other stars does 
a province of this kind belong? Do we not, therefore, derive conviction 
from hence, that the up apparent and divine race of intellectual Gods,' 
above the heavens, are replenished from the sun with boniform powers; 
to whose authority the whole choir of the stars submits ; and whose nod 
generation, which he governs by his providence, attentively obeys ? For 
the planets, indeed, dancing round him as their king, harmoniously 

* It must be carefully observed, however, that this is only true of the Gods characteristically 
called supermundane. For it does not apply to the Gods who vn primarily intellectual, since they 
are above the supermundane order, to which the sun and Apollo belong.' 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XVI. 


OF PLATO. 


149 


revolve in a circle, with definite intervals, about his orb; producing 
certain stable energies, and advancing backwards and forwards; terms 
by which the skilful in the spheric theory signify such like phenomena 
of the stars. To which we may add, as manifest to every one, that the 
light of the moon is augmented or diminished according to her distance 
from the sun. 

Is it not then highly probable that the orderly disposition of the 
intellectual Gods, which is more ancient than that of bodies, is analogous 
to the mundane arrangement ? Hence we infer his perfective power from 
the whole phenomena, because he gives vision to visive natures ; for he 
perfects these by his light. But we collect his demiurgic and prolific 
power from the mutation of the universe; and his capacity of collecting 
all things into one, from the properties of motion conspiring into union 
and consent; and middle position, from his own central situation. Lastly, 
we infer his royal establishment among the intellectual Gods, from his 
middle order between the planets. For if we perceived these, or as many 
other properties, belonging to any other of the apparent Gods, we should 
not ascribe the principality among them to the sun. 

Again, that we may consider this affair in a different mode, since there 
is one demiurgus of the universe, but many demiurgic Gods, who revolve 
round the heavens, it is proper to place in the midst of these the mundane 
administration of the sun. Besides, the fertile power of life is copious 
and redundant in intelligibles, and the world is full of the same prolific 
life. Hence it is evident that the fertile life of the sovereign sun is a 
medium between the two, as the mundane phenomena perpetually 
evince. For with respect to forms, some he perfects, and others he 
fabricates; some he adorns, and others he excites; nor is any thing 
capable of advancing into light and generation without the demiurgic 
power of the sun. Add too, that if we attend to the uniningled, pure 
and immaterial essence of intelligibles, to which nothing extrinsical flows, 
and nothing foreign adheres, but which is full of its own appropriate 
simplicity, and afterwards consider the defecated nature of that pure 
and divine body which is conversant with mundane bodies revolving in 
an orb, and which is free from all elementary mixture, we shall, find that 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



150 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK vn. 


the splendid and incorruptible essence of the . royal sun, is a medium 
between the immaterial:purity of intelligibles and that which in sensibles 
is unmingled and remote from generation and corruption. 

The greatest argument, however, for the truth of this is derived from 
hence, that the light which Hows from the sun upon the earth will not 
suffer itself to be mingled with any thing; nor is it polluted by any 
sordid nature, or by any contagion; but it abides every where pure, 
undefiled, and impassive. Again, if we consider not only immaterial 
and intelligible forms, but such as are sensible, subsisting in matter, the 
middle intellectual situation of forms about the mighty sun will be no 
less certain and clear. For these afford continual assistance to forms 
merged in matter: so that they could neither exist, nor preserve them¬ 
selves in existence, unless this beneficent deity co-operated with their 
essence. In short, is he not the cause of the separation of forms and the 
concretion of matter ? From whom we not only possess the power of 
understanding his nature, but from whom our eyes are endued with the 
faculty of sight ? For the distribution of rays throughout the world, and 
union of light, exhibit the demiurgic separation of the artificer. 

Again, the solar orb is moved in the starless, which is far higher than 
the inerratic sphere. Hence, he is not the middle of the planets, but of 
the three worlds, according to the mystic hypotheses ;* if it be proper to 
call them hypotheses, and not rather dogmas; confining the appellation 
of hypotheses to the doctrine of the sphere. For the truth of the former 
is testified by men who audibly received this information from Gods, or 
mighty dsemons; but the latter is founded on the probability arising 
from the agreement of the phenomena. But besides those which I have 
mentioned, there is an innumerable multitude of celestial Gods, perceived 
by such as do not contemplate the heavens indolently and after the 
manner of brutes. As the sun quadruply divides these three worlds, 
on account of the communion of the zodiac with each, so he again 
divides the zodiac into twelve powers of Gods, and each of these into 

* That is, according to the Chaldsan oracles, the sun is the middle of the empyrean, etherial, 
and material worlds, the two last of which, as 1 have observed in a former note, receive a 
triple division. • 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XVII. 


OF PLATO. 


151 


three others, so> that thirty-six are produced in the whole. Hence, as ijt 
appears to me, a triple benefit of the Graces proceeds to us from the 
heavens, I mean from those circles which the God quadruply dividing 
produces in consequence of this, a quadripartite beauty and elegance of 
seasons and' times. But the Graces also imitate a circle in their 
resemblances on the earth. Add too, that Bacchus is the source of joy, 
who is said to obtain a common kingdom with the sun. But why should 
I here mention the epithet Horus, or other names of the Gods, all of 
which correspond with the divinity of the sun ? Mankind, indeed, may 
conceive the excellence of the God from his operations; since he perfects 
the heavens with intellectual goods, and renders them partakers of 
intelligible beauty. For as he originates from this beauty, he applies 
himself both wholly and by parts, to the distribution of good. 

In the last place, as the sun is the source of our existence, so likewise 
of the aliment by which that existence is supported. And, indeed, he 
confers on us more divine advantages peculiar to souls ; for he loosens 
these from the bands of a corporeal nature, reduces them to the kindred 
essence of divinity, and assigns them the subtile and firm texture of 
divine splendor, as a vehicle in which they may safely descend to the 
realms of generation. And these benefits of the God have been cele¬ 
brated by others according to their desert, and require the assistance of 
faith more than the evidence of demonstration. 


CHAPTER XVII. 

From the MS. Scholia likewise ofProclus on the Cratylus of Plato, 
we derive the following very important information concerning Apollo j 
in which the principal powers of the God are unfolded by him with his 
usual magnificence of diction, and divine fecundity of conception. 
Socrates, therefore, in the Cratylus says, '“ that there is no other name 
[than that of Apollo3 which can more harmonize with the four powers 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



152 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VIL 


of this God, because it touches upon them all, and evinces in a certain 
respect his harmonic , prophetic, medicinal, and arrow-darting skill.” And 
shortly after he adds, “ that the name is so composed that it touches 
upon all the powers of the God, viz. his simplicity , perpetual jaculation , 
purifying, and joint-revolving nature.” On these words Proclus observes, 
that very rationally after Proserpine, Plato analyzes Apollo. For there 
is a great communion between the Coric and the Apolloniacal series; 
since the former is the unity of the middle triad of the supermundane 
Gods, and emits from herself vivific powers; but the latter converts the 
solar principles to one union; and the solar principles are allotted a 
subsistence immediately after the vivific. Hence, according to Orpheus, 
when Ceres delivered up the government to Proserpine, she thus 
admonished her: 

Avrctg Axoteowos QotKtgov uravcifiarci, 

Tefrrai otykxa Texva xvgtQteytiovjet xgotrwxoig' 

That is, 

But next Apollo’s florid bed ascend; 

For thus the God fam’d offspring shall beget, 

Refulgent with the beams of glowing fire. 

But how could this be the case, unless there was a considerable degree 
of communion between these divinities ? 

It is necessary however, to know thus much concerning Apollo, that 
according to the first and most natural conception, his name signifies the 
cause of union, and that power which collects multitude into one; and 
this mode of speculation concerning his name harmonizes with all the 
orders of the God. But Socrates alone considers his more partial powers: 
for the multitude of the powers of Apollo are not to be comprehended, 
nor described by us. For when will man who is merely rational, be able 
to comprehend not only all the peculiarities of Apollo, but all those of 
any other God ? Theologists indeed deliver to us a great multitude of 
Apolloniacal peculiarities; but Socrates now only mentions four of them. 
For the world is as it were a decad, being filled from all productive prin¬ 
ciples, receiving all things in itself, and being converted to the proper 

* These verses are not in Gesner’s collection of the Orphic fragments. 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP- XVII. 


OF PLATO. 


15S 


principle of the decacj, of which ijjto tetrad proximately contains the 
cause, but in an exempt manner the monad. And the former without 
separation and occultly, but the latter with separation ; just as Apollo 
proximately. unites the multitude of mundane natures, but the demiurgic 
intellect exemptly. Why then does Socrates use an order of this kind ? 
For beginning from the medicinal power of the god, and proceeding 
through his prophetic and arrow-darting powers, he ends in his harmonic 
power. We reply, that all the energies of this god, are in all the orders 
of beings, beginning from on high and proceeding as far as to the last pf 
tilings ; but different energies appear to haye more or less dominion in 
different orders. Thus for instance the medicinal power of Apollo is most 
apparent in the sublunary region, for 

There slaughter, rage, and countless ills beside. 

Disease, decay, and rottenness reside.' 

And as these are moyed in an inordinate manner, they require t<? be 
restored from a condition contrary, iuto one agreeable to nature, and 
from incommensuration and manifold division, into symmetry and unipn. 

But the prophetic energy of the god is most apparent in the heavens; 
for there his enunciative power shines forth, unfolding intelligible good 
to celestial natures, and on this account he revolves together with the stjn, 
with whom he participates the same intellect in common; since the sup 
also illuminates whatever the heavens contain, and extends a unifying 
power to all their parts. But his arrow-darting energy mostly prevails 
among the liberated gods; for there ruling over the wholes which the 
universe contains, he excites their motions by his rays, which are always 
assimilated to arrows, extirpates every thing inordinate, and fills all 
.. things with demiurgic gifts. And though he has a separate and exempt 
subsistence, he reaches all things by his energies. 

Again, his harmonic power js more predominant in the ruling super- 

* These lines are from Empedocles, and in the original are as follow: 

Eviot xoTOf rc $ovo; n xou aXXm tivtot xrjgwv, 

Auxpqgai n voffoi, xou tgya n purr** 

Proc . Vol. II. U 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



154 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


mundane order; for it is this divinity who harmonizing the universe, 
establishes about himself according to one union the choir of the Muses, 
and produces by this mean as a certain Theiirgist says “ the harmony of 
exulting light ” Apollo therefore as we have shown is harmonic , and this 
is likewise the case with the other A polios which are contained in the 
earth and the other spheres; but this power appears in some places more, 
and in others less. These powers too subsist in the god himself in an 
united manner, and exempt from other natures, but in those attendants 
of the Gods who are superior to us, divisibly, and according to participa¬ 
tion ; for there is a great multitude of medicinal, prophetic, harmonic, 
and arrow-darting angels, daemons, and heroes, suspended from Apollo, 
who distribute in a partial manner the uniform powers of the god. 

But it is necessary to consider each of these powers according to one 
definite characteristic; as for instance, his harmonic power, according to 
its binding together separated multitude; his prophetic power according 
to the enunciative ; his arrow-darting power, according to its being sub- 
vertive of an inordinate nature ; and his medicinal power, according to its 
perfective energy. We should likewise speculate these characteristics 
differently in Gods, angels, daemons, heroes, men, animals, and plants; 
for the powers of the Gods extend from on high to the last of things, and 
at the same time appear in an accommodated manner in each ; and the 
telestic (i. e. mystic) art endeavours through sympathy to conjoin these 
ultimate participants with the Gods. But in all these orders we must 
carefully observe, that this God is the cause of union to multiplied 
natures : for his medicinal power, which takes away the multiform nature 
of disease, imparts uniform health ; since health is symmetry and a sub¬ 
sistence according to nature, but that which is contrary to nature is 
multifarious. Thus too, his prophetic power, which unfolds the simplicity 
of truth, takes away the variety of that which is false; but his arrow- 
darting power, which exterminates every thing furious and wild, but 
prepares that which is orderly and gentle to exercise dominion, vindicates 
to itself unity, and exterminates a disordered nature tending to multitude; 
and his musical power, through rythm and harmony, places a bond, 
friendship and union in wholes , and subdues the contraries to these. 



Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XVII. 


OF PLATO. 


155 


And all these powers indeed, subsist primarily, in an exempt manner, 
and uniformly in Jupiter the demiurgus of wholes, but secondarily and 
separately in Apollo. Hence Apollo is not the same with the demiurgic 
intellect; for this comprehends these powers totally and.paternally, but 
Apollo with subjection, imitating his father; since all the energies and 
powers of secondary Gods, are comprehended in the demiurgus according 
to cause. And the demiurgus fabricates and adorns the universe accord¬ 
ing to all these powers, apd in a collected manner; but the other deities 
which proceed from him, co-operate with their father according to 
different powers. 

Purification however being seen not only in the medicinal, but also in 
the prophetic art evinces, that the cathartic power of Apollo comprehends 
the two powers: for it illustrates the world with the glittering splendors 
of light, and purifies all material immoderation by Paeonian energies; 
which physicians and prophets among us imitating, the former purify 
bodies, and the latter through sulphureous preparations render themselves 
and their associates pure. For, as Timaeus says, the Gods purify the 
universe, either by fire or water; and prophets also in this respect 
imitate the Gods. In the most sacred of the mysteries too, purifications 
are employed prior to initiation into them, in order to take away every 
thing foreign from the proposed sacred mystery. We may likewise add, . 
that the referring multiform purifications to the one cathartic power of 
the Gods, is adapted to him. For Apollo every where unites arid elevates 
multitude to the one , and uniformly comprehends all the modes of purifi¬ 
cation ; purifying all heaven, generation, and all mundane lives, and 
separating partial souls from the grossness of matter. Hence the 
theurgist who is the leader of the myteries of this God begins from 
purifications and sprinklings: 

Auro; Vtv ngunotg ugtvg irvgog tpyu xvfiegvwv, 

Kvfut !ti gaivefricv itotytgw /3otgur)%tTog aXfirjg. 


i. e. “The priest in the first place governing the works of fire, must sprinkle 
with the cold water of the loud-sounding sea," as the Oracle says con¬ 
cerning him. But the assertion that the God presides over simplicity 


Digitized by {jOOQie 



156 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Vlf. 


•according to knowledge, and unfolds truth into light, presents him to 
our view as analogous to the good, which Socrates celebrates in the 
Republic ; in which place he calls the sun the progeny of the good, and 
says that the former is analogous to the latter. Apollo therefore being 
the source of union, and this to the mundane Gods, is arranged analogous 
to the good ; and through truth, he unfolds to us his similitude to it, if it 
be lawful so to speak. For the simple is a manifestation of the one, and the 
truth which subsists according to knowledge is a luminous representation 
of superessehtial truth, which first proceeds from the good. But the 
perpetually prevailing might of the God in the jaculation of arrows , evinces 
his dominion which vkntpiishes every thing in the world. For on high * 
from the supercelestial order, he scatters the rivers of Jupiter, and pours 
his rays oh the whole world: for his arrows obscurely signify his rays. 
Again,'the assertion that he presides over music, represents to us that 
this'God is the cause of all harmony, both unapparent and apparent, 
through his ruling supermundane powers, according to which he generates 
tdgether with Mnemosyne and Jupiter, the Muses. But he orderly 
disposes every thing sensible by his demiurgic powers , which the sons of 
theutgists denominate hands ; since the energy of the harmony of sounds 
& suspended from the motion of the hands. He likewise orderly disposes 
sbtlls and bodies through harmonic reasons, using their different powers 
as if they were sounds; and he moves all things harmoniously : and 
ijfthmically by his demiurgic motions. The Whole of the celestial order 
too, and motion, exhibit the harmonious work of the God; on which 
account also, partial souls are no otherwise perfected than through an 
l&rmOhic similitude to the universe, and abandoning the dissonance 
arising from generation; for then they obtain the most excellent life, 
which is proposed to them by the God. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XVIU. 


OF PLA1XX 


167 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


As the Muses derive their subsistence from Apollo, and are perpetually 
united to him, it is necessary to consider the nature of these divinities in 
the next place, and the good which they confer on the universe in con¬ 
junction with their leader Apollo. Plato therefore in the Cratyhis says 
“ That the name of the Muses, and universally that of music, was derived, 
as it seems, from /itorQou, to inquire,and from investigation and philosophy." 
On which Proclus in his MS. Scholia on that dialogue observes as 
follows: 

u From discoursing about king Apollo, Plato proceeds to the Muses, 
and the name of music; for Apollo is celebrated as Musagetes, or the 
leader of the Muses. And he indeed is a monad with respect to the 
harmony in the world; but the choir of the Muses is the monad of aH 
the number of the ennead (i. e. nine): From both likewise the whole 
world is bound in indissoluble bonds, and is one and all-perfect, through 
the communications of these divinities; possessing the former through 
the Apolloniacal monad, but its all-perfect subsistence through the 
number of the Muses. For the number nine which is generateebfrom the 
first perfect number (that is 3) is, through similitude and sameness, 
accommodated to the multiform causes of the mundane order and 
harmony; all these causes at the same time being collected into one 
summit for the purpose of producing one consummate perfection. For 
the Muses generate the variety of reasons with which the world is replete; 
but Apollo comprehends in union all the multitude of these. And the 
Muses give subsistence to the harmony of soul; but Apollo is the leader 
of intellectual and impartible harmony. The Muses distribute the phe¬ 
nomena according to harmonical reasons; but Apollo comprehends 
unapparent and separate harmony. And though both give subsistence 
to the same things, yet the Muses, effect this according to number, but 
Apollo according’to union. And the Muses indeed distribute the unity 



Digitized by boogie 



158 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


of Apollo; but Apollo unites harmonic multitude, which he also converts 
and comprehends. For the multitude of the Muses proceeds from the 
essence of Musagetes, which is both separate, and subsists according to 
the nature of the one; and their number evolves the one and primary cause 
of the harmony of the universe. 

That such being the etymology of the name of the Muses, since Plato 
calls philosophy the greatest music, as causing our psychical powers to 
be moved harmoniously, in symphony with real beings, and in conformity 
to the orderly motions of the celestial orbs; and since the investigation 
of our own essence and that of the universe leads us to this harmony, 
through a conversion to ourselves and more excellent natures,—hence 
also we denominate the Muses from investigation. For Musagetes 
himself unfolds truth to souls, according to one intellectual simplicity; 
but the Muses perfect our various energies elevating them to an intellec¬ 
tual unity. For investigations have the relation of matter, with reference 
to the end from invention ; just as multitude with respect to the one , and 
variety with respect to simplicity. We know therefore, that the Muses 
impart to souls the investigation of truth, to bodies the multitude of 
powers, and that they are every where the sources of the variety of 
harmonies. 

In the fable likewise in the Pha;drus about the grass-hoppers Plato 
speaks the four Muses, Terpsichore, Erato, Calliope, and Urania, as 
follows : “ It is said the race of the grasshoppers received this gift from 
the Muses, that they should never want nutriment, but should continue 
singing without meat or drink till they died ; and that after death they 
should depart to the Muses, and inform them what Muse was honoured 
by some particular person among us. Hence that by acquainting 
Terpsichore with those who reverence her in the dance, they render her 
propitious to such. By informing Erato of her votaries, they render her 
favourable in amatory concerns; and the rest in a similar manner, 
according to the species of veneration belonging to each. But that they 
announce to the most ancient Calliope, and after her to Urania, those who 
have lived in the exercise of philosophy, and have cultivated the music 
over which they preside; these Muses more than all the rest being 


Digitized by ^OOQLe 



OF PLATO. 


CHAP. XIX. 


139 


conversant with the heavens, and with both divine and human discourse; 
and sending forth the most beautiful voice.” 

■ On what Plato here says of these Muses, Hermeas in his MS. Commen¬ 
tary On the Phaedrus, makes the following beautiful remarks : “ Dancing 
here must not be understood literally, as if Terpsichore was propitious 
to those who engage in that kind o£ dancing which is the object of sense ; 
for this would be ridiculous. We must say therefore, that there are 
divine dances; in the first place, the dance of the Gods; and in the 
second place, that of divine souls. In the third place, the revolution of 
the celestial divinities, viz. of the seven planets, and the inerratic sphere* 
is called a dance. In the fourth place, those who are initiated in the 
mysteries perform a certain dance. And in the last place, the whole life 
of a philosopher is a dance. Who then are those that honour the 
Goddess in the dance? Not those who dance well, but those who live 
well through the whole of the present existence, elegantly arranging 
their life, and dancing in symphony with the universe. Again, Erato is 
denominated from Love, and from making the works of Love, lovely; 
for she co-operates with Love. But Calliope is denominated from the 
eye; and Urania presides over astronomy. Through these two Goddesses 
we preserve our rational part from being in subjection to the irrational 
nature. For through sight surveying the order of the celestial Gods, 
we properly arrange our irrational part. And farther still, ithrough 
rythms, philosophy, and hearing, we elegantly dispose that which we 
contain of the disorderly and void of rythm.” 


CHAPTER XIX. 


The triad of celestial Gods immediately above the sun consists of 
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, of which the first who is the source of division 
and motion, perpetually separates, nourishes and excites the contrarieties 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



160 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Y1L 


of the universe, that the world may exist perfect and entire from all its 
parts. He requires, however, the assistance of Venus, that he may insert 
order and harmony into things contrary and discordant. But Jupiter is 
the cause of a royal and. political life, and is the supplier of a ruling 
prudence and a practical and adorning intellect. And Saturn is the 
source of intellect, in consequence of being an intellectual deity, and 
ascending as far as to the first cause. Hence, as there is nothing 
disordered and novel in intellect, Saturn is represented as an old man. 
and as slow in his motion : and on this account, astrologers say, that 
such as have Saturn well situated in their nativity are endued with 
intellect 

Plato in the Timaeus delivers to us the manner in which each of these 
seven divinities becomes an animal, and is suspended from a more divine 
soul, and what kind of perfection it affords to the universe. For be says, 
“ When therefore, each of the natures necessary to a joint fabrication of 
time had arrived at a local motion adapted to its condition, and their 
bodies became animals through the connecting power of vital bonds, they 
then learned their prescribed order." For each of them, says Proclus, is 
allotted an appropriate life and motion. For since the demiurgic sacred 
Jaw distributes to every mortal nature that which is adapted to it, and 
co»arranges every tiling with a view to the blessedness of the universe, 
what ought we to say concerning the governors of the world ? Ought we 
not to assert that they have received from their father, every thing 
appropriate and every good; and that shining with the splendors of 
beauty, they not only fabricate the generation of time in conjunction 
with the father, but also lead and govern the whole world ? For by thus 
speaking of them we shall speak rightly. In addition to these things 
likewise, we ought to assert, that they not only receive the beautiful and 
the good from the demiurgic monad, but also that being self-motive, they 
impart these to themselves; and that from themselves the giving of good 
v originates. Plato indeed, indicating this says, “ that each of them arrives 
(aQixttrdau) at a local motion, adapted to its condition/’ as defining from 
itself the measure of the life, the order, and the motion which it is 
allotted in the universe. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XIX. 


OF PLATO. 


161 


Since, however, each of the seven bodies has a twofold fife, the one 
inseparable, but the other separable; and the one indeed intellectual, 
and in a ruling manner established in itself, but the other divided about 
body, which it connects and moves; according to the latter indeed, it is 
an animal, but according to the former a God. Plato, therefore, 
distinguishing both these, and rightly conceiving that a divine and 
intellectual soul, and which does not depart from intelligibles, is one 
thing, but another, the animal which is suspended from it, possesses life 
from, and is the image of it says, “ that their bodies became animals 
through the connecting power of vital bonds, and that they then learned 
their prescribed order/' For a divine soul learns indeed the demiurgic 
will, understands the works of the father, and fabricates in conjunction 
with him mundane natures; and this, through intellectually perceiving 
him, and being filled from him with divine powers. For it is not possible 
for either intellect or soul to provide for wholes in an exempt manner, 
in any other way than by the participation of deity, and through a deific 
life. The words, therefore, “ a joint fabrication of time," manifest that 
they are allotted a secondary power in the generation of it; in conse¬ 
quence of their father possessing a primary power. For he, indeed, 
generated the wholeness of time ; but these divinities co-operate with 
him in the production of the parts of which time consists. For the 
' periods of these are the parts of the whole of time; just as they also 
were generated parts of the world. 

But the animated body is an animal bound with vital bonds, possessing 
life from the soul which it receives according to the demiurgic allotments. 
For if with us also, the animal is different from the man, and the visible 
Socrates is one thing, but the true another, much more are the true sun 
and the true Jupiter different from the visible orbs of these divinities, 
and not composites of body and soul. Conformably to this Socrates in 
the Phaedrus says, ** that we do not sufficiently understand that a God is 
an immortal animal, possessing indeed a soul and a body, connascent 
through the whole of time." Indeed the unity in each of these divinities, 
and the ineffable participation of the fountain of all the numbers charac¬ 
terized by unity, form that which is primarily a God. But the intellect 
Proc. Vol. II. X 



Digitized by boogie 



162 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK YH, 


which connects each of these deities stably, uniformly, and invariably, is 
secondarily a God. And the soul which is filled from intellect, and 
evolves the one comprehension of it, is a God in the third place. And 
the first indeed of these is truly a God; the second is most divine; and 
the third is itself also divine, but illuminates the animal with which it is 
connected with the peculiarity of deity; according to which this like¬ 
wise is divine, being bound with animated bonds, which may be said to 
be vivific, demiurgic and indissoluble bonds, as Plato himself afterwards 
asserts. For the whole of the divine bodies, are bound in souls, are 
comprehended by and established in them; the being bound indeed 
indicating the stable and immutable comprehension of bodies in souls, 
and their undisjoined communion with them. Such therefore being the 
nature of divine bodies, they fabricate time in conjunction with the 
demiuigus, call forth its one and unapparent power, and impart a 
progression to it into the world, which unfolds many temporal measures. . 


CHAPTER XX. 

The celestial Gods therefore, according to Plato subsisting after this 
manner, and the unity in each of them ineffably proceeding from the 
fountain of good, it is evident that they are all of them beneficent, and 
after a similar manner the causes of good. The bodies also which are 
suspended from their divine souls possess indescribable powers, some 
indeed being firmly established in the divine bodies themselves, but 
others proceeding from them into the nature of the world and into the 
world itself, descending in an orderly manner through the whole of 
generation, and without impediment extending as far as to particulars. 
With respect to the powers therefore, which remain in the divine celestial 
bodies themselves, there can be no doubt but that they are all similar; 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



OF PLATO. 


CHAP. XX. 


163 


hence those powers remain to be considered which are sent- to this 
terrestrial region, and are mingled with generation. 

These then descend after the same manner for the safety of the 
universe, and connect with invariable sameness the whole of generation. 
They are likewise impassive and immutable, though they arrive at that 
which is mutable and passive. Generation indeed, being multiform, and 
consisting of things of a different nature, it receives the unity and 
simplicity of these Gods through its appropriate contrariety and division, 
in a hostile and partible manner. It likewise receives that which is 
impassive passively: and in short it participates of these Gods according 
to its own nature, and not according to their power. Hence, as that 
which is generated participates of being according to a flux of existence; 
and body participates of an incorporeal nature corporeally; thus also the 
patural and material substances which are in generation, participate of 
the immaterial and etherial bodies which are above nature and generation, 
in a confused and disorderly manner. Those therefore are absurd who 
attribute colour, figure and contact to intelligible forms, because the 
participants of them are coloured, figured and tangible; and they are no 
less absurd who ascribe evil to the celestial bodies, because the partici¬ 
pants of them are sometimes evil. For there could be no participation, 
if the participant was not different from that which it participates. But 
if that which is participated is received in something different from itself, 
this something different, is in terrestrial places that which is evil and 
disorderly. 

This participation therefore, becomes the cause of the abundant 
difference in secondary natures, and also the mixture of material with 
immaterial influences. To which may be added likewise, as another 
cause, that what is imparted in one way, is received after another in 
these inferior realms. Thus for .instance, the influence of Saturn is 
connective, but that of Mars motive. In these material realms however, 
the passive receptacle of generation, receives the former according to 
congelation and frigidity ; but the latter according to immoderate heat. 
Hence, corruption and the privation of symmetry are to be ascribed to 
the alterant, material and passive natuse of the recipients. 


Digitized by 


Google 



164 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK m 


Farther still, the imbecility of material and terrestrial places, not being 
able to receive the genuine power and most pure life of the etherial 
natures, ascribes its own defects to first causes. Just as if some one 
being weak in his body, and not able to bear the vivifying heat of the 
sun, should falsely dare to say, influenced by his own infirmities, that 
the sun is not advantageous to health and life. A thing of this kind 
likewise, may take place in the harmony and temperament of the 
universe, I mean, that the same things which are salutary to the whole, 
through the perfection of the recipients and things received, may be 
noxious to the parts though their partible privation of symmetry. In 
the motion of the universe therefore, all the circulations preserve the 
whole world after a similar manner, though frequently one certain part 
is injured by another; just as in a dance, where the order of the whole 
choir is still preserved, though a foot or a finger may happen to be hurt. 
Again, to be corrupted, and to be changed, are affections connascent 
with particulars. But it is not proper to accuse on this account wholes 
and first causes, either as containing these in themselves, or as if these 
proceeded from them into these inferior realms. And thus it appears, 
that neither the celestial Gods themselves, nor their gifts are productive 
of evil.' 


CHAPTER XXI. 


And thus much concerning the planetary deities, who were called by 
the ancients, the governors of the world. In the next place therefore, let 
us direct our attention to what Plato and his best interpreter Proclus 
have transmitted to us Concerning Minerva, who as a. mundane divinity 

1 Vide Jamblich. de Myat. lib. i. cap. 18. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXI. 


OF PLATO. 


165 


is connected with ether, and has also an allotment in the celestial regions. 
Plato then in the Timaeus describes this Goddess as both a lover of war, 
and a lover of wisdom ; for he sajs that she is philopolemic and philoso¬ 
phic. As she every where however exerts this twofold power, according 
to her intellectual, supermundane, and mundane subsistence, I shall 
present the reader with the whole of what Proclus says 1 respecting these 
two powers of the goddess, in his commentaiy on that part of the 
Timeus where she is celebrated by Plato. 

In the demiurgus and father, says he, of the whole world, many orders 
of Gods that have the form of the one present themselves to the view. 
And these are of a guardian, or demiurgic,, or elevating, or connective, or 
perfective characteristic. But the undefiled and untamed deity Minerva, 
is one of the first intellectual unities subsisting in the demiurgus, according 
to which he himself remains firm and immutable, and all things proceeding 
from him participate of inflexible power; and through which he intellec¬ 
tually perceives every thing, and is separate in an exempt manner from 
all beings. All theologists therefore, call this divinity Minerva, as bang 
brought forth indeed from the summit of her father, and abiding in him, 
being a demiurgic, separate, and immaterial intelligence. Hence Socrates 
in the Cratylus, celebrates her as theonoe (dsownj) or deific intellection. 
But as, in conjunction with other divinities sustaining all things in the 
one demiurgus, and arranging wholes, togetherewith her father;—through 
the first of these, they denominate her philosophic, but through the 
second philopolemic. For she who according to the form of one con- 
nectedly-contains all the paternal wisdom is a philosopher. And she 
who invariably rules over all contrariety, may be properly called a lover 
of war. Hence Orpheus speaking of her birth says, that Jupiter gene¬ 
rated her from his head. 

With armour shining like a brazen flower. 

Since however, it was necessary that she should proceed into second 
and third orders, she appears in the order to which Proserpine belongs, 

, •* In Tim. lib. k p. 51. 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



166 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


according to the un^efiled heptad; but she generates every virtue from 
herself, and elevating powers, and illuminates secondary natures with 
intellect, and an undefiled life. Hence she is called Core Tritogenes. 
She likewise appears among the liberated Gods, uniting the lunar order 
with intellectual and demiurgic light, causing the productions of those 
divjnities to be undefiled, and demonstrating the one unity of them to be 
unmingled with their depending powers. She also appears in the heavens 
and the sublunary region ; and according to the united gift of herself, 
imparts the cause both of the philosophic and the philopolemic power. 
For her inflexibility is intellectual-, and her separate wisdom is pure and 
unmingled with secondary natures; and the one characteristic peculiarity 
of Minerval providence, extends as far as to the last orders. For since 
wherever there are partial souls that resemble her divinity, they exert an 
admirable prudence, and exhibit an unconquerable strength, what ought 
we tp say of her attendant choirs 1 of daemons or divine, mundane, libe¬ 
rated, and ruling orders? For all these receive as from a fountain the 
twofold peculiarity of this Goddess. Hence also the divine poet [Homer] 
indicating both these powers of Minerva, in conjunction with fabulous 
devices says, 

The radiant veil her sacred fingers wore, 

Floats in rich wares, and spreads the court of Jore. 

Her father’s warlike robe her limbs inrest.* 

In which verses by the veil which she wove, and to which she gave 
subsistence by her intellections, her intellectual wisdom is signified. 
But by the warlike robe of Jupiter we must understand her demiurgic 
providence, which immutably takes care of mundane natures, and 
prepares more divine beings always to have dominion in the world. 
Hence also, I think Homer represents her as an associate in battle with 
the Greeks against the Barbarians; just as Plato here relates that she 
was an associate with the Greeks against the inhabitants of the Atlantic 


' For ^ojiutwv in this place, it is necessary to read tm. 
* Iliad, viii. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXI. 


OF PLATO. 


167 


island; in order that every where more intellectual and divine natures 
may rule over such as are more irrational and vile. ' For Mars also is a 
friend to war and contrarieties, but with a separation. and division more 
adapted to the things themselves. Minerva however, connects contrariety* 
and illuminates the subjects of her government with union. Hence like¬ 
wise she is said to be philopolemic.. For, 

Strife, fighting, war, she always loves. 

And she is a friend to war indeed, because she is allotted the summit of 
separation; but she is a lover of contrarieties, because these are in a 
certain respect congregated through this goddess, in consequence of better 
natures having dominion. On this account likewise, the ancients co¬ 
arranged Victory with Minerva. 

If therefore, these things are rightly asserted, she is philosophic indeed, 
as being demiurgic intelligence, and as separate and immaterial wisdom. 
Hence also, she is called Metis by the Gods. But she is philopolemic, 
as connecting the contrarieties in wholes, and as an untamed and 
inflexible deity. On this account likewise, she preserves Bacchus 
undefiled, but vanquishes the giants in conjunction with her father. She 
too alone shakes the aegis, without waiting for the mandate of Jupiter. 
She also hurls the javelin. 

Shook by her arm, the massy javelin bends. 

Huge, ponderous, strong! that when her fury burns 
Whole ranks of heroes tames and overturns. 1 

Again, she is Phosphor os, as every way extending intellectual light; the 
Saviour , as establishing every partial intellect in the total intellections of 
her father; Ergane , or the artificer, as presiding over demiurgic works. 
Hence the theologist Orpheus says, that the father produced her, 

That she the queen might be of mighty works. 

But she is Calliergos , or the beautiful fabricator, as connecting by beauty 
all the works of the father; a Virgin , as exerting an undefiled and 

* Iliad, viii. 


Digitized by boogie 



I<58 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK TIL 


unmingled purity; and Aigiochos, or «gis-bearing, as moving the whole 
of fate, and being the leader of its productions. 

With respect to the spear and shield with which this Goddess, in 
the statues of her, is represented as armed, Jamblichus, as we are 
informed by Proclus,' explains these in a most divinely-inspired manner 
as follows: Since every divine nature ought to act and not to suffer; in 
order that by operating it may not have the inefficacious which is similar 
to matter, but by not suffering, it may not have that efficacy which 
resembles material natures, that produce accompanied with passion,— 
that it may have neither of these, he asserts that shields are powers, 
through which a divine nature remains impassive and pure, surrounding 
itself with an infrangible guard. But spears are powers, according to 
which it proceeds without contact through all things, operates in alt 
things, amputating a material nature, and giving assistance to every 
generation-producing form. These powers, however, are first seen about 
Minerva. Hence also in the statues of her she is armed with a spear 
and shield. For she vanquishes every thing, and according to theologists, 
remains inflexibly, and uncontaminated in her father. But these things 
are seen in a secondary degree in the Minerval powers, both in such as 
are whole, and such as are partial. For as the Jovian and demiurgic 
multitudes imitate their monads; and as the prophetic and Apolloniacal 
multitudes participate of the characteristic peculiarity of Apollo; thus 
also the Minerval number adumbrates the uncontaminated and unmingled 
nature of Minerva. And they are seen ultimately in Minerval souls. 
For in these also the shield is the untamed and inflexible power of 
reason; but the spear is that which is incisive of matter, and which 
liberates souls from the perturbations arising from daemons or destiny. 

With respect to the mundane allotment also of this Goddess who 
proceeds supernally from intellectual causes to the earth, Proclus 
observes, (in Tim. p. 43.) that she primarily subsists in her father; but 
secondarily in the supermundane Gods; that her third progression is in 
the twelve liberated rulers; and that after this, she unfolds into light a 

* In Tim. p. 48. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXL 


OF PLATO.' 


169 

liberated authority in the heavens. In one way indeed in the inerratic 
sphere; for there also, a certain allotment of this Goddess is expanded j 
whether it be the place about the ram, or that about the virgin, or 
whether it be some one of the northern stars, as the Electra which is 
there is by certain persons asserted to be. But she unfolds this power 
in another way in the sun. For there also an admirable power, and a 
Minerval order, fabricates wholes, according to theologists, in conjunc¬ 
tion with the sun. And again, in another way in the moon, being the 
monad of the triad ' which is there. But in another way in the earth, 
according to the similitude of the allotments of the earth to the celestial 
distributions. And lastly, she unfolds this liberated authority differently 
in different parts of the earth, according to the peculiarities of provi¬ 
dential energy. This being the case, it is by no means wonderful that 
one deity, Minerva, is said by Plato to have been allotted Athens, and 
- Sals in Egypt. For it must not be supposed, that because partial -souli 
are not naturally adapted to inhabit two bodies at once, this is also 
impossible to the Gods. But there is a participation of the same divine 
power according to different places, yet in the one power there is also 
multitude. And by this place, indeed, it is participated in one way ; 
but by other places in a different way. And in some sameness is more 
abundant, but in others difference. 

In another part, likewise, of the same admirable work (p. 30) Proclus 
observes of this Goddess, that it is manifest from the Greeks, that her 
dominioti extends from on high as far as to the last of things ; for they 
say she was generated from the summit or head of Jupiter. But the 
Egyptians relate that this inscription was written in the adytum of the 
Goddess. J am the things that are , that mil be, and that have been. Nb 
one has ever laid open the garment by which I am concealed. The fruit 
which I brought forth was the sun.' The Goddess, therefore, being 
demiurgic, and at the same time apparent and unapparent, has an allot- 

1 This triad consists of Minejrva, Diana, and Proserpine. 

x The former part of this inscription is to be found in Plutarch’s treatise of Isis and Osiris \ but 
the latter part, viz. the fruit which I brought forth was the sun , is only to be found in the above 
Commentary of Proclus. The original is, ov gym xaprov erexov ijAio* rymro. 

Proc. Vol. II. Y 


Digitized by boogie 



170 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VIL, 


ment in the heavens, and illuminates generation with forms. For of the 
signs of the zodiack, the ram is ascribed to the Goddess, and the equi¬ 
noctial circle itself, where especially a power motive of the universe is 
established. And thus much concerning the philopolemic and philo¬ 
sophic Goddess Minerva. 


CHAPTER XXII, 


Let us in the next place direct our attention to that great mundane 
divinity the earth, and consider what it is, whence it proceeds, and how 
it is said by Plato in the Timseus to be our nurse, and the most ancient 
and first of the Gods within the heavens, deriving our information about 
this Goddess also from Proclus, (in Tim. p. 280). Earth then proceeds 
primarily from the intelligible earth which comprehends all the intelligible 
orders of the Gods, and is eternally established in the father. 1 It also 
proceeds from the intellectual Earth which is co-arranged with Heaven, 
and all the productions of which it receives. For being analogous to 
these, it also abides perpetually as in the centre of the heavens, and being 
contained, on all sides by them, is full of generative power, and demi¬ 
urgic perfection. The true earth, therefore, is neither this corporeal- 
formed and gross bulk; for it will not be the most ancient of the Gods 
from its bulk, nor the first of the Gods that are arranged within the 
heavens ; nor is it the soul of this body; for it would not be, as Plato 
says it is, extended about the pole of the universe, since not the soul, but 
the body of the earth is a thing of this kind ; but if it be necessary to 
speak what is most true concerning it, it is an animal consisting of a 
divine soul, and a living body. Hence the whole is, as Plato says, an 
animal. For there are in it an immaterial and separate intellect; a 


* viz. In ether or boundy the summit of the intelligible triad. 


J3i( boogie 



CHAP, xm 


OF PLATO. 


171 


divine soul dancing round this intellect; an etherial body proximately 
suspended from its informing soul; and in the last place, this visible 
bulk, which is on all sides inspired with life by the vehicle * of this soul, 
with which also being filled, it generates and nourishes all-various ani¬ 
mals. For some animals* are rooted in it, but others about it. And this 
likewise, Aristotle perceiving, was ashamed not to give to the earth a 
natural life. For whence is it that plants while they remain in the earth 
live, but when divulsed from it die, unless this earthly mass was full of 
life? It is necessary, also, to assume universally, that wholes are anima¬ 
ted prior to parts. For it would be ridiculous that man indeed should 
participate of a rational soul and of intellect, but that no soul should be 
assigned to the earth and the air, supernaliy riding in [as it were] and 
governing the elements, and preserving them in their proper boundaries. 
For wholes, as Theophrastus says, would have less authority than parts, 
and perpetual than corruptible natures, if they were destitute of soul. 
Hence, it is necessary to grant that a soul and an intellect are in the 
earth; the former causing it to be prolific, but the latter connectedly- 
containing it in the middle of the universe. 

Earth herself, therefore, being a divine animal, is also a plenitude of 
intellectual and psychical essences, and of immaterial powers. For if a 
partial soul has besides a material body an immaterial vehicle, what 
ought we to think of a soul so divine as that of the earth ? Is it not, that 
by a much greater priority visible bodies are suspended from this soul 
through other vehicles as media, and that through these, the visible bo¬ 
dies are able to receive the illuminations of soul? Such then being the 
nature of earth herself, she is said to be our nurse; in the first place, 
indeed, as possessing a power in a certain respect equivalent to Heaven. 
For as that comprehends in itself divine animals, thus also earth is seep 
to contain terrestrial animals. But in the second place, she is our nurse, 
as inspiring our lives from her own proper life. For she not only pro¬ 
duces fruits, and nourishes our bodies through these, but she also fills x>ur 

1 Instead of a^/wrrof here, it is necessary to read oxypvrtf. 

1 For according to Plato, plants also, as having life, are animals. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



172 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VJf, 


sods with the illuminations of herself. For being a divine animal, and 
generating us who are partial animals, through her own body indeed she 
nourishes and connectedly-contains our bulk; but from her own soul per¬ 
fects ours. By her own intellect, likewise, she excites the intellect which 
is in us; and thus according to the whole of herself becomes the nurse of 
'our whole composition. On this account it appears to me that Plato 
calls her our nurse, indicating by this her intellectual nutritive energy. 
For if she is our nurse, but we are truly souls and intellects, according to 
these especially, she will be the perfector of our essence, moving and 
exciting our intellectual part. But being a divine animal, and compre¬ 
hending in herself many partial animals, she is said by Plato to be oon- 
globed about the pole which is extended through the universe; because 
she is contained and compressed about its axis. For the axis also is the 
pole. And the pole is thus now denominated, because the universe re¬ 
volves about it. Because, however, the pole [properly so called] is im¬ 
partible, but the axis is a pole with interval, just as if some one shodd 
-say that a line is a flowing point,—on this account, the pole is said by 
Plato to be extended through the universe, as entirely pervading through 
the centre of the earth. 

But we must survey the poles as powers that give stability to the 
universe, exciting indeed the whole bulk of it to intelligible love, and 
impartibly connecting that which is partible, and unitedly and without 
interval that which is extended by interval. Hence, also, Plato in the 
Republic, makes the spindle of Lachesis of adamant, indicating, as we 
^ have said, their inflexible and untamed power. And we must consider 
the axis, as that one divinity which collects the centres of the universe, 
whifcb is connective of the whole world, and motive of the divine circu¬ 
lations ; and as that about which wholes dance and are convolved, and 
os sustaining all heaven, being on this account denominated Atlas, as 
possessing an immutable and unwearied energy. The word rtrajj-tvov also, 
or extended , used here by Plato, indicates that this one power is Titannic, 
guarding the circulations of wholes. But if, as the divine Jamblichus 
says, we understand by the pole extended through the universe, the 
heavens, neither thus shall we wander from the conception of Plato. For, 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. XXII. 


OF PLATO. 


173 


as Plato says in the Cratylus, those who are skilled in astronomy call the 
heavens the pole, as harmoniously revolving. According to this concep¬ 
tion, therefore, you may call heaven the pole extended through the 
universe, as being incnrvated through the whole of itself, in conseqluenoe 
of being without an angle. For after this manner the superficies of a 
circle is extended. About this, however, earth is con globed, not locally, 
but through a desire of becoming assimilated to it, converging to the 
middle, in order that as heaven is moved about the centre, so she by 
tending to the centre, may become similar to that which is essentially 
spherical, being herself as much as possible conglobed. Hence Bhe is 
compressed about the heaven in such a way as to be wholly extended 
about it. 

According to each of these conceptions, therefore, Plato delivers the 
cause through which earth is contained in the middle. For the axis is a 
power connective of the earth ; and the earth is on all sides compressed 
by the circulation of the heaven, and is collected together into the centre 
of the universe. Earth, therefore, being such, Timseus afterwards clearly 
shows what utility she affords to the universe; for he calls her the 
guardian and artificer of day and night. And indeed that she is the 
maker of night, is evident. For she produces a conical shadow ; and 
her magnitude and figure, are the causes of the dimension and quality 
of the figure of this shadow. But after what manner is she likewise the 
fabricator of day P Or does she not produce this day which is conjoined 
with night? For about her the risings and settings of the sun are sur¬ 
veyed. And that Plato assumes this day which is convolved with night, 
is evident from his arranging the former under the latter; as also prior to 
this, when he says, night therefore and day were thus generated. Earth, 
therefore, is the fabricator of both these, producing both in' conjunction 
with the sun; the sun indeed being in a greater degree the cause of day, 
but the earth of night. 

Being, however, the fabricator, she is also the guardian of them, pre¬ 
serving their boundaries and contrariety with reference to each other, and 
also their augmentations and diminutions, according to a certain analogy. 
Hence, some denominate her Isis, as equalizing the inequality, and 



Digitized by boogie 



174 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


« 


bringing to an analogy the increase and decrease of both day and night. 
But others looking to her prolific power call her Ceres, as Plotinus, who 
denominates the intellect of the earth Vesta, but the soul of it Ceres. 
We, however, say that the first causes of these divinities are intellectual, 
ruling * and liberated; but that from these causes illuminations and 
powers extend to the earth. Hence there is a terrestrial Ceres and Vesta, 
and a terrestrial Isis, in the same manner as there is a terrestrial Jupiter, 
and a terrestrial Hermes; these terrene deities being arranged about the 
one divinity of the earth; just as a multitude of celestial Gods proceeds 
about the one divinity of the heavens. For there are progressions and 
terminations of all the celestial Gods into the earth; and all things are 
in her terrestrially, which are contained in the heavens celestially. For 
the intellectual earth receives the paternal powers of heaven, and contains 
all things after a generative manner. Thus, therefore, we say that there 
is a terrestrial Bacchus, and a terrestrial Apollo, who is the source of 
prophetic * waters in many parts of the earth, and of openings which 
predict future events. But the Paeonian 1 and judicial powers which 
proceed into it, render other places of it of a purifying or medicinal 
nature. All the other powers of the earth, however, it is impossible to 
enumerate. For divine powers are indeed inexplicable. But the orders 
of angels and daemons that follow these powers are still more numerous, 
and are circularly allotted the whole earth, and dance round its one divi¬ 
nity, its one intellect, and one soul. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 

It remains in the next place, that we should survey how the earth is 
said to be the most ancient, and the first of the Gods within the heavens. 

* For tieu[iovtxoi$ here, it is necessary to read riyepovixas. 

* tavtik* is erroneously printed in the original for fxamxot. 

3 For oiowoi, it is evidently necessary to read in this place %awmiu 


Digitized by 


Google 



CJHAP. XXIII. 


OF PLATO. 


175 

For this will be taken literally by those who are accustomed to look only 
to its material, gross and dark bulk. But we indeed grant them that 
there is something of such a kind in the bulk of the earth as they say 
there is; but we think it proper that they should likewise look to the 
other goods of the earth, through which it surpasses the prerogatives of 
the other elements, viz. its stability, its generative power, its concord with 
the heavens, and its position in the centre of the universe. For the 
centre has great power in the universe, as being connective of eveiy cir¬ 
culation. Hence also the Pythagoreans call the centre the tower of 
Jupiter, in consequence of containing in itself a demiurgic guard. We 
shall likewise remind our opponents of the Platonic hypothesis concern¬ 
ing the earth, mentioned by Socrates in the Phaedo, where he says that 
the place of our abode is hollow and dark, and bound by the sea ; but 
that there is another true earth, containing the receptacles of the Gods, 
and possessing a beauty resembling that of the heavens. We ought not, 
therefore, to wonder if now the earth is said to be the most ancient and 
the first of the Gods within the he&vens, since she possesses so great an 
altitude, and such a surpassing beauty, and as Socrates afterwards 
says, was fashioned by the Demiurgus resembling a sphere covered with 
twelve skins, just as the heaven is similar to a dodecahedron. We must 
likewise understand that the Deiniurgus gave to the earth alone among 
the elements to have all the elements separately, causing her to be wholly 
a world, variegated analogous to the heavens. For she contains a river 
of fire, of air, and of water, and of another earth, which has the same 
relation to her which she has to .the universe, as Socrates says in the 
Phaedo. But if this be the case, she very much transcends the other 
elements as imitating the heavens, and possessing every thing in herself 
terrestrially, which is celestially contained in the heavens. 

To this also we may add, that the Demiurgus produced these two ele¬ 
ments the first, earth and fire; but the others for the sake of these, in 
order that they might have the ratio of bonds with respect to them. And 
that the four elements are both in the heavens, and in the sublunary 
region; but in the former, indeed, accprding to a fiery characteristic, 
since fire there predominates, as Plato says, but in the latter according 


Digitized by boogie 



176 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI!. 


to ft terrestrial peculiarity* For the profundity of air, and the bulk of 
water are spread round the earth, and possess much of an earthly pro¬ 
perty, on which account they are in their own nature dark. In the 
heavens, therefore, there is a predominance of fire, but in the sublunary 
region of earth. Since, however, generation is connascently conjoined 
with the heavens, the. end of the latter is earth, so far as earth is in the 
heavens, but the beginning of generation is fire, considered as subsisting 
in generation. For it is usual to call the moon earth, as having the same 
ratio to the sun, which earth has to fire. “ But [the Demiurgus] says 
Orpheus, fabricated another infinite earth, which the immortals call 
Selene, but terrestrials Mene” And it is usual to denominate the summit 
of generation fire, which Aristotle also does, when he calls ether fire. In 
another place, however, he does not think it proper to call ether fire, but 
fiery-formed. Hence, the end of the heavens is not entirely destitute of 
mutation, in consequence of its propinquity to generation; but the 
beginning of generation is moved in a circle imitating the heavens. 

. Farther still, this likewise must be considered, that we ought not to 
judge of the dignity of things from places, but from powers and essence. 
By what peculiarities, therefore, are we to form a judgment of transcen¬ 
dencies ? By what others than those which the divine orders exhibit ? 
For transcendency truly so called is with the Gods. From the divine 
orders, therefore, we must assume the monadic , the stable, the all-perfect, 
the prolific, the connective, the perfective, the every-way extended, the 
vivific, the adorning, the assimilative, and the comprehending power. For 
these are the peculiarities of all the divine orders. According to all these 
however, the earth surpasses the other elements, so that she may justly 
be called the most ancient, and the first of the Gods. 

Again, a two-fold nature of things may be surveyed, the one indeed 
according to progression, which always makes things that have a second¬ 
ary arrangement subordinate to those that are prior to them; but the 
other according to conversion, which conjoins extremes to primary 
natures through similitude, and produces one circle of the whole genera¬ 
tion. Since also the world is spherical, but a figure of this kind is the 
peculiarity of things that subsist according to conversion, earth likewise 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXIII. 


OF PLATO. 


*77 


must be conjoined in it to the heavens, through one circle, and one simi¬ 
litude. For thus also the centre is most similar to the poles. For the 
heavens indeed entirely comprehend wholes, being moved about the 
poles; but the earth is allotted permanency in the centre. For it is 
appropriate to generation that the immoveable should be more ancient 
than that which is moved. Hence, according to all these conceptions it 
may be said, that earth as co-ordinate with heaven, is the most ancient 
of the Gods within the heavens. For she is within them, as being 
on all sides comprehended by them. For as the demiurgus fashioned 
the whole of a corporeal nature within the soul of the world, thus also he 
fUhricated earth within the heavens, as compressed and contained by 
them, and in conjunction with them fabricating wholes. 

She has, however, so far as she is the first of the Gods, an indication of 
transcendency according to essence; but so far as she is the most ancient , 
she exhibits to our view the dignity which she is allotted. For how is it 
possible not to admit that she 1 b allotted a great portion in the world, and 
is very honourable, in whom there are the tower of Jupiter, and the 
progression of Saturn ? For not only Tartarus, which is the extremity of 
the earth, is on all sides comprehended by Saturn, and the Saturnian 
power, but also whatever else may be conceived subordinate to this. For 
Homer says that this is connectedly-contained through the sub-tartarean 
Gods. Not that he arranges Gods beyond Tartarus, as the words indi¬ 
cate; but that Tartarus itself is on all sides comprehended by them. 

Farther still, we may survey the analogy which earth has to the intel- 
h-< tual earth. For as the latter comprehends and gives subsistence to 
jxjilective, guardian, and Titannic orders of Gods, of which the Orphic 
theologies are full, so likewise the former possesses various powers. And 
as a nurse indeed she imitates the perfective order, according to which 
the Athenians also are accustomed to call her xtoporpopog, or the nourisher 
of youth , and avrjriZwp*, or scattering gifts , as producing and nourishing 
plants and animals. But as a guard she imitates the guardian, and as 
conglobed about the pole which is extended (rcrafunij) through the uni¬ 
verse, the Titannic order. Since, however, the intellectual earth prior to 
other divinities generated Aigle and the Hesperian Erithya, thus also our 
Proc , Vol. JI. Z 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



178 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


book vn. 


earth is the fabricator of day and night. And the analogy of the latter 
to the former is evident. 

In the last place, Proclus adds, if also you are willing after another 
manner to understand that she is the first and most ancient of the Gods, 
as deriving her subsistence from the first and most ancient causes, this 
reason also will be attended with probability, since first causes proceed 
by their energies to the utmost extent of things; and besides this, the 
,last of things frequently preserve the analogy of such as are first, as 
possessing their order from them alone. Hence, every way the assertion 
of Plato is true, whether you are willing to look to the bulk of»the earth, 
or to the powers which she contains. And thus much from Proclus, 
concerning that great mundane divinity, the earth, who in the language 
of Theophrastus 1 is the common Vesta of Gods and men; and on whose 
fertile surface reclining, says he, as on the soft bosom of a mother or a 
nurse, we ought to celebrate her divinity with hymns, and incline to her 
with filial affection, as to the source of our existence. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

Having thus amply discussed the theory pertaining to the celestial 
"Gods, it is necessary in the next place, that we should direct our attention 
to the sublunary, deities, who are denominated ytmrtaupyoi, or the fabrica¬ 
tors of generation. Plato in the Timacus calls these Gods daemons, 
because they are so with reference to the celestial Gods. For they are 
suspended from them, and together with them providentially attend to 
their appropriate allotments. Conformably to this, also, in the Banquet 
he calls Love a daemon, as being the attendant of Venus, and as proceed¬ 
ing from the God Porus, who is truly the source of abundance; though 

' Apud Porphyr. de Abstin. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


179 


in the Phaedrus he admits Love to be a God, as with reference to the life 
of which he is the leader. What Plato, therefore, says of these Gods in 
the Timaeus is as follows: “ But to speak concerning the other daemons, 
and to know their generation, is a task beyond our ability to perform. 
It is, therefore, necessary in this case to believe in ancient men; who 
being the progeny of the Gods, as they themselves assert, must have a 
clear knowledge of their parents. It is impossible, therefore, not to 
believe in the children of the Gods, though they should speak without 
probable and necessary arguments: but as they declare that their narra¬ 
tions are about affairs to which they are naturally allied, it is proper that 
complying with the law, we should assent to their tradition. In this 
manner then, according to them, the generation of these Gods is to be 
described. That Ocean and Tethys were the progeny* of Heaven and 
Earth. That from hence Phorcys, Saturn, and Rhea, and such as subsist 
together with these, were produced. That from Saturn and Rhea, 
Jupiter, Juno, and all such as we know are called the brethren of these 
descended. And lastly others, which are reported to be the progeny of 
these." 

Proclus, in his usual admirable manner, copiously elucidates these words 
of Plato, and in his comment fully unfolds the theory of the sublunary 
Gods. But unfortunately there are many chasms in some of the most 
important parts of his elucidations, which no critical acumen, nor sagacious 
conjecture, can fully supply. I shall endeavour, however, to extract 
from his commentary, in the best manner I am able, all the information 
mi this subject which can at present be derived from this invaluable work, 
occasionally attempting to restore the sense, where from the mutilated 
state of the original it is wanting. 

Plato then, intending now to speak of the sublunary Gods, says, that 
the discourse about them is admirable, and beyond our ability to per¬ 
form, if we intend to discover the generation of them, and promulgate it 
to others. For what he before.said of the demiurgus, that it is difficult to 
discover him, and impossible to speak of him to all men, this he now says 
of the sublunary Gods, that to know and to speak of the generation of 
them, surpasses our ability. What, therefore, does Plato mean by this 


Digitized by boogie 



180 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VU. 


mode of indication ? For as he has delivered so many and such, admi¬ 
rable things concerning all heaven, and the intelligible paradigm, how is 
it that he says, that to speak of the Gods who are the fabricators of 
generation, is a task' beyond our ability to perform? Perhaps it is 
because many physiologists considered these sublunary elements to be in¬ 
animate natures casually borne along, and destitute of providential care. 
For they acknowledged that the celestial bodies, on account of their 
orderly motions, participate of intellect and the Gods; but they kit 
generation, as being very mutable and indefinite, deprived of providential 
inspection. In order, therefore, that we might not be affected in the 
same manner as they were, he antecedently celebrates and proclaims the 
generation of the sublunary Gods to be divine and intellectual, requiring 
no such mode of indication in speaking of the celestial Gods. Perhaps 
also it may be said, that souls more swiftly forget things nearer to them¬ 
selves, but have a greater remembrance of superior principles. For they 
in a greater degree operate upon them through transcendency of power, 
and appear through energy to be present with them. The same thing 
also happens with respect to our sight. For though we do not see many 
things that are situated; on the earth, yet at the same time we appear to 
see the inerratic sphere, and the stars themselves, because they illuminate 
our sight with their light. The eye of the soul, therefore, becomes in a 
greater degree oblivious of, and blind to, more proximate than to higltt r 
and more divine principles. Thus, all religions and sects acknowledge 
that there is a first principle of things, and all men invoke God as their 
helper ; but all do not believe that there are Gods posterior to this prin¬ 
ciple, and that a providential energy proceeds from them info the 
Universe. For the one is seen by them in a clearer manner than multi¬ 
tude. Others, again, believe indeed that there are Gods, but after the 
Gods, admitting the demoniacal genus, they are ignorant of the heroic 
order. And in short, this is the grea test work of science, soixtiUy to dis¬ 
tinguish the media and the progressions of beings. If, therefore, we 
rightly assert these things, Plato, when speaking of the celestial Gods, 
very properly indicates nothing of the difficulty of the subject; but when 
speaking of the sublunary Gods, says that it surpasses our ability. For 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


181 


the discussion of these is more difficult, because we cannot collect any 
thing about them from apparent objects, but it alone requires a divinely* 
inspired energy, and intellectual projection. And thus much concerning 
this doubt. 

Again, though we have assigned a reason why Plato calls the sublunary 
Gods daemons, we may likewise say according to another conception, 
that in the celestial regions there are daemons, and in the sublunary, 
Gods; but that in the former the genus is indeed divine, 1 though daemons 
also are generated according to it ;* and that in the latter the whole 
multitude are daemons. For there indeed, the divine peculiarity, but 
here the dsemoniaca) predominates, to winch some alone looking,' have 
divided the divine and the deemoniacal, according to the heavens and 
generation. They ought however, to have arranged both in both; but 
in the former indeed the divine nature, and in the latter the daemoniacal 
predominates; though in the former there is also the divine peculiarity. 
For if the whole world is a blessed God, no one of the parts which give 
completion to it is destitute of divinity, and providential inspection. 
But if all things participate of deity and providence, the world is allotted 
a divine nature. And if this be the case, appropriate orders of Gods 
preside over its different parts. For if the heavens through sonte and 
intellects as media participate of one soul, and oner intellect, what ought 
we to think of these sublunary elements ? How is it possible, that these 
should not in a much greater degree participate through certain middle 
divine orders, of the one deity of the world ? 

Farther still, it would also be absurd that the tetestie art (or the arrt 
pertaining to mystic ceremonies) should establish on the earth places, 
fitted for oracles, and stjatues of the Gods, and 1 through certain symbols 
should cause things generated from a partial and corruptible matter, to 
become adapted to the participationof deity, to be moved by hkn, and 
to predict future events; but that the demiurgns of wholes, should not 
place over the whole elements which are the incorruptible plenitudes of 

1 It is necessary here to supply the word fcion. 

1 It is re qui s ite to reawf xeer nctinrv, iwfemf of n<rr> txtmp. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



18? 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


the world, divine souls, intellects and Gods. For whether was he 
unwilling ? But how could he be unwilling, since he wished to make aU 
things similar to himself? Was he then unable? But what could hinder 
him ? For we see that this is possible from telestic works. But if he was 
both willing and able, it is evident that he gave subsistence to Gods, 
who have allotments in, and are the inspective guardians of generation. 
Since however the genus of daemons is every where an attendant on the 
Gods, there are also daemons who are the fabricators of generation; some 
of whom indeed rule over the whole elements, but others are the guar¬ 
dians of climates, others are the rulers of nations, others of cities, others of 
certain families, and others are the guardians of individuals. For the 
guardianship of daemons extends as for as to the most extreme division. 


CHAPTER XXV. 

Having therefore solved the problem pertaining to the essence, let 
us in the next place consider the order of the sublunary Gods, and the 
meaning of the subsequent words of Plato. For let them be Gods, and 
let them be called daemons for the cause above assigned, where must we 
arrange them ? Must it be, as we have before said, under the moon, or 
prior to the celestial 1 Gods ? For this may appear to be proper for these 
two reasons; one indeed, because Plato indicates that he ascends to a 
greater order, by saying that it exceeds our ability to speak concerning 
them, having already ‘spoken concerning the celestial Gods; but the 
other, because he follows in what he says, those who have delivered to 
us Theogonies. For they prior to the world and the demiurgus, delivered 
these generations of Gods proceeding from Heaven and Earth. In 
answer to this query however, we must say, that he produces them after 

l The word ovg»ywn is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXV. 


OF PLATO. 


188 


the celestial Gods, and through this from Heaven and Earth. For on 
this account he said that Earth was the most ancient of the Gods within 
the Heaven, because from this and Heaven, he was about to produce the 
other Gods which the heavens contain. This we demonstrate from the 
demiurgus addressing his speech to these Gods, and to all the rest, as 
being produced by him within the universe. Why, however, Plato says 
that he follows the Theogony, and why he shall omit to speak concerning 
the sublunary deities, we must refer to his having no clear indications of 
the subsistence of these from the phenomena, as he had of the celestial 
divinities, from the order of their periods, which is adapted to the 
government of Gods. It exceeds the province therefore of physiology to 
speak of beings, concerning whom natural effects afford us no stable 
belief. Hence Plato says, as a physiologist, that it surpasses his ability 
to speak of these. 

If, however, he says that he follows those who are divinely inspired, but 
they speaking concerning the supercelestial Gods, he adopts a similar 
Theogony, though discoursing of the sub-celestial divinities, we must not 
consider this as wonderful. For he knew that all the orders of the Gods, 
proceed as far as to the last of things, from the arrangement which is the 
principle of their progression, every where generating series from them¬ 
selves analogous to the superior deities from which they proceed. 
Hence, though the orders of these Gods which are celebrated by 
theologists, are above the world, yet they subsist also in the sensible 
universe. And as this visible heaven is allied to that which is super¬ 
mundane, so likewise our earth is allied to the earth which is there, and 
the orders subsisting from the one to the orders proceeding from the other. 

, From these things too, this also may be assumed, that according to Plato 
as well as according to other theologists, first natures as they proceed, 
produce things subordinate in conjunction with the causes of themselves. 
For these sublunary Gods proceeding from the demiurgus, are also said 
td be generated from Heaven and Earth that first proceed from him. 
The demiurgus therefore says to all of them that they ought to fabricate 
mortal natures, imitating his' power about their generation. Hence all 

* It is obviously necessary here for tavrm to read mutov. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



184 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


of them proceed from one producing cause, though those of a secondary 
order proceed likewise from the Gods that are prior to them. It follows 
therefore from this, that not every thing which is produced - by the junior 
Gods is mortal, since some of these proceed from other junior Gods; 
but the contrary alone is tnle, that every thing mortal is generated by 
these divinities. And again, it follows from this, that the junior Gods 
produce some things according to the immoveable, but others according 
to the moveable hyparxes of themselves. For they would not be the 
causes of immortals, if they produced all things according to moveable 
hyparxes; if it be true that every thing which subsists from a moveable 
cause, is essentially mutable. 

Again, when Plato says, “ It is therefore necessary to believe in ancient 
men, who being the progeny of the Gods as they themselves assert, must 
have a clear knowledge of their parents ; for it is impossible not to believe 
in the children of the Gods, though they should speak without probable 
and necessary arguments," we may collect from this, that he who simply 
believes in things which seem difficult to be known, and which are of a 
dubious nature, runs in the paths of abundance, recurring to divine 
knowledge, and deific intelligence, through which all things become 
apparent and known. For all things are contained in the Gods. But 
that which antecedently comprehends all things, is likewise able to fill 
other things with the knowledge of itself. Hence, Timaeus here sends us 
to theologists, and to the generation of the Gods celebrated by them. 
Who therefore are they, and what is their knowledge ? They indeed are 
the progeny of the Gods, and clearly know their progenitors ; being the 
progeny and children of the Gods, as preserving the form of their 
presiding deity according to the present life. For Apolloniacal souls, in 
consequence of chusing a prophetic, or telestic life, are called the children 
and progeny of Apollo; children indeed, so far as they are souls 
pertaining to this God, and adapted to this series; but progeny because 
they demonstrate their present life to be conformable to these charac¬ 
teristics of the God. All souls therefore, are the children of the Gods; 
but all do not know their presiding God. Such however, as have this 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXV. 


OF PLATO. 


185 


knowledge and chusc a similar life, are called the children and progeny ‘ 
of the Gods. Hence Plato adds, “ as they say,” for they unfold the 
order from which they came. Thus the Sibyl 1 as soon as she was born, 
uttered oracles; and Hercules appeared at his birth with demiurgic 
symbols. But souls of this kind convert themselves to their progenitors, 
and are filled from them with deific knowledge. Their knowledge how¬ 
ever, is enthusiastic, being conjoined to deity through divine light, and 
exempt from all other knowledge, both that which is probable, and that 
which is demonstrative. For the former is conversant with nature, and 
the universal in particulars; but the latter with an incorporeal essence, 
and the objects of science. Divinely-inspired knowledge however, alone, 
is conjoined with the Gods themselves. 

Timaeus, or in other words Plato, afterwards adds: “ But as they 
declare that their narrations are about affairs, to which they are naturally 
allied, it is proper that complying with the law, we should assent to their 
tradition.” From these words, he who considers them accurately may 
assume many things, such as that divinely-inspired knowledge is perfected 
through familiarity with and alliance to the Gods. For the sun is seen 
through solar-form light, and divinity becomes apparent through divine 
illumination. It may likewise be inferred that the divine law defines the 
orders of the Gods which the divinely-inspired conceptions of the 
ancients unfold, according to which also souls energizing, though not 
enthusiastically, are persuaded by those that enthusiastically energize. 
Complying with this law, Timeeus in the beginning of this dialogue says 
that he shall invoke the Gods and Goddesses. From these words also 
we may infer, that all the kingdoms both in the heavens and the 
sublunary region, are adorned and distributed in order, according to the 
first and intellectual principles; and that all of them are every where 
according to the analogous. Likewise that the order of things precedes 

1 eyyom is omitted in the original. 

4 This is doubtless the Sibyl, of whom Proclus also observes (in Tim. p. 395.) " that proceeding 
into light, she knew her own order, and manifested that she came from the Gods, saying I am the 
medium between Gods and men.” nfo yog rot uMa irgocXiow* ns <p xeu rip r«ftv «auri \$ 9 
xcn t^s ** ijxfj $c$i)A^Kfv, cijAi 8* ryo> /tAtcnj rc ftwit citouta fwnj r’ aftigan rcov. 

Proc. Vol. II. 2 A 


Digitized by boogie 



186 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


our conceptions. But it is Pythagoric to follow the Orphic genealogies. 
For the science concerning the Gods proceeded from the Orphic tradition 
through Pythagoras, to the Greeks, as Pythagoras himself says in the 
Sacred Discourse. 


CHAPTER XXVL 

Again then, following Proclus, we say that the theory of the sublunary 
is immediately connected with that of the celestial Gods; and in conse¬ 
quence of being suspended from it, possesses the perfect and the scientific: 
For the generation-producing choir of Gods, follows the Gods- in the 
heavens, and in imitation of the celestial circle, convolves also the circle 
in generation. For secondary follow the natures prior to them, accord* 
ing to an indivisible and united progression. Because however; the 
divinities that govern generation, subsist immediately from the celestial 
Gods, on this account also they are converted to- them according to one 
undisjoined union; just as the celestial are converted to the supercelestial 
deities, from whom they were proximately generated; but the superce¬ 
lestial to the intellectual, by whom they were adorned and distributed’; 
and again the intellectual to the intelligible Gods, from whom they were 
inefiably unfolded into light, and who indescribably and occultly compre¬ 
hend all things. 

Of the whole of this truly golden chain therefore, the summit is indeed 
the genus of the intelligible Gods, but the end is that of the sublunary 
deities, who govern' generation in an unbegotten, and nature in. a. 
supernatural manner, to which the demiurgic intellect now gives subsist¬ 
ence ; the dominion of the Gods extending supernally from the heavens,, 
as far as to the last of things. Of these sublunary deities however, it is 


1 For nriirogfvorraw, it it necessary to read nrrrqvitfvonm. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXVI. 


OF PLATO. 


187 


necessary to observe in the first place, that all of them preserve the 
generative and perfective energy of their generating cause, and also his 
demiurgic and stable productive power. They likewise receive measures, 
boundaries, and order from their father. And such things as he governs 
exemptlyand totally, they being divided according to allotments, fabricate, 
generate, and perfect. Some of them also are proximate to the celestial 
Gods; but others proceed to a greater distance from them. Hence, 
some preserve the idea of these Gods, so far as it can be preserved in the 
sublunary order; but others are established according to their appropriate 
power. For of every order, the summit is analogous to the order prior to 
it. Thus the summit of intelligibles is unity; of intellectuals is intelligible; 
of the supermundane order, is intellectual; and of the mundane order, 
supermundane. And some of the sublunary Gods indeed, are in a 
greater degree united to the demiurgic monad; but others are more 
distant from it. Hence, some being analogous to it, are the leaders of 
the whole of this series; but others have a more partial similitude to it. 
For the father established in every order powers analogous to him in their 
arrangement; since in all the divine orders a certain cause pre-subsists 
analogous to the good. 

Conformably to these causes which are thus analogous to the ineffable 
principle of things, and which with reference to it are called monads, the 
sublunary Gods proceed, and adorn and distribute generation in a, 
becoming manner. And some indeed, give completion to this, but others 
to some other will of their father. For some complete his connective, 
others his prolific, others his motive, others his guardian will, and others, 
some other will of the demiurgus pertaining to the wholes in the 
sublunary region. And some of them have dominion over souls, others 
over daemons, and others over Gods. All of them however are intel¬ 
lectual according to essence, but mundane according to allotment. They 
are also perfective, and powerful, governing generation in an unbegotten 
manner, beings deprived of intellect, intellectually, and inanimate natures, 
vitally. For they adorn all things according to their own essence, and 
not according to the imbecility of the recipients. But Plato is evidently 
of opinion that these Gods use certain other bodies more simple and 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



188 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


perpetual than these elements by saying, that they appear when they 
please and become visible to us. That he likewise gives them souls is 
manifest from his saying that every mundane God is conjoined to bodies 
through soul. For he then first called the world itself a God, when he 
had established a soul in it. And again that he suspends intellects from 
them, through which their souls are intellectual, and are immediately 
converted to the demiurgus, is evident from the speech of the demiurgus 
to them. 

If likewise it is requisite that the whole world should be perfect, it is> 
necessary that together with the divine genera we should conceive that 
the dsemoniacal order was generated prior to our souls, and which 
receives a triple division, viz. into angels, daemons properly so called,, 
and heroes. For the whole of this order fills up the middle space- 
between Gods and men; because there is an all-perfect separation or 
interval between our concerns, and those of the Gods. For the latter 
are eternal, but the former are frail and mortal. And the former indeed* 
are satisfied with the enjoyment of intellect in energy partially; but the* 
latter ascend into total intellects themselves. On this account, there is- 
a triad which conjoins our concerns with the Gods, and which proceeds, 
analogous to the three principal causes of things; though Plato is. 
accustomed to call the whole of this triad dsemoniacal. For the angelic 
is analogous to being, or the intelligible which is first unfolded into light 
from the ineffable and occult fountain of beings- Hence also, it unfolds, 
the Gods themselves, and announces that which is-oecult in their essence.. 
But the daemoniacal is analogous to infinite life. On- which account it 
proceeds every where according to many orders, and is of a multiform* 
nature. And the heroic is analogous to intellect and conversion.. 
Hence also, it is the inspective guardian of purification, and is the 
supplier of a magnificent and elevated life. Farther still, the angelic 
indeed proceeds according to the intellectual life of the demiurgus.. 
Hence it also is essentially intellectual, and interprets, and transmits aa 
divine intellect to secondary natures. But the dsemoniacal proceeds, 
according to the demiurgic providence of wholes, governs nature, and. 
rightly gives completion to the order of the whole world. And the 


Digitized by 


Google 




CHAP. XXVL OF PLATO. 18$ 

heroic again, proceeds according to the convertive providence of all these. 
Hence, this genus likewise is elevated, raises souls on high, and is the 
eause of a grand and vigorous energy. 

Such therefore being the nature of these triple genera, they are 
suspended from the Gods; some indeed from the celestial Gods, but 
others from the divinities who are the inspective guardians of generation. 
And about every God there is an appropriate number of angels,, heroes. 
and 1 daemons- For. every God is the leader of a multitude which receives, 
his- characteristic form. Hence of the celestial Gods, the angels, daemons- 
and heroes are celestial ; but of the fabricators of generation, they have 
a generation-producing characteristic. Of the elevating Gods, they have- 
an elevating property - but of the demiurgic, a demiurgic; of the vivificr 
a vivific property. And so of the rest- And again, among the elevating' 
Gods,of those that are of a Saturnian characteristic,the angels,daemons, 
and heroes are Saturnian - but ef those that are Solar, they are Solar.. 
Among the vivific Gods likewise of those that are Lunar, the ministrant 
powers are Lunar;, but of the Aphrodisiacal, or those that have the- 
characteristic of Venus, they are Aphrodisiacal; For they bear the 
names-of the Gods from whom they are suspended,as being in connected) 
continuity with them, and receiving one and the same idea with an* 
appropriate subjection. Nor is this wonderful, since partial souls also,, 
when they know their patron, and leading Gods, call themselves by their 
names- Or whence- were the Esculapiuses, the Bacchuses, and the- 
Dioscuri denominated,, who being men of an heroic character, took the 
names of the deities from whom they descended?’ As therefore,of the 
celestial, so likewise of the Gods who are the fabricators of generation, it 
is necessary to survey about each of them, a co-ordinate angelical, 
demoniacal, and heroical multitude ;, and that the number suspended’ 
from-them retains the appellation of its producing monad. Hence, there 
is a. celestial. God, angel and. hero; and’ the like is also true of the 

1 Some of the modems, fronr being’ profoundly ignorant of this circumstance, have stupidly.’ 
supposed that the Gods of the ancients were nothing more than dead men deified ; taking for their 
guides on this important; subject,, mere, historians,, philologists, and rhetoricians, instead. q£j 
philosophers.. 


Digitized by boogie 


190 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VIL 


earth." In a similar manner we must say that Ocean and Tethys proceed 
into all the orders; and conformably to this the other Gods. For there is 
likewise a Jovian, a Junonian, and a Saturnian multitude, which is called 
by the same appellation of fife. Nor is there any absurdity, in calling 
man both the intelligible and the sensible man; though in these, there is 
a much greater separation and interval.* And thus much in common 
concerning the Gods and daemons who are the fabricators of generation. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 

It now remains to show what conceptions we ought to have of the 
Gods mentioned by Plato in the passage before cited from the Timaeus. 
For of the ancient9, some referred what is said about them to fables, 
others to the fathers of cities, others to guardian powers, others to ethical 
explanations, and others to souls. These, however, are sufficiently 
confuted by the divine Jamblichus, who demonstrates that they wander 
from the meaning of Plato, and from the truth of things. After this 
manner, therefore, we must say, that Timaeus being a Pythagorean, 
follows the Pythagorean principles. But these are the Orphic traditions. 
For what Orpheus delivered mystically through arcane narrations, these 
Pythagoras learned, being initiated by Aglaophemus in the mystic 
wisdom which Orpheu9 derived from his mother Calliope. For these 
things Pythagoras says in the Sacred Discourse. What then are the 
Orphic traditions, since we are of opinion that the doctrine of Timaeus 
about the Gods should be referred to these ? They are as follow: 
Orpheus delivered the kingdoms of the Gods who preside over wholes, 

1 For on rijf, it is necessary to read «n yw. 

* For oroorMTCM’iwf, it is requisite to read carorrunas. 

t 


Digitized by- 


Google 



CHAP, xxvir. 


OF PLATO. 


191 


according to a perfect number, viz. Phanes, Night, Heaven, Saturn, 
Jupiter, Bacchus. For Phanes is the first that bears a sceptre, and the 
first king is the celebrated Ericapaeus. But the second is Night, who 
receives the sceptre from her father [Phanes.] The third is Heaven, who 
receives it from Night. The fourth is Saturn, who, as they say, offered 
violence to his father. The fifth is Jupiter, who subdued his father. 
And after him, the sixth is Bacchus. All these kings, therefore, beginning 
supernally from the intelligible and intellectual Gods, proceed through 
the middle orders, and into the world, that they may adorn mundane 
affairs. For Phanes is not only in intelligibles, but also in intellectuals, 
in the demiurgic, and in the supermundane order; and in a similar 
manner, Heaven and Night. For the peculiarities of them proceed 
through all the middle orders. And with respect to the mighty Saturn, 
is he not arranged prior to Jupiter, and does he not after the Jovian 
kingdom, divide the Bacchic fabrication in conjunction with the other 
Titans? And this indeed, he effects in one way in the heavens, and in 
another in- the sublunary region; in one way in the inerratic sphere, 
and in another among the planets. And in a similar manner Jupiter and 
Bacchus. These things , therefore , are clearly asserted by the ancients. 

If, however we are right in these assertions, these divinities have 
every where an analogous subsistence; and he who wishes to survey the 
progressions of them into the heavens, or the sublunary region, should 
look to the first and principal causes of their kingdoms. For from 
thence, and according to them, their generation is derived. Some, 
therefore, say, that Plato omits to investigate the Gods who are analogous 
to the two kings in the heavens, I mean Phanes and Night. For it is 
necessary to place them in a superior order, and not among the mundane 
Gods; because prior to the world, they are the leaders of the intellectual 
Gods, being eternally established in the adytum, as Orpheus says of 
Phanes, who by the word adytum signifies their occult and immanifest 
order. Whether, therefore, we refer the circulation; of same and different, 
mentioned by Plato in this dialogue, to the analogy of these, as male and 
female, or paternal and generative, we shall not wander from the truth. 
Or whether we refer the sun and moon, as opposed to each other, among 


Digitized by 


Google 



192 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII 


the planets, to the same analogy, we shall not err. For the sun indeed 
through his light preserves a similitude to Phanes, but the moon to 
Night. Jupiter, or the demiurgus, in the intellectual, is analogous to 
Phanes in the intelligible order. And the vivific crater Juno is analogous 
to Night, who produces nil life in conjunction with Phanes from unap- 
parent causes; just as Juno is parturient with, and emits into light, all 
the soul contained in the world. For it is better to conceive both these 
as prior to the world ; and to arrange the demiurgus himself as analogous 
to Phanes; since he is said to be assimilated to him according to the 
production of wholes; but to arrange the power conjoined with Jupitdr, 
{i. e. Juno) and which is generative of wholes, to Night, who produces 
all things from the father Phanes. After these, however, we must 
consider the remaining, as analogous to the intellectual kingdoms. 

If, likewise, it should be asked why Plato does not mention the 
kingdoms of Phanes and Night, to whom we have said Jupiter and Juno 
are analogous ? It may be readily answered, that the tradition of Orpheus 
contains these; on which account Plato celebrates the kingdom of 
Heaven and Earth as the first, the Greeks being more accustomed to 
this than to the Orphic traditions; as he himself says in the Cratylus, 
where he particularly mentions the Theogony of Hesiod, and recurs as 
far as to this kingdom according to that poet. Beginning, therefore, from 
this Theogony as more known, and assuming Heaven and Earth as the , 
first kingdoms above the world, he produces the visible Heaven and 
Earth analogous to those in the intellectual order, and celebrates the 
latter as the most ancient of the Gods within the former. From these 
also, he begins the Theogony of the sublunary Gods. These things, 
however, if divinity pleases, will be manifest from what follows. At 
present we shall only add, that it is requisite to survey all these names 
divinely or daemoniacally, and according to the allotments of these 
divinities in the four elements. For this ennead is in ether and water, in 
earth and in air, all-variously, according to the divine, and also according 
to the daemoniacal peculiarity. And again, these names are to be 
surveyed aquatically and aerially, and likewise in the earth ( terrestrially, 
in order that all of them jnay be every where, according to an all-various 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 


CHAP, xxvin. 


OF PLATO. 


193 


mode of subsistence. For there are many modes of providence divine 
and demoniacal, and many allotments according to the division of the 
elements. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


Let us, therefore, now return to the words of Plato. In the first place 
then he says that Ocean and Tethys were the progeny of Heaven and 
Earth. And here we may observe, that as this whole world is ample 
and various, as adumbrating the intellectual order of forms, it contains 
these two extremities in itself. Earth and Heaven; the latter having the 
relation of a father, but the former of a mother. On this account Plate 
calls Earth the most ancient of the Gods within the heavens, in order 
that conformably to this he might say, that Earth is the mother of all 
that Heaven is the father; at the same time evincing that partial causes 
are not only subordinate to their progeny, as Poverty, in the Banquet of 
Plato to Love, but are likewise superior to them, as alone receiving the 
offspring proceeding from the fathers. These two extremities, therefore, 
must be conceived in the world, Heaven as the father, and Earth as the 
mother of her common progeny. For all the rest terminate in these, some 
giving completion to the celestial number, but others to the wholeness of 
Earth. After the same manner, likewise, in each of the elements of the 
world, these two principles, Heaven and Earth, must be admitted, 
subsisting aerially indeed in air, but aquatically in water, and terrestrially 
in earth ; and according to all the above-mentioned modes; in order that 
each may be .a perfect world, adorned and distributed from analogous' 
principles. For if man is said to be a microcosm, is it not necessary that 
each of the elements by a much greater priority should contain in itself 

‘ fn the original fttayw is emmeoiuiy printed for ttvtkoyw. 

Proc. Vol. II. 2 B 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



.194 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII, 


appropriately all that the world contains totally ? HenCe, it appears to 
ine that Plato immediately after speaking about Heaven and Earth, 
delivers the theory of these Gods, beginning from those two divinities; 
for the other divinities proceed analogous to Heaven ahd Earth. These 
two divinities, however, are totally the causes of all the Gods that are 
now produced. And these divinities that are the progeny of Heaven 
and Earth, are analogous to the whole of each. These two, likewise, as 
we have before observed, are in each of the elements, aerially, or 
aquatically, or terrestrially. For Heaven is in Earth, and Earth in 
Heaven.* And here, indeed. Heaven subsists terrestrially, but there Earth 

1 This is a very ancient Egyptian doctrine. And hence Kircher in hi* Oedipus Egyptiacus says 
that he read the following words engraved in a scone near Memphis: Coelum sursum , coelum 
ieorsum, quod sursum id omne deorsum , hcec cape et beaberis , t. e. Hcaixn is above and heaven is 
teneath . Every thing which is above is also beneath. Understand this , and you will be blessed. 
Conformably to this also the celebrated Smaragdine Table, which is of such great authority with 
the Alchemists, and which whether originally written or not by Hermes Trismegistus, is doubtless 
of great antiquity, says that all that is beneath resembles all that is above. But the Table itself is 
as follows: Verum sine mendacio, certum et verissimum: quod est inferius, est sicut id quod est 
superius, et quod est superius, est sicut id, quod est inferius ad perpetrandum miraculum unius 
rei. Et sicut res omnes fuerunt ab uno mediatione unius, sic omnes res natae ab hac re adop- 
tatione. Pater ejus est sol, mater ejus luna. Portavit illud ventus in ventre suo. Nutrix ejus 
terra, pater omnis telesmi totius mundi est hie. Virtus ejus integra est, si versa fuerit in terram. 
Separabis terram ab igne, subtile a spisso suaviter cum magno ingenio. Ascendit a terra in 
coelum, iterumque descendit in terram, et recipit vim superiorum et inferiorum. Sic habebis 
gloriam totius mundi, ideo fugiet a te omnis obscuritas. Haec est totius fortitudinis fortitudo 
fortis, quia vincet omnem rem subtilem, omniaque solida penetrabit. Sic mundus creatus est. 
Hinc erunt adoptationes mirabiles, quarum modus hie est. Itaque vocatus sum Hermes Tris¬ 
megistus habens tTes partes philosophise totius mundi. Completum est quod dixi de opere solis.” 
i. e. " It is true without a lie, certain, and most true, that what is beneath is like that which is 
above, and what is above is like that which is beneath, for the purpose of accomplishing the 
miracle of one thing. And as all things were from one through the mediation of one, so all things 
were generated from this thing by adoption [i. e. by participation.] The sun is its father, and the 
moon its mother. The wind carried it in its belly. The earth is its nurse. This is the father of 
all the perfection of the whole world. Its power is entire when it is converted into earth. You 
must separate the earth from the fire, die subtil from the thick sweetly with great genius. It 
ascends from earth to heaven, and again descends to the earth, and receives the power of things 
superioux and inferiour. Thus you will have the glory of the whole world, and thus all obscurity 
will fly from you. This is the strong fortitude of all fortitude, because it vanquishes every subdie 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXVIII. OF PLATO. *95 

celestially. For Orpheus calls the 'moon celestial earth.' Nor is it 
proper to wonder that this should be the case. For we may survey the 
same things every where, according to the analogous, in intelligibles, in 
intellectuals, in the supermundane order, in the heavens, and in genera¬ 
tion, conformably to the proper order of each. 

With respect, however, to each of these divinities, some of the inter¬ 
preters of Plato understand by Earth, this solid bulk which is the object 
of sensible inspection; others as that which has an arrangement analogous 
to matter, and is supposed to exist prior to generated natures; others, 
as intelligible matter; others, as the power of intellect; others, as life; 
others, as an incorporeal form inseparable from earth; others conceive it 
to be soul; and others intellect. In a similar manner with respect to 
Heaven, some suppose it to be the visible heavens; others, the motion 
about the middle of the universe; others, power aptly proceeding in 
conjunction with motion; others, that which possesses intellect; others, 
a pure and separate intellect; others, the nature of circulation ; others, ' 
soul ; and others, intellect. I know, likewise, that the divine Jamblichus 
understands by Earth, every thing stable and firm, according to the 
essence of the mundane Gods, and which according to energy and a 
perpetual circulation, comprehends more excellent powers and total 
lives. But by Heaven, he understands the total and perfect energy 
proceeding from the demiurgus, which is full of appropriate power, and 
subsists about the demiurgus, as l)eing the boundary of itself and of 

wholes. I know, likewise, that the admirable Theodoras establishes both 

these powers in the life which subsists according to habitude. 

In order, however, that we may avoid erroneous opinions, and may 
adhere to the most pure conceptions of Jamblichus, and the traditions 
of Syrianus, it is necessary iu the first place to recollect, that Plato is 

thing, and penetrates .all solid substances. Thus the world was fabricated. Hence admirable 

adoptions will take place of which this is the mode. I am therefore called Hermes Trismegistus 
possessing three parts of the philosophy of the whole world. That which I have said concerning 
the work of the sun is complete.” 

* Instead of xai yag ovgaviav xai njv (TfArjvTjv OgQsvs Tgwqyogtwiy, the sense requires we should 
read xai yag ougaviav yyv r>jy <r*At}nj», x. A. 


Digitized by boogie 



*96 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


oow speaking of the sublunary Gods, that all of them are every where, 
and that they proceed according to the analogy of the intelligible aud 
intellectual kings. And in the second place we must say, that as the first 
Heaven is the boundary of and connectedly contains the intellectual Gods, 
containing the measure which proceeds from the good ' and the intel¬ 
ligible Gods, into the intellectual orders, after the same manner the 
Heaven which is now mentioned by Plato, is the boundary and container 
of the Gods that are the fabricators of generation, comprehending in one 
bound the demiurgic measure, and also that which proceeds from the 
celestial Gods to those divinities that are allotted the realms of genera¬ 
tion, and connecting them with the celestial government of the Gods. 
For as the demiurgus is to the good itself y so is the one divinity of this 
Heaven, to the intellectual Heaven. Hence, as there, measure and 
hound proceeds from the good through Heaven to all the intellectual 
Gods, so likewise here a bound arrives to the Gods the fabricators of 
generation and to the more excellent genera [viz. to angels, daemons and 
heroes] from the demiurgus, and the summit of the mundane Gods; viz. 
through the connectedly-containing medium of this Heaven.* For the 
every-where proceeding Heaven i6 allotted this order; in one procession 
erf things indeed, unitedly and occultly ; but in another manifestly and 
separately. For in one order, it introduces bound to souls; in another 
to the works of nature; and in another in a different manner to other 
things. And in air indeed, it effects this primarily ; but in the aquatic 
orders secondarily; and in earth, and terrestrial works, in an ultimate 
degree. But there are also complications of these. For the divine mode 
of subsistence, and also the daemoniacal are different in the air, and in 
the earth. For in one place, the mode is the same in different orders.; 
but in another the mode is different in one allotment. And thus much 
concerning the power of Heaven. 


1 For ex t avrov, it is necessary to read ex rayaiw. 

* Instead of \gy» ty roif too Ovgetvov rovSt ctoko^jxij* ftwonjTos, it is requisite to read \syoo ha ms 
too Ougavov, x. A. 


Dig zed by 


Google 



CHAP. XXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


197 


CHAPTER XXIX. 

In the next place, directing our attention to Earth, we shall derive the 
whole of the theory concerning her from her first evolution into light. 
She first becomes manifest, therefore, in the middle triads * of the intel¬ 
lectual Gods, together with Heaven who connectedly contains the whole 
intellectual order. She likewise proceeds analogous to the intelligible 
Earth, which we find to be the first of the intelligible * triads. And as 
ranking in the vivific orders, she is assimilated to the first infinity. But she 
is the receiving bosom of the generative deity of Heaven, and the middle 
centre of his paternal goodness. She also reigns together with him, and 
is the power of him who ranks as a father. The Earth, however, which 
is analogous to her, and presides in the sublunary regions, is as it were the 
prolific power of the Heaven pertaining to the realms of generation, 
unfolding into light his paternal, definitive, measuring and containing 
providence, which prolifically extends to all things. She likewise gene¬ 
rates all the sublunary infinity; * just as Heaven who belongs to the co¬ 
ordination of bound, introduces termination and end to secondary natures. 
Bound, therefore, and end define the hyparxis of every thing according 
to which Gods and daemons, souls and bodies are connected and made to 
be one, imitating the one unity of wholes, or in other words, the ineffable 
principle of things; but infinity multiplies the powers of every being. 
For there is much bound in all sublunary natures, and likewise much infi¬ 
nity, which through divinity, and after the Gods extends to all things. We 
have, therefore, these two orders, which are generative of the divine or 
daemoniacal progressions, in all the sublunary genera and elements.; and 
one kingdom of them in thp same manner as in the intellectual orders. 

’ For T£ioSi)y, it is necessary to read rpteiSaif. 

* Tot yoffcey, read mipw. 

' * Tot atopua>t read eauipictv. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



198 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK vir. 


From these, however, a second duad proceeds. Ocean and Tethys, this 
generation not being effected by copulation, nor by any conjunction of 
things separated, nor by division, nor according to a certain abscission, 
for all-these are foreign from the Gods; but they are accbmplished 
according to one union and indivisible conjunction of powers. And this 
union theologists are accustomed to call marriage. For marriage, as the 
theologist Orpheus says, is appropriate to this order. For he calls Earth 
the first Nymph, and the union of her with Heaven the first marriage ; 
since there is no marriage in the divinities that are in the most eminent 
degree united. Hence there is no marriage between Phanes and Night, 
who are intelligibly united to each other. And marriage appears on this 
account to be adapted to the Heaven and Earth which we are at present 
considering, so far as they adumbrate the intellectual Heaven and Earth; 
which the sacred laws of the Athenians likewise knowing, ordered that 
the marriages of Heaven and Earth should be celebrated, as preparatory 
to initiation into the mysteries. Directing their attention to these also, 
in the Eleusinian mysteries looking upward to the heavens, they exclaim¬ 
ed, O son ! but looking downward to the earth, O parent! According to 
this union, therefore, in conjunction with separation, Heaven and Earth 
produce through their goodness Ocean and Tethys. Or rather, they do 
not immediately produce these, but prior to these two monads, two triads, 

- and duple hebdomads, among which are Ocean and Tethys. And the 
monads indeed, together with the triads, remain with the father. But of 
the hebdomads, Ocean, together with Tethys, ahide, and at the same 
time proceed. All the rest, however, proceed into another order of 
Gods. And this indeed is the mode of their subsistence in the intellec¬ 
tual order. But here, Plato entirely omits the causes that abide in the 
father, but delivers to us those that proceed and at the same time abide, 
because his intention is to speak of the Gods that are the fabricators of 
generation. To these, however, progression, motion, and difference, are 
adapted, and a co-arrangement of the male with the female; in order that 
there may be generation, that matter may be adorned with forms, and 
that difference may be combined with sameness. Hence Plato com¬ 
mences from the duad, proceeds through it, and again returns to it. For 


9 


Digitized by Google 



CHAP. XXIX. 


OP PLATO. 


199 


the duad is adapted to material natures, as well as difference, on account 
of the division of forms about matter. Having mentioned a duad, like¬ 
wise, he begins from Earth; for this is more adapted to things pertaining 
to generation. 

With respect to these two divinities, however, Ocean and Tethys, who 
abide in their causes and at the same time proceed from them, some say 
that Ocean is a corporeal essence; others, that it is a swiftly pervading 
nature; others, that it is the motion of a humid essence; others, that it 
is ether, through the velocity of its motion; and others, that it is the 
intelligible profundity itself of life. The divine Jamblichus, however, 
defines it to be the middle motive divine cause, which middle souls, lives, 
and intellections, efficacious natures, and those elements that are pneu¬ 
matic, such as air and fire, first participate. And with respect to Tethys, 
some say that it is a humid essence; others, that it is a very-mutable 
nature; and others, that it is the hilarity of the universe. But the divine 
Jamblichus asserts it to be a productive power, possessing in energizing 
an efficacious establishment, the stable intellections of which, souls, 
natures, and powers participate, and which is likewise participated by 
certain solid receptacles, either of earth or water, which prepare a seat 
for the elements. x 

We, however, again assuming our principles, say, that the causes of 
these are indeed in the intellectual Gods, and that they are likewise in 
the sensible universe. For Ocean every where distinguishes first from 
second orders, in consequence of which poets do not improperly call it 
the boundary of the earth. But the Ocean which is now the subject of • 
discussion, is the cause of motion, progression, and power; inserting in 
intellectual lives indeed, acme, and prolific abundance; but in souls, 
celerity and vigour, in their energies, and purity in their generations; 
and in bodies facility of motion. And in the Gods indeed it imparts a 
motive and providential cause; but in angels an unfolding and intellec¬ 
tual celerity and vigour. Again, in daemons it is the supplier of efficacious 
power; but in heroes, of a magnificent and flourishing life. It likewise 
subsists in each of the elements, according to its characteristic peculiarity. 
Hence, the aerial Ocean is the cause of all the mutation of aerial natures. 


Digitized by 


Google 



200 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


and of the circle of the meteors, as also Aristotle says. But the aquatic 
Ocean gives subsistence to fertility, facility of motion, and all-various 
powers. For according to the poets, 

From this all seas, and every river flow. 

And the terrestrial ocean is the producing cause of generative perfection, 
of the separation of forms, and of generation and corruption. Whether 
also there are certain terrestrial orders, vivific and demiurgic, it is the 
source of their distinction; or whether there are powers connective of the 
productive principles of the earth, and the inspective guardians of gene¬ 
ration,—these also it excites and multiplies, and calls into motion. 

With respect to Tethys, as the name indeed evinces, she is the most 
ancient, and the progenitor, of the Gods, in the same manner as it is lit to 
acknowledge of the mother Rhea. For theologists denominate another 
Goddess prior to her, Maia. Thus, Orpheus, 

Maia, of Gods supreme, immortal Night, 

What mean you, say ? 

But according to the etymology of Plato, she is a certain fontal deity. 
For the undefiled and pure, and that which percolates are signified through 
her name. For since Ocean produces all things, and is the source of all 
motions, wheuce also it is called the generation of the Gods, Tethys 
separates the unical cause of his motions into primary and secondary 
motions. Hence Plato says, that she derives her appellation from leaping 
and percolating. For these are separative names, in the same manner, as 
he says in the Sophista, (to ^atvuv xat xtpxt^tiv) to card, and to separate 
threads in weaving with a shuttle. Ocean, therefore, generating all 
motion collectively, whether divine, or intellectual, or psychical, or phy¬ 
sical, Tethys separating both internal and external motions, is so called 
from causing material motions to leap and be percolated from such as 
are immaterial. Hence, the separating characteristic is adapted to the 
female, and the unical 1 to the male, Plato, therefore, would assert such 

* Per otowroy here, it is necessary to read ivwuoy. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP, XXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


201 


i 


peculiarities as these, of Ocean and Tethys, and does assert them in the 
Oatylus. But according to the divine Jamblichus, Tethys must be 
defined to be the supplier of position and firm establishment. From all 
that has been said, however, it may be summarily asserted that Tethys is 
the cause of permanency, and a firm establishment of things in herself, 
separating them from the motions that proceed externally. 

In short, Ocean is the cause of all motion, intellectual, psychical, and 
physical to all secondary natures; but Tethys is the cause of all the 
separation of the streams proceeding from Ocean, imparting to each a 
proper purity in the motion adapted to it by nature; through which 
each, though it may move itself, or though it may move other things, yet 
moves in a transcendent manner. But theologists manifest that Ocean is 
the supplier of all motion, when they say that he sends forth ten streams, 
nine of which proceed into the sea; because it is necessary, that of 
motions nine should be corporeal, but that there should be one alone of 
the essence which is separate from bodies, as we are informed by Plato in 
the Laws. * Such divine natures, therefore, as the mighty Ocean generates, 
these he excites to motion, and renders them efficacious. But Tethys distin¬ 
guishes these, preserving generative causes pure from their progeny, and 
establishing them in energies more ancient than those that proceed into 
the external world. And thus much concerning each of these divinities. 
Ocean and Tethys. 

Since, however, as we have said, the generation of these, is from the 
prior divinities. Heaven and Earth, but is not effected either by a copu¬ 
lation such as that which is in sensibles, nor according to such a union as 
that of Night and Phanes in intelligibles, it very properly follows that 
their progeny are separated from each other, analogously to their parents, 
and that each receives a similitude to both. For Ocean indeed, as being 

1 Plato, in the 10th book of the Laws, distinguishes the genus of motions int^ten species, viz. 
circulation about an immoveable centre, local transition, condensation, rarefaction,* increase, de¬ 
crease, generation, corruption, mutation or alteration, produced in another by another, and a 
mutation produced from a thing itself, both in itself, and in another. This last is the motion 
of an essence separate from bodies, and is the motion of soul. 

Proc. Vol. II. 2 C 


% 

Digitized by 


Goc e 



4 


202 ON the theology book V1T. 

the male, is assimilated to the paternal cause. Heaven; but as the supplier 
of motion to the maternal cause, Earth, who is the cause of progressions. 
And Tethys indeed, as the female, is assimilated to the prolific cause; but 
as producing a firm establishment * of her progeny in their proper lives, 
she is assimilated to the fabricating cause. For the male is analogous to 
the monadic; but the female to the dyadic. And the stable is adapted 
to the former; but the motive to the latter. A duad, therefore, proceed¬ 
ing from a duad, and being assimilated according to the whole of itself to 
the duad which is generative of it, defines and distinguishes the causes 
of itself, and all the number posterior to itself; in order that every where 
we may ascribe that which defines and separates, to the order of Ocean 
and Tethys. 


CHAPTER XXX. 


Iw the next place Plato says, “ that from Ocean and Tethys, Phorcys, 
Saturn, and Rhea, and such-as subsist together with these were produced;" 
the theory of which divinities is as follows. In the former progeny, a 
duad generative and motive, was produced from a terminating and defi¬ 
nitive duad; viz. Ocean and Tethys, from Heaven and Earth; but in the 
second progeny, a multitude converted to its causes through the triad, is 
generated from the duad ; indicating likewise an all-perfect progression. 
For this multitude also is divided, into the analogous to bound, and the 
co-ordinate to infinity. For the triad is the bound in this multitude; but 
the nameless number is the infinity in it. And of the triad itself, like¬ 
wise, one thing is analogous to the monad and bound, but another to the 
duad and infinity. And in the former progression, indeed, the progeny 
alone proceeded according to bound and the intellectual; but in this there 

-* For yowftov here, it i# necessary to read povip.o». 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXX. 


OF PLATO. 


203 


is also a mixture of the indefinite. But after the boundary from the 
triad, Plato adds, “ And such as subsist together with these/’ indicating 
the entire progression and separation of these triple orders; so that the 
progeny of this progression is triadic through the peculiarity of conver¬ 
sion, and dyadic through the intervention of the infinite and indefinite. 

Since, however, these differ according to their intellectual causes, in 
the same manner as the. before-mentioned orders; but in them Ocean and 
Tethys were said to be the brethren, and not the fathers ' of Saturn and 
Rhea; for the progression to these was from Heaven and Earth, and all 
the Titannic order is thence derived; let us see on what account Plato 
here gives subsistence to Phorcys, Saturn and Rhea, from Ocean and 
Tethys. For he may appear to say this not conformably to the Orphic 
principles. For ** Earth latently bore from Heaven, as the theologist 
says, seven pure beautiful virgins with rolling eyes, and seven sons that 
were kings, with fine long hair. And the daughters indeed were Themis, 
and the joyful Tethys, Mnemosyne with thick-curled hair, and the 
blessed Thea. She likewise bore Dione having a very-graceful form, and 
Phoebe, and Rhea the mother of king Jupiter. But the venerable Earth 
brought forth those celestial youths, who are called by the appellation of 
Titans, because they revenged the mighty starry Heaven. And she also 
bore Caeus, the great Craeus, and the strong Phorcys, and likewise 
Saturn, and Ocean, Hyperion and Japetus.” These things then having 
been written by the theologist prior to Plato, how is it that Timaeus pro¬ 
duces Saturn and Rhea, from Ocean and Tethys? In answer to this, as 
we have .before arranged Ocean and Tethys above Saturn and Rhea, as 
being the media between these and the fathers, and guardians of the 
boundaries of both, as it is usual to celebrate them; we must say in the first' 
place, indeed, that it is not wonderful that the same divinities should be 
brothers, and yet through transcendency of dignity should be called the 
fathers of certain Gods. For such things as are first, when they proceed 
from their causes, produce in conjunction with those causes, the natures 
posterior to themselves. Thus all souls indeed are sisters, according to 

. ' xarpos is erroneously printed instead of 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



204 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


one demiurgic cause, and according to the vivific principle and fountain 
from which they proceed ; at the same time divine souls produce partial 
souls together with the demiurgus and vivific causes, in consequence of 
first proceeding into light, and abiding iu their wholeness, receiving the 
power of fabricating natures similar to themselves. Besides, in the Gods 
themselves, all the offspring of Saturn are brethren, according to the one 
generative monad by which they were produced; yet at the same time 
Jupiter is called father, in the divine poet Homer, both by Juno and 
Neptune. So that it is not at all wonderful, if Ocean and Tethys are 
called both brethren and fathers of Saturn and Rhea; in consequence of 
preserving as among brethren the paternal peculiarity. In the first 
place, therefore, the doubt may after this manner be solved. 

In the next place, it may be said, that of the divine Titannic hebdo¬ 
mads, Ocean indeed both abides and proceeds, uniting himself to his 
father, and not departing from his kingdom. But all the rest rejoicing 
in progression, are said to have given completion to the will of Earth, but 
to have assaulted their father, dividing themselves from his kingdom, and 
proceeding into another order. Or rather, of all the celestial genera, some 
alone abide in their principles, as the two first triads. For, as soon as 
Heaven understood that they had an implacable heart, and a lawless 
nature, he hurled them into Tartarus, the profundity of the earth, [says 
Orpheus]. He concealed them, therefore, in the unapparent, through 
transcendency of power. But others both abide in, and proceed from, 
their principles, as Ocean and Tethys. For when the other Titans pro¬ 
ceeded to assault their father Heaven, Ocean prohibited them from 
obeying the mandates of their mother, being dubious of their rectitude. 
He, therefore, abides, and at the same time proceeds, together with 
Tethys; for she is conjoined with him according to the first progeny. 
But the other Titans are induced to separation and progression. And 
the leader of these is the mighty Saturn, as the theologist says; though he 
evinces that Saturn is superior to Ocean, by saying, that Saturn himself 
received the celestial Olympus, and that there being throned he reigns 
over the Titans; but that Ocean obtained all the middle allotment. For 
he says, that he dwells in the divine streams which are posterior to 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXX. 


OF PLATO. 


205 


Olympus, and that he environs the Heaven which is there, and not the 
highest Heaven, but as the table says, that which fell from Olympus, and 
was there arranged. * 

Ocean and Tethys, therefore, so far as they abide, and are united to 
Heaven, produce in conjunction with him the kingdom of Saturn and 
Rhea; and so far as they are established in the first power of their 
mother, so far they produce Phorcys in conjunction with her. * For she 
produces him together with Nereus and Thaumas, 5 from being mingled 
through love with the sea. For Phorcys is not celestial, but Ocean, as is 
evident from the Theogony. 1 * 3 4 And so far as Tethys is full of Earth, so 
far being as it were a certain Earth, she may be said to produce 
this Phorcys in conjunction with Ocean; so far as Ocean also compre¬ 
hends the intelligible in himself. Hence Tethys, so far as she is Earth 
according to participation, and Ocean so far as he is causally the sea, 
give subsistence in conjunction with Saturn and Rhea to this God. If, 
however, any arguments should demonstrate that in the intellectual order 
Saturn is above Ocean, or Rhea above Tethys, it must be said that this 
arrangement is indeed there; for in that order the causes of intellection 
are superior to those of motion ; but that here on the contrary, all things 
are in mutation and a flowing condition, so that here Ocean is very pro¬ 
perly prior to Saturn, since it is the fountain of motion, and Tethys is 
prior to Rhea. Hence, after another manner, the doubt may be thus 
solved. 

1 As this is a remarkably curious Orphic fragment, and is not to be found in Gesner’s collection 
of the Orphic remains, I shall give the original for the sake of the learned reader, xai roi yt on o 
xgovo$ urcpupo$ eori tow ooxsavov, SebtjXeoxiv o i§oXoyo$ ttccXjiv Xtyooir tov fitv xpovov auroy xotTa\ap,f$amv 
to f ovpaviov oAuprov, xaxei fyoyi<r0evra, fiounXevtw toov riravwr tov be co xeavov ttjv AtjJjv ctnaorav «njf 
fu<nir veuttv yap autov ev roi$ Serx evm$ peiipot$ rots potra tov oXvfjwtov, xcu tov exei irsptumv ougavov, 
ftAX'ou tov axpoTarox, a>$ be Qqwv b pu)6o$, tov tfurstrovra row oXuprov, xcu fxci TtTayjxevov. 

Procl. in Tim. p. 296. 

1 For fur avrov, it is necessary to read pur avrri $.. 

3 For &av(jL*vra, it is requisite to read Oav/iavro$; and for wovrov, tvovtco. 

4 The original here is evidently erroneous j for it is, ow yag emv o fopxv$ ovgavibys oAAa o 

u>$ wri SijXov ex 6eoyovia$. For aXXa o fogxu$, therefore, I read aXXa o Jlxeavp$\ Ocean, 
according to the Theogony of Hesiod, being the progeny of Heaven and Earth. 


Digitized by boogie 



206 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII 


That we may speak, however, about each of these Gods, Theodoras 
refers souls that subsist in habitude to these divinities, and arranges them 
as presiding over the three divisions of the world. And Phorcys indeed, 
he arranges in the starless sphere, as moving the lation of the universe. 
He ought, however, to persuade us that Plato was acquainted with a cer¬ 
tain starless sphere, and afterwards, that he thus arranged Phorcys in this 
sphere. But he places Saturn over the motions of the stars, because 
time' is from these, and the generations and corruptions of things. And 
he places Rhea over the material part of the world, because by materiality 
she has a redundancy with respect to the divinities prior to herself. But 
the divine Jamblichus arranges them in the three spheres between the 
heavens and the earth. For some of the sublunary deities give a two-fold 
division to the sublunary region, but these divide it in a three-fokl 
manner. And Phorcys indeed, according to him, presides over the 
whole * of a humid Essence, containing all of it impartibly. But Rhea is 
a divinity connective of flowing and aerial-formed spirits. And Saturn 
governs the highest and most attenuated sphere of ether, having a middle 
arrangement according to Plato; because the middle and the centre in 
incorporeal essences, have a greater authority than the powers situated 
about the middle. We, indeed, admire this intellectual explanation of 
Jamblichus; but we think it proper to survey these Gods every where, 
both in all the elements, and all orders. For thus we shall behold that 
which is common in them, and which extends to all things. And we say, 
indeed, that Phorcys is the inspective guardian of every spermatic 
essence, and of physical, and as it were spermatic productive principles, 
as being pregnant with, and the cause of generation. For there are sper¬ 
matic productive principles in each of the elements; and different orders 
of Gods and daemons preside over them, all which Plato comprehends 
through Phorcys. But king Saturn divides forms and productive 
principles, and produces more total into more partial powers. Hence he 
is not only an animal but pedestrious, aquatic and a bird. And he is 

1 Kpons is erroneously printed for 

% For ouaiots, I read ou<nas* 


Digitiz ed by 


Google 


CHAP. XXX. 


OF PLATO. 


1207 


not only pedestrious, but likewise man and horse. For the productive 
principles in him are more partial than in the celestial deities. Among 
the intellectual Gods, therefore, he is allotted this power, viz. to multiply 
and divide intelligibles. Hence, he is the leader of the Titans, as being 
especially characterized by the dividing peculiarity. i 

Again, we say that Rhea receives the unapparent powers of king 
Saturn, leads them forth to secondary natures, and excites the paternal 
powers to the fabrication of visible objects. For thus also, her iirst 
order is moved, is filled with power and life, and produces into that which 
is apparent, the causes that abide in Saturn. Hence Saturn is every 
where the supplier of intellectual forms; Rhea is the cause of all souls, 
and of every kind of life; and Phorcys is prolific with physical productive 
principles. Since however another number of Gods pertains to the 
kingdom of these, and which Saturn and Rhea comprehend, on this 
amount Plato adds, “ and such as subsist together with these.” For he 
not only through this comprehends daemons, as some say, but both the 
angelic and the daemoniacal Saturn have with themselves a multitude, 
the one angelic, but the other daemoniacal. And the multitude which is 
in the Gods is divine ; that which is in the air is aerial; and in a similar 
manner in the other elements, and in the other more excellent genera 
arranged under these Gods. 

By the words also “ such as subsist together with these,” Plato appears 
to signify the remaining Titans, viz. Caeus and Hyperion, Creus, Japetus, 
and likewise the remaining Titanidae, viz. Phoebe, Theia, Mnemosyne, 
Themis, and Dione, with whom Saturn and Rhea proceeded into light. 

Also, those that proceeded together with Phorcys, viz. Nereus and 
Thaumas, the most motive Eurybia, and those who especially contain 
and connect the whole of generation. - Moreover, it is worth while to 
observe that it is not proper to discuss accurately the arrangement in 
these divinities, and whether Saturn or Phorcys is the superior deity ; for 
they are united and similar to each other. But if it be requisite to make 
a division, it is better to adopt the arrangement of the divine Jamblichus, 
viz. that Saturn is a monad ; but Rhea a certain duad calling forth the 
powers that are in Saturn; and that Phorcys gives perfection to their 
progression. 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



208 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


It now remains that we direct our attention to the other kings, who 
produce the apparent sublunary order of things; for such is the arrange¬ 
ment which they are allotted. Plato adds therefore, “ That from Saturn 
and Rhea, Jupiter, Juno, and all such as we know are called the brethren 
of these descended.” This is the third progression of the Gods who are 
the fabricators of generation, but the fourth order, closing as a tetrad the 
nomination of the leading Gods. For the tetrad is comprehensive of the 
divine orders. Rut as a duad this progression is assimilated to the first 
kingdom; because that as well as this is dyadic. There are, however, 
present with it, the all-perfect according to progression, and the uncir¬ 
cumscribed according to number. But Plato here not only adds the 
words “ such as” as in the progression prior to it, but likewise the word 
“ all” that he may indicate the progression of them to every thing. For 
we use the term to ovov such as in speaking of things united, but the term 
to t arras all , in speaking of things now divided and multiplied. The 
total (to oXixoy) likewise pertains to this progression. For the Gods which 
are denominated in it, and those that proceed every where together with 
them, are characterized according to this form of fabrication. For all 
demiurgi are total. Who therefore are they, and what kind of order 
do they possess ? 

The divine Jamblichus then asserts that Jupiter is the perfector of all 
generation ; but that Juno is the cause of power, connexion, plenitude 
and life to all things; and that the brethren of them are those that 
communicate with them in the fabrication of generation, being also 
themselves intellects, and receiving a completion according to a perfection 
and power similar to them. But Theodoras, again dividing the life 
which animates the total in habitude, and forming it as he is accustomed 
to do'into triads, calls Jupiter the power that governs the upper region 
as far as to the air; but Juno the power who is allotted the aerial part of 


Digitiz ed by 


Google 


I 


CHAP. XXXI. m OF PLATO. 209 

the world ; and the brethren of them those that give completion to the 
remaining parts. For Jupiter is the essential of the soul that subsists in 
a material habit, because there is nothing more vital than essence. But 
Juno is the intellectual part of such a soul, because the natures on the 
earth are governed by the productive principles proceeding from the air. 
And the other number is the psychical distributed into particulars. 

We, however, consequently 1 to what has been before asserted, say, 
that according to Plato there are many orders of Jupiter. For one is the 
demiurgus, as it is written in the Cratylus ; another, is the first of the 
Saturnian triad, as it is asserted in the Gorgias ; another is the liberated, 
as it is delivered iu the Phaedrus; and another is the celestial, whether in 
the inerratic sphere, or among the planets. Moreover, as the first Jupiter 
produced into the visible fabrication the power of his father, which was 
concealed in the unapparent, being excited * to this by his mother Rhea; 
after the same manner the Jupiter delivered here, who is the fabricator 
of generation, causes the unapparent divisions and separations of forms 
made by Saturn to become apparent; but Rhea calls them forth, into 
motion and generation ; and Phorcys inserts them in matter, produces 
sensible natures, and adorns the visible essence, in order that there may 
not only be divisions of productive principles in natures and in souls, 
and in intellectual essences prior to these, but likewise in sensibles. For 
this is the peculiarity of fabrication. And if it be requisite to speak 
what appears to me to be the truth, Saturn indeed produces intellectual 
sections, but Rhea such as are psychical, and Phorcys such as are 
physical. For all spermatic productive principles are under nature. 
But Jupiter adorning sensible and visible sections, gives a specific 
distinction to such beings in the sublunary region as are totally vital, 
and causes them to be moved. Since, however, these sensible forms 
which are generated and perfected, are multiformly evolved, being moved 
and changed according to all-various evolutions, on this account, the 
queen Juno is conjoined with Jupiter, giving perfection to this motion 


1 The words h rxofugm$ are omitted in the original, 

* For it is necessary to read foxxiwiQu$,' 

Proc. Vol. II. 2 D 


Digitized by boogie 



210 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


book vn. 


of visible natures, and to the evolution of forms. Hence fables represent 
her as at one time sending mania to certain persons, but ordering others 
to undergo severe labours, in order that through intellect being present 
with all things, and partial souls energizing divinely both theoretically 
and practically, every progression, and all the'generation of the sublunary 
region may obtain complete perfection. 

Such, therefore, being the nature of this duad, there are also other 
demiurgic powers which triply divide the apparent * world of generation ; 
one of these being allotted the government of air; another, that of water; 
and another that of earth, conformably to demiurgic allotments. Hence 
they are said to be the brothers of these, because they also preside over 
the visible fabrication. And farther still, there are others the progeny of 
these; which is the last progression of the divinities mentioned in this 
place by Plato. Hence, they are delivered anonymously ; Plato by this 
indicating the diminution of it as far as to the last division : For as in 
the Gods that are above the world, the partible proceeds from the total 
fabrication, and the series of kings terminates in this; after the same 
manner also among the sublunary Gods, the progeny of Jupiter proceed 
from the Jovian order; among which progeny, likewise, is the choir of 
partible fabrication. For the before-mentioned demiurgi producing 
sensibles totally, it is necessary that those deities should have a subsist¬ 
ence who distribute different powers and peculiarities to different natures, 
and divide the sublunary generation into multitude. Hence Plato alone 
denominates them others , and does not employ the expressions such as, 
and all, because they associate with all-various diversity. 

With respect, therefore, to this ennead of Gods, Heaven terminates. 
Earth corroborates, and Ocean moves all generation. But Tethys 
establishes every thing in its proper motion; intellectual essences in 
intellectual; middle essences in psychical; and such as are corporeal in 
physical, motion; Ocean at the same time collectively moving all things. 
Saturn alone divides intellectually ; Rhea vivifies; Phorcys distributes 
spermatic productive principles; Jupiter perfects things apparent from 

! For ccQctvt) here it is necessary to read tp$gv>|. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XX&I. 


OF PLATO. 


311 


such as are unapparent ; and Juno evolves according to the all-various 
mutations of visible natures. And thus through this ennead all the 
sublunary world derives its completion, and is fitly arranged; divinely 
indeed from the Gods, but angelically, as we say, from angels, and 
daemoniacally from daemons; the Gods indeed subsisting about bodies, 
souls and intellects; but angels exhibiting their providence about souls 
and bodies; and daemons being distributed about the fabrication of 
nature, and the providential care of bodies. But again, the number of 
the ennead is adapted to generation. For it proceeds from the monad 
as far as to the extrejnities without retrogression ; * which is the peculiarity 
of generation. For reasons (i. e. productive principles) fall into matter, 
and are unable to convert themselves to the principles of their existence. 
Moreover, the duad is triadic; for three dyadic orders were assumed; 
viz. Heaven and F<arth; Ocean and Tethys; Jupiter and Juno. And 
this last duad ranks as the fourth progression, because prior to it, is the 
triad Phorcys, Saturn, and Rh^a ; which manifests the complication here, 
of the perfect and the imperfect, and of bound with infinity. For all 
celestial natures are definite, and as Aristotle says, are always in the end. 
But things in generation proceed * from the imperfect to the perfect, and 

1 The meaning of Proclus in asserting that the ennead proceeds from the monad as far as to the 
extremities without retrogression is as follows: The ennead, according to the Pythagoreans, circu¬ 
lates all numbers within itself, and there can be no number beyond it. For the natural progression 
of numbers is as far as to 9, but after it their retrogression takes place. For 10 becomes as it were 
again the monad. Thus, if from each of the numbers 10, 11,12, IS, 14, 15,16, 17,18, and 19> 
the number 9 is subtracted* the numbers that remain will be 1 , 2, S, 4, 5,6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And 
vice versa, the progression will receive an increase by the addition of 9. For, if to each of the 
numbers 1,2, 8, 4, 5, &c. 9 is added, the numbers produced will be 10, 11, 12, IS, &c. Like¬ 
wise by subtracting from 20 twice 9, from SO thrice 9, from 40 four times 9, from 50 five times 9 
&c, the numbers 2, S, 4, 5, 6, &c will be produced. By taking likewise from 100 eleven times 
9, we again return to the monad. And after the same manner we may proceed to infinity. 
Hence it is not possible there should be any elementary number beyond the ennead. Hence too 
the Pythagoreans, called it Ocean and the Horizon, because all numbers are comprehended by 
and revolve within it. On this account likewise, it was called by them Halios, (raga to a\tfav) 
and Concord and Perseia because it congregates all numbers, and collects them into one, and does 
not permit the conspiration of the numbers beyond it to be dissipated. Vid. Anonym, in opere 
quod inscnpsit ret tioXoyov/Meva t ij$ agtS/jLtjrixrjf. 

* For cj<n, it is requisite to read Tgoeiffi. 


Digitized by {jOoq le 



212 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


receive the same boundary indefinitely. Besides this, the tetrad arising 
from the generation of these divinities is adapted to the orders of the 
fabricators of the sublunary region; in order that they may contain 
multitude unitedly, and the partible impartibly ; and also to the natures 
that exist in generation. For the sublunary elements are four; the 
seasons according to which generation is evolved are four; and the 
centres are four. And in short, there is an abundant dominion of the 
tetrad in generation. 

Why, however, it may be said, does Plato comprehend all the multi¬ 
tude of the Gods that fabricate generation, in thisennead? I answer, 
because this ennead gives completion to all the fabrication of generation. 
For in the sublunary realms there are bodies and natures, souls, and 
intellects, and this both totally and partially. And all these are in both 
respects in each of the elements. This ennead in each of the elements, 
is as follows, viz. total and partial bodies, total and partial natures, total 
^nd partial souls, and total and partial intellects, and the monad which 
contains these, viz. the elementary sphere itself; because wholes 
and parts are consubsistent with each other. Heaven and Earth, 
however, generate the unapparent essences of these, i. e. of wholes 
and parts, the former indeed according to union, but the latter 
according to multiplication. And the former according to bound, 
but the latter according to infinity; being the leaders of essence 
to all things. But Ocean and Tethys give perfection to both the 
common and divided motion of them. There is, however, a different 
motion of different things, viz. of total intellect, of total soul, and of 
total nature; and in a similar manner in such of these as are partial. 
The sublunary wholes, therefore, being thus adorned and distributed, 
Saturn, indeed, divides partial from total natures, but intellectually; 
Rhea, calls forth this division from intellectuals, into all-various pro¬ 
gressions,' as far as to the last forms of life, being a vivific deity ; but 
Phorcys produces the Titannic separation, to physical productive prin¬ 
ciples. After these three, are the fathers of composite natures. And 


1 itgooiovs is omitted in the original. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXXII. 


OF PLATO. 


213 


Jupiter indeed, adorns sensibles totally, according to an imitation of 
Heaven. For the Jupiter in the intellectual order, proceeds analogous 
to the intellectual Heaven, in the royal series. But Juno moves wholes, 
fills them with powers, and evolves, according to every progression. 
And the Gods posterior to these fabricate the partial works of sensibles, 
some according to one, but others according to another peculiarity, either 
demiurgic, or vivific, or perfective, or connective, being evolved and 
dividing themselves, as far as to the last of things, analogously to the 
Saturnian order. For the dividing peculiarity originates from the 
Saturnian dominion. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


In the last place, let us consider why Plato denominates the sublu* 
nary deities, “ such as become apparent when they please.” Shall we 
say it is because these material elements are hurled forth before them as 
veils 1 of the splendour of the etherial vehicles which are proximately 
suspended from them ? For it is evident that being mundane they must 
also necessarily have a mundane starry vehicle. The light of them, 
however, shines forth to the view, when they are about to benefit the 
places that receive their illumination. But i ; f Plato says that they 
become visible when they please, it is necessary that this appearance of 
them should either be an evolution into light of the incorporeal powers 
which they contain, or of the bodies which are entirely spread under 
them. But if it is an evolution of their incorporeal powers, this is also 
common to the visible Gods. For they are not always apparent by their 
incorporeal powers, but only sometimes, and when they please. It is not 
proper, therefore, to divide the sublunary oppositely to the visible Gods, 

1 In the original it is Ka.ga.xeTa instead of xagarna^fuiiTa. 


Digitized by VooQie 



214 


ON THE THEOLOGY . 


BOOK VII. 


according to that which is common to both, but so far as they have 
entirely something peculiar. But if they produce a luminous evolution 
of certain bodies when they please, they must necessarily use other 
bodies prior to these material elements; and which then become visible 
to us, when it seems fit to the powers that use them. Hence, other 
bodies more divine than such as are apparent, are spread under the 
invisible Gods; and according to these, they are said to be, and are 
mundane. Through these also as media, they ride in and govern these 
elements. For they impart to them as much of themselves as they are 
able to receive, and contain the forms and the natures of them in their 
powers. For since no one of these is an object of sense, and it is 
necessary that the vehicles of rational souls should be things of this kind, 
it is evident that they must use other vehicles prior to these visible 
bodies. 

With respect, however, to all the Gods that govern generation, we 
must not say, that they have an essence mingled with matter, as the 
Stoics assert they have. For nothing which verges to matter is able to 
govern with intellect and wisdom, nor is properly a producing cause, but 
an organ of something else. Nor must we say that they have an essence 
unmingled with matter, but powers and energies mingled with it, as 
Numenius and his followers assert. For the energies of the Gods concur 
with their essences, and their, inward subsist prior to their externally 
proceeding energies; since a partial soul also prior to the life which is 
inserted in the animal suspended from it, contains a more principal life 
in itself; and prior to the externally proceeding motion, through which 
it moves other things, it is moved with a motion converted to itself. 
The sublunary Gods, therefore, are entirely unmingled with matter; 
adorning indeed things mingled in an unmingled, and things generated, 
in an unbegotten manner. They likewise contain partibles impartibly, 
are the causes of life, the suppliers of intellect, the replenishes of power, 
the givers of soul, the primary leaders of all good, and the sources of 
order, providence, and the best administration. They also give subsist¬ 
ence to more excellent animals about themselves, are the leaders of 
angels, the rulers of daemons, and the prefects of heroes; governing 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXXII. 


OF PLATO. 


215 


through this triple army the whole of generation. If, therefore, we 
assert that the appropriate order of these divinities about generation, 
is the basis and seat of the total Gods, we shall speak rightly. And we 
shall likewise not err in asserting that they convolve the end of the divine 
decrement to the beginning. Such then being the nature of these 
divinities, Plato indeed looking to the Gods that are both intelligible and 
intellectual, and to those that are properly called intellectual, surveyed 
four progressions of them in common. But they also contain powers 
derived from the supermundane Gods; whether they proceed from the 
twelve leaders, or from certain other deities. 

From the celestial choir of Gods likewise, a certain order proceeds into 
generation, which, as the divine Jamblichus says, is doubled in its 
progression. For from the twenty-one leaders, forty-two governments of 
Gods who are the fabricators of generation, are derived, according to 
each elementary allotment. But from the thirty-six decadarchs, 1 seventy- 
two sublunary rulers proceed; and in a similar manner other Gods; 
being the double of the celestial Gods in multitude, but falling short of 
them in power. It is likewise necessary to survey their triple progressions, 
their quintuple divisions, and their divine generation according to the 
hebdomad; For they receive an orderly distribution in a threefold, 
fivefold, and sevenfold manner analogous to the whole world; in order 
that each of the elements may be a world, and may be truly an imitation 
of the universe. Such, therefore, is the concise doctrine concerning the 
sublunary Gods, according to twofold essences, lives, and allotments; 
just as Plato also makes the ruling progeny of them to be dyadic. 

1 These thirty-six decadarchs are the divinities alluded to by the Emperor Julian in his Oration 
to the Sun, when he says, “ that the Sun divides the zodiac into twelve powers of Gods, and each 
of these into three others, so that thirty-six are produced in the whole." 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



216 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 

Having therefore discussed the theory pertaining to the celestial and 
sublunary Gods, it now remains that we ascend to the summit or monad 
of all the mundane Gods, Bacchus, in whose divinity they all subsist and 
are rooted, similarly to the fixed stars in the inerratic sphere. For after 
this manner, every monad analogously contains its co-ordinate multi¬ 
tude. 

Bacchus therefore, is the mundane intellect, from which the soul and 
body of the world are suspended. With respect however, to intellect it 
is necessary to observe that one kind is imparticipable and total; another 
is participate indeed but essentially so ; and a third is participate, and 
subsists as a habit. All intellects unconnected with soul belong to the 
first kind. The mundane intellect, and the intellects of all the mundane 
Gods and beneficent daemons, rank in the second division. And to the 
third class such intellects as ours belong. This deity also is the monad 
of the Titans, or ultimate fabricators of things, by whom he is said in 
divine fables to have been torn in pieces; because the mundane soul 
which participates df this divinity, and is on this account intellectual, is 
participated by the Titans, and through them distributed into every part 
of the universe. Plato in the Cratylus says of this divinity “ that he is 
the giver of wine ; and that oivog wine may most justly be denominated 
otovovg because it is accustomed to deprive those of intellect who possessed 
it before.” On which words Proclus in his MS Scholia on that dialogue 
observes as follows : “ The young man Cratylus appears to inquire about 
our sovereign master Bacchus, as if it were about things of small import¬ 
ance, and on this account he is silenced by Socrates. 1 And he does not 
indeed pay attention to the occult, but only to the last and mundane 
progressions of the Gods. These indeed, the wise man venerates, though 

* This is implied by Socrates telling him that he inquires about great things. 


Digitized by 


Google 



chap, xxxm. 


OF PLATO, 


* 1 ? 

as he says, they are sports, through these Gods [Bacchus and Venus] 
being lovers of sport. For as he says of the terminations of the other 
Gods, that they are terrible, and that they avenge and punish, and thus 
give perfection to souls; as for instance, that Justice follows Jupiter, the 
avenger of the divine law, and that this divinity is benevolent to those 
whose manners are orderly, and who live according to intellect, but that 
she is baneful to those who mingle their life with insolence and ignorance, 
till she has entirely subverted them, their houses and cities;—in like 
manner, he venerates the terminations of Bacchus and Venus, which 
produce yXuxvflufua sweetness of sensation; every where purifying our 
conceptions concerning the Gods, and preparing us to understand that 
all things look to the best end, whatever it may be. For because the 
terminations of these divinities strengthen the infirmity of the mortal 
nature, and alleviate corporeal molestation, on this account the Gods the- 
causes of these things, are Qi>MxeuyiMns lovers of sport. Hence, of statues, 
they make some of them laughing and dancing, and exhibiting relaxation), 
but others austere, astonishing, and terrible to the view, analogously to • 
the mundane allotments of the Gods. 

But theologists frequently call Bacchus wine, from the last of his gifts^ 
as for instance, Orpheus, 

Oivou f«VT» ftcAy xoffbco kajk? xou jxoi mix*. 

iv e. “ Take all the members of Wine [that are distributed] in the world, 
and bring them to me." If however the God is thus denominated, 
certainly his first and middle energies will be thus called, as well as his 
last; so that Socrates now looking to this calls the God Mottwrog, 
beginning from wine, which as we have said manifests all the powers .of 
Bacchus. Thus also in the Phaedrus, Socrates calls Love in. common 
great , both that which is divine, and that which is a lover of body. By 
this epithet wine therefore, we must understand that the peculiarity of a 
"partial intellect, is in common presented to our view. For the word o tow 
such as, is nothing else than intellectual form separated from a total intel¬ 
lect, and in consequence of this becoming participated, particular and 
Proc. Vo l. II. 2 £ 


Digitized by V- ogle 



218 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII; 


alone. For an all-perfect intellect is all things, and energizes according 
to all things with invariable sameness: but a partial and participated 
intellect, is indeed all things, but this according to one form, such as a 
solar, lunar, or mercurial form. This therefore, the peculiarity of which 
is to be separated from the rest, wine indicates, signifying an intellect* 
such as, and particular. (<nj/xau»»v rov #«ov xai met pour) 

Since, therefore, every partial fabrication is suspended from the Diony- 
siacal or Bacchic monad, which distributes participated mundane intellects 
from total intellect, (or that intellect which ranks as a whole) many 
souls from one soul, and all sensible forms from their proper wholenesses; 
on this account theologists call both this God and all his fabrications wine. 
For all these are the progeny of intellect. And some things participate 
of the partial distribution of intellect in a more distant, but others in a 
nearer degree. Wine therefore energizes in things analogous to its 
subsistence in them; in body indeed, after the manner of an image, 
according to a false opinion and imagination; but in intellectual natures, 
according to an intellectual energy and fabrication. For in the laceration 
of Bacchus by the Titans, the heart of the God is said to have alone 
uemained undistributed, i. e. the indivisible or impartible essence of 
intellect. 

With respect to the mundane soul which is the immediate participant 
of this Bacchic intellect, the composition of it is most accurately delivered 
by Plato in the Timaeus, and admirably unfolded by Proclus in his 
Commentaries on that dialogue. For full information therefore on this 
subject I refer the reader to those works; and shall only summarily 
observe at present that there are five genera of being, from which all 
things after the first being are composed; viz. essence, permanency, motion, 
sameness, and difference. For every thing must possess essence; must 
abide in its cause, from which also it must proceed, and to which it must 
be converted; must be the same with itself and certain other natures, and. 
at the same time different from others, and distinguished in itself. But 
Plato for the sake of brevity, assumes only three of these in the composir 
tion of the mundane soul, viz. essence, sameness, and difference; for the 
other two must necessarily subsist in conjunction with these. When 


Digitized by 


Google 



Chap, xxxiii. 


OF PLATO. 


219 


therefore Plato says, “that from aa essence impartible* and always 
subsisting according lo sameness of being, and from a nature divisible 
about bodies, the demiurgus mingled from both a third form of essence, 
having a middle subsistence between the two,”—by the impartible 
essence lie means intellect, and by the nature which is divisible about 
bodies, a corporeal life. Hence the mundane soul is a medium between 
the mundane intellect, and the whole of that corporeal life which the 
world participates. We must not however suppose that when the soul 
is said to be mingled from these two, the indivisible and divisible natures 
are consumed in the mixture, as is the case when corporeal substances 
are mingled together; but we must understand that the soul is of a 
middle nature between these, so as to be different from each, and yet a 
participant of each. In short, the intellect participated by soul, is called 
by Plato impartible; but the nature which is divisible about bodies is the 
corporeal-formed life proceeding from the mundane soul, and which has 
the relation of splendour to it. For intellect is analogous to the Sun; 
soul, to the light proceeding from the sun; and a divisible life to the 
splendour proceeding from light. 

Proclus observes on the above cited words of Plato, that they arte 
conformable to the Orphic traditions. “ For, says he,' Orpheus does not 
predicate the impartible of every intelligible or intellectual order, but 
according to him there are certain natures superior to this appellation, 
in the same manner as others are superior to other names. For king and 
father are not adapted to all the divine orders. Where, therefore, 
according to Orpheus, shall we first survey the impartible, in order that 
we may understand the divine conception of Platoi* Orpheus therefore 
establishes one demiurgus of every divisible fabrication, analogous to the 
one father who generates the total fabrication, and from him produces 
the whole intellectual mundane multitude, the number of sonls, and 
corporeal compositions. And this one demiurgus indeed (i. e. Bacchus) 
generates all these unitedly; but the Gods that surround him, divide and 
separate his fabrications. Orpheus however says, that all his other 


* In Tim. p. 18 *. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



320 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VIL 


fabrications were distributed into parts by the Gods whose characteristic 
is of a dividing nature; but that his heart alone was preserved impartible, 
through the providence of Minerva. For since he gives subsistence to 
intellects, souls and bodies; but souls and bodies indeed, receive in them¬ 
selves an abundant division and distribution into parts, intellect remaining 
united and indivisible, being all things in one, and comprehending total 
intelligibles in One intellection;—this being the case, he says that the 
intellectual essence alone, and the intellectual number was saved entire 
by Minerva. For says he. 

The intellectual heart alone was left, 

directly calling it intellectual. 

If therefore the impartible heart is intellectual, it will evidently be 
intellect and an intellectual number; not indeed every intellect, but the 
mundane; for this is the impartible heart, since the divided God was also 
the fabricator of this. Orpheus therefore calls the impartible essence of 
Bacchus intellect. But he denominates the life which is divisible about 
body, which is physical, and pregnant with seeds, the genitals of the God. 
And ,he says that Diana who presides over all the generation in nature, 
and is the midwife of physical productive principles, extends these 
genitals, distributing as far as to subterranean natures, the prolific power 
iof the God. But all the remaining body of Bacchus was, he says, the 
psychical essence, this also being divided into seven parts. For they 
divided all the seven parts of the boy, says the theologist, speaking of 
the Titans; just as Timaeus divides the soul into seven parts. And 
perhaps Timseus, when he says that soul is extended through the whole 
world, will remind the followers of Orpheus of the Titannic division, 
through which soul is not only spread round the universe like a veil, 
but is also extended through it. Very properly therefore, does Plato call 
the essence which is proximately above soul, an impartible essence. 
And in short, he thus denominates the intellect which is participated by 
soul, following the Orphic fables, and wishing to be as it were an 
interpreter of what is said in the mysteries.” And thus much concerning 
Bacchus, or the monad of the mundane Gods. 


Digitized by {jOoq le 



CHAP. XXXIV. 


OP PLATO. 



251 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


Ik the next place let us direct our attention to the Parmenides of Plato, 

' and see how in that most theological dialogue the mundane Gods are 
Characterized. In the first hypothesis therefore of that dialogue, in 
which all the divine orders are denied of the one , Parmenides characterizes 
the mundane Gods by the equal and the unequal as follows: “But 
since the one is such, it will neither be equal nor unequal either to itself 
or to another. How so ? If it were equal, indeed, it would be of the 
same measures with that to which it is equal. Certainly. But that 
which is greater or less than the things with which it is commensurate^ 
will possess more measures than the less quantities, but fewer than the 
greater. Certainly. But to those to which it is incommensurable, with 
respect to the one part, it will consist of less; and with respect to the 
other of greater measures. How should it not ? Is it not therefore 
impossible that a thing which does not participate of same should either 
be of the same measures, or admit any thing in any respect the same? 
It is impossible. It will therefore neither be equal to itself nor to another 
if it does not consist of the same measures. It does not appear that it 
will. But if it consists of more or fewer measures, it will he of as many 
parts as there are measures; and so again, it will no longer be the one t 
but as many as there are measures. Right. But if it should be of one 
measure, it would become equal to that measure. It has, however, 
appeared that the one cannot be equal to any thing. It has appeared so. 
The one , therefore, neither participates of one measure, nor of many, nOr 
of a few; nor (since it in no respect participates of same) can it ever, as 
it appears, be equal to itself or to another, nor again greater or less either 
than itself or another. It is in every jespect so.” 

As the commentary of Prod us on the second hypothesis of the 
Parmenides, in which the equal and the unequal are affirmed of the one, is 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



222 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


UOOK VII. 


lost, and in which I have no doubt, the properties of the mundane Gods 
were most fully unfolded, I shall present the reader with the following 
extract from his commentary on the above passage in the Parmenides of 
Plato. The peculiarity of the mundane Gods is the equal and the 
unequal, the former of these indicating their fulness, and their receiving 
neither any addition nor ablation; (for such is that which is equal to 
itself, always preserving the same boundary;) but the latter, the multitude 
of their powers, and the excess and defect which they contain. Tor in 
these, divisions, variety of powers, differences of progressions, analogies, 
and bonds through these, are, according to ancient tfaeologists, especially 
allotted a place. Hence, Timseus also constitutes souls through analogy, 
the causes of which must necessarily presubsist in the Gods that proxi- 
mately preside over souls. And as all analogies subsist from equality, 
Plato very properly indicates the peculiarity of these divinities by the 
equal and the unequal. But he now rightly frames the demonstrations 
of the negations of the equal and the unequal from sameness and the 
many , and not from the similar and the dissimilar , though immediately 
before he spoke of these. For every mundane deity proceeds from the 
demiurgic monad, and the first multitude which he denies of the one. 

Of this then we must be entirely persuaded, that the things of which 
demonstrations consist are the preceding causes of the particulars about 
'Which Parmenides discourses; so that the equal and the unequal , so far 
as tlrey proceed from the one , and subsist through sameness and the many , 
so far through these they are denied of the one. Hence, Plato thus 
begins his discussion of them:—“ But since it (viz. the one) is such," i. e. 
not as we have just now demonstrated, but as was formerly shown, that 
it neither receives same nor different, and is mthout multitude, —being 
such, it is neither equal nor unequal, neither to itself, nor to others. For 
again, there are here twofold conclusions, in the same manner as 
concerning the similar and the dissimilar, and the same and the different. 
But that the equal and the unequal are suspended from the twofold 
co-ordinations of divine natures is not immanifest. For the equal is 
arranged under the similar and the same , subsistence in another , the round, 
and the whole; but the unequal, under the dissimilar, the different , 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXXIV. 


OF PLATO. 


S83v 

subsistence in itself, the straight , and the possession of parts . And again, 
of these the former are suspended from bound, but the latter from infinity. 
Plato also appears to produce the discourse through certain oppositions; 
as it were, that he may show* that the one is above all opposition. For 
the one cannot be the worse of the two opposites, since this would be 
absurd; nor can it be the better of the two, since in this case it would 
not be the cause of all things. For the better opposite is not the cause 
of the worse, but in a certain respect communicates with it, without 
being properly its cause. For neither does sameness give subsistence to 
difference, nor permanency to motion; but comprehension and union 
pervade from the better to the worse. 

It is, however, by no means wonderful that the demonstrations of the 
equal and the unequal , which are here assumed as symbols of mundane 
deity, should be adapted to physical and mathematical equals, to the 
equals in the reasons of soul, and to those in intellectual forms. For it 
is necessary that demonstrations in all these negations should begin 
supernally, and should extend through all secondary natures, that they 
may show that the one of the Gods is exempt from intellectual, psychical, 
mathematical, and physical forms. All such axioms, therefore, as are 
now assumed concerning things equal and unequal, must be adapted to 
this order of Gods. Hence, as it contains many powers, some of which 
are co-ordinate with each other, and extend themselves to the self-perfect 
and the good , but others differ according to transcendency and subjection 
— the former must be said to be characterized by equality , but the latter 
by inequality. For the good is the measure of every thing : and hence 
such things as are united by the same good are measured by the same 
measure, and are equal to each other. But things which are unco¬ 
ordinated with each other make their progression according to the 
unequal. 

Since, however, of things unequal, some are commensurate and others 
incommensurate, it is evident that these also must be adapted to divine 
natures. Hence commensuration must be referred to those Gods, through 
whom secondary natures are mingled with those prior to them, and par¬ 
ticipate of the whole of more excellent beings. For thus, in throgs com-’ 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



394 


OK THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VIL 


mens urate, the less is willing to have a common measure with the greater, 
the same thing measuring the whole of each. But incommensuration must 
be ascribed to those divinities from whom things subordinate, through the 
exempt transcendency of more excellent natures, participate of them in a 
certain respect, but are incapable through their subjection of being 
conjoined with the whole of them. For the communion proceeding from 
first to partial and multifarious natures is incommensurate to the latter. 
If, indeed, the equal and the Unequal are symbols of the mundane Gods, 
the commensurate and the incommensurate are here very properly intro¬ 
duced. For in things incorporeal and immaterial this opposition lias no 
place, all things being there effable; but where there is a material sub¬ 
ject, and a mixture of form and something formless, there an opposition of 
commensuration very properly subsists. Hence, as the mundane Gods 
are proximately connective of souls and bodies, form and matter, a division 
appears in them* according to the equal and the unequal. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

After the mundane Gods, the scientific order of discussion requires 
that we should consider divine souls, and the triple genera of natures more 
excellent than man, viz. angels, daemons, and heroes. Previous, however, 
to this, that I may as much as possible unfold to the reader the whole of 
the Platonic theory about the Gods, I shall present him with a develope- 
ment of the nature of certain other divinities mentioned by Plato; and 
'which, owing to the loss of the seventh book of Proclus, and of other 
theological works of the most genuine Platonists, cannot at this remote 
and barren period be scientifically classed. 

In the first place, then, I shall present the reader with what Plato says 
in the Pheedrus of Boreas and Orithya, the Centaurs, Chimaeras, Gorgons r 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXXV. 


OP PLATO. 


225 

Pegasuses, Typhons, Achclous, and the Nymphs, accompanied with the 
elucidations of Ammonius Hermeas. “ Phaedr. Inform me, Socrates, 
whether this is not the place in which Boreas is reported to have ravished 
Orithya from Ilissu9. Soc. It is reported so indeed. Phaedr. Was it not 
just here then? for the brooks hereabouts appear to be grateful to the 
view, pure and transparent, and very well adapted to the sports of virgins. 
Soc. It was not, but two or three stadia lower down, where we meet with 
the temple of Diana, and in that very place there is a certain altar sacred 
to Boreas. Phaedr. I did not perfectly know this. But tell me by 
Jupiter, Socrates, are you persuaded that this fabulous narration is true? 
Soc. If I should not believe in it, as is the case with the wise, I should 
not be absurd : and afterwards, speaking sophistically, I should say that 
the wind Boreas hurled from the neighbouring rocks Orithya, sporting 
with Pharmacia; and that she dying in consequence of this, was said to 
have been ravished by Boreas, or from the hill of Mars. There is also 
another report, that she was not ravished from this place, but from that. 
But for my own part, Phsedrus, I consider interpretations of this kind as 
pleasant enough, but at the same time, as the province of a man vehe¬ 
mently curious and laborious, and not entirely happy; and this for no 
other reason, than because after such an explanation, it is necessary for 
him to correct the shape of the Centaurs, and Chimsera. And besides 
this, a crowd of Gorgons and Pegasuses will pour upon him for an ex¬ 
position of this kind, and of certain other prodigious natures, immense 
both in multitude and novelty. All which, if any one, not believing in 
their literal meaning, should draw to a probable sense, employing for this 
purpose a certain rustic wisdom, he will stand in need of most abundant 
leisure. With respect to myself, indeed, I have not leisure for such an 
undertaking; and this because I am not yet able, according to the Del¬ 
phic precept, to know myself. But it appears to me to be ridiculous, 
while I am yet ignorant of this, to speculate things foreign from the 
knowledge of myself. Hence, bidding farewell to these, aud being per¬ 
suaded in the opinion which I have just now mentioned respecting them, 
I do not contemplate these, butmyself, considering whether I -am not a 
wild beast, possessing more folds than Typhon, and far more raging and 
Proe. Voi,, II. 2 F 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



226 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VIL 


fierce; or whether I am a more mild and simple animal, naturally parti* 
cipating of a certain divine and modest condition. But are we not, my 
friend, in the midst of our discourse arrived at our destined seat ? And 
is not yonder the oak to which you were to lead Us? Phaedr. That indeed 
is it. Soc. By Juno, a beautiful retreat. For the plane-tree very widely 
spreads its shady branches, and is remarkably tall ; and the height and 
opacity of the willow, are perfectly beautiful, being now in the vigour of 
its vegetation, and, on this account, filling all the place with the most 
agreeable odour. Add too, that a most pleafcant fountain of extreme 
cool water flows under the plane-tree, as may be inferred from its effect 
on our feet, and which appears to be sacred to Certain Nymphs, and to 
Achelous, from the virgins and statues with which it is adorned.” 

On this very beautiful passage, Hermes comments as follows: The 
Athenians established a temple of Rural Diana, because this Goddess is 
the inspective guardian of every thing rural, and represses every thing 
rustic and uncultivated. But the altars and temples of the Gods signify 
their allotments; as you may also call this mundane body, or apparent 
solar orb, the altar and temple of the sun, and of the soul of the sun. 

With respect to the fable, a two-fold solution may be given of it; one 
from history, more ethical, but the other transferring us to wholes. And 
the former of these is as follows : Orithya was the daughter of Erectheus, 
and the priestess of Boreas; for each of the winds has a presiding deity, 
which the.telestic art, or the art pertaining to sacred mysteries, religiously 
cultivates. To this Orithya, then, the God was so very propitious, tliht 
he sent the north wind for the safety of the country; and besides this, he 
is said to have assisted the Athenians in their naval battles. Orithya, 
therefore, becoming enthusiastic, being possessed by her proper God 
Boreas, and no longer energizing as a human being (for animals cease to 
energize according to their own peculiarities when possessed by superior 
causes) died under the inspiring influence, and thus was said to have been 
ravished by Boreas. And this is the more ethical explanation of the 
fable. 

But the second, which transfers the narration to wholes, is as follows, 
and does not entirely subvert the former: for divine fables often employ 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



/ 


CHAP. XXXV. OF PLAfO.. 227 

transactions and histories in subserviency to the discipline of wholes. 
They say, then, that Erectheus is the God that rules over the three 
elements, air, water, and earth. Sometimes, however, he is considered 
as alone the ruler of the earth, and sometimes as the presiding deity of ’ 
Attica alone. Of this deity, Orithya is the daughter. And she is the 
prolific power of the earth, which is indeed co-extended with the word 
Erectheus , as the unfolding of the name signifies. For it is the prolific 
power of the earth flourishing and restored according to the seasons . But 
Boreas is the providence of the Gods supernally illuminating secondary 
natures; for the providence of the Gods in the world is signified by 
Boreas, because this divinity blows from lofty places. But the elevating 
power of the Gods is signified by the south wind, because this wind blows 
from low to lofty places; and besides this, things situated towards the 
south are more divine.. The providence of the Gods, therefore, causes 
the prolific power of the earth, or of the Attic land, to ascend, and pro*- 
ceed into the apparent. 

Orithya, also, may be said to be a soul' aspiring after things above, 
from opoum and d«<», according to the Attic custom of adding a letter at 
the end of a word, which letter is here an m. Such a soul, therefore, is 
ravished by Boreas supernally blowing. But if Orithya was hurled from 
a. precipice, this also is appropriate. For such a soul dies a philo¬ 
sophic, not receiving a physical death, and abandons a proairetic , 1 at the 
same time that she lives a physical life. And philosophy, according to 
Socrates in the Phaedo, is nothing else than a meditation of death. 

According to some, however, Socrates in what he here says about 
Orithya and Boreas does not admit the explanation of fables. But it is 
Evident that he frequently does admit and employ fables. Now, indeed, 
he blames those explanations which make fables to be nothing more than 
certain histories, and unfold them into material causes, airs, and earth, 

* This is according to the psychical mode of interpreting fables. See my translation of Sallust 
On the Gods and the World. 

* This is a life pertaining to her own will; for die soul in this case gives herself up to the wQi 
of divinity. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



228 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VU. 


and winds,-which da not revert to true beings, nor harmonize with divine 
concerns. Hence, Socrates now says. If unfolding this fable I should 
recur to physical causes, and should assert that the wind Boreas, blow¬ 
ing vehemently, hurled Orithya as she was playing from the rock, and 
thus dying she was said to have been ravished by Boreas,—should I 
not speak absurdly? For this explanation which is adopted by the 
mse, viz. by those who are employed in physical speculations, is meagre 
and conjectural; since it does not recur to true beings, but to natures, 
and winds, airs and vortices, as he also says in the Phsedo. He Rejects, 
therefore, these naturalists, and those who thus explain this fable, as falling 
into the indefinite and infinite, and not recurring to soul, intellect, and 
the Gods. But when Socrates says that he considers such interpretations 
as the province of a man very curious and laborious , and not entirely 
happy, these words indicate the being conversant with things sensible 
and material. And the Centaurs, Chimseras, Gorgons, and Pegasuses, 
are powers which preside over a material nature, and the region about 
the earth.' 

When Socrates also says, that he is not yet able to know himself, his 
meaning may be, either that he does not yet know himself as pure soul 
itself, but that as being in body he knows himself; or that he does not 
yet know himself, as he is known by divinity. For if ever any man 
knew himself, this was certainly the case with Socrates. 

When likewise he says, “ I do not contemplate these, but myself;” this 
is because he who knows himself knows all things. For in consequence of 
the soul being xa/A/Mg<pov ayax/ta an omniform image, he beholds all things 
in himself. But by Typhon here we must understand that power which 
presides over the confused and disordered in the universe, or in other 
words over the last procession of things. The term manifold , therefore, 
in this place, must not be applied to the God Typhon, but to that over 
which he presides, as being in its own natpre moved in a confused, dis- 

' For an account of divine fables, and specimens of the mode in which they ought to be ex¬ 
plained, see the Introduction to the second Book of the Republic, in VoL I. of my translation of 
Plato. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXXVI. 


/ 'OF PLATO. 


229 


ordered, and manifold manner. For it is usual with fables to refer the 
properties of the objects of providential care to the providing powers 
themselves. 

Farther still, Socrates mentions Juno, as generating and adorning the 
beauty of the mundane fabrication; and hence she is said to have received 
the Cestiis from Venus. But Achelous is the deity who presides over the 
much-honoured power of water. For by this mighty river, the God who 
is the inspective guardian of potable water is manifested. And Nymphs 
are Goddesses who preside over regeneration, and are ministrant to 
Bacchus the offspring of Semele. But this Bacchus supplies the rege¬ 
neration of the whole sensible world. 

I shall only add, that Nymphs according to Servius on the first iEneid 
are distributed into three classes. But Nymphs belonging to. mountains 
are called Oreades; to woods, Dryades; those that are born with woods, 
Hamadryades ; those that belong to fountains, Napae, or Naiades; and 
those that belong to the sea. Nereides. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Again, the following divinities are also mentioned by Plato in different 
parts of his works. In the first place, Pan, at the end of the Phaedrus; 
to which divinity Socrates addresses the following admirable prayer: 
“ O beloved Pan, and all ye other Gods, who are residents of this place, 
grant that I may become beautiful within, and that whatever 1 possess 
externally may be friendly to my inward attainments! Grant also, that I 
may consider the wise man as one who abounds in wealth; and that I 
may enjoy that portion of gold, which no other than a prudent man is 
able either to bear, or properly manage!” In this prayer, by Pan and 
the other Gods, we must understand local deities under the moon. But 


Digitized by boogie 



230 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


Pan is denominated as it were all, because he possesses the most ample 
sway in the order of local Gods. For as the supermundane Gods are 
referred to Jupiter, and the celestial to Bacchus, so all the sublunary local 
Gods and daemons are referred to Pan. 

In the next place, Tartarus is mentioned by Plato in the Phsedo, as one 
of the greatest chasms of the earth; and of which, says lie, Homer' thus 
speaks: 

Far, very far, where under earth U found 

Ji gulf, of every depth, die most profound. 

But Tartarus, says Olympiodorus, is the extremity of the universe, and 
subsists oppositely to Olympus. It is also a deity, the inspective guard¬ 
ian of that which is last in every order. Hence, there is a celestial 
Tartarus, in which Heaven concealed his offspring; a Saturnian Tartarus, 
in which likewise Saturn concealed his offspring; and also a Jovian of 
this kind, which is demiurgic. 

Again, the characteristic peculiarity of Prometheus, as mentioned by 
Plato in the Gorgias, is thus unfolded by Olympiodorus in his MS. 
Scholia on that dialogue: Prometheus is the inspective guardian of the 
descent of rational souls. For to exert a providential energy is the em¬ 
ployment of the rational soul, and, prior to any thing else, to know itself. 
Irrational natures indeed perceive through percussion, and prior to 
impulsion know nothing; but the rational nature is able, prior to inform¬ 
ation from another, to know what is useful. Hence, Epimetheus is the 
inspective guardian of the irrational soul, because it knows through 
percussion, and not prior to it. Prometheus, therefore, is that power 
which presides over the descent of rational souls. But fire signifies the 
rational soul itself; because, as fire tends upwards, so the rational soul 
pursues things on high. But you will say, why is this fire said to have 
been stolen ? Because that which is stolen is transferred from its proper 
place to one that is foreign. Hence, since the rational soul is sent from 
its proper place of abode on high, to earth, as to a foreign region, on this 


1 Iliad, lib. viii. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXXVI. 


OF PJyATO. 


231 


account the fire is said to be stolen. But why was it concealed in a 
reed ? Because a reed is full of cavities, and therefore signifies the flowing 
body in which the soul is carried. But why was the fire stolen contrary 
to the will of Jupiter? Again, the fable speaks as a fable. For both 
Prometheus and Jupiter are willing that the soul should abide on bigh; 
but as it is requisite that she should descend, the fable fabricates particu¬ 
lars accommodated to the persons. And it represents indeed the supe¬ 
rior character, which is Jupiter, as unwilling; for he wishes the soul 
always to abide on high. But the inferior character, Prometheus, obliges 
her to descend: Jupiter, therefore, ordered Pandora to be made. And 
what else is this than the vTational soul , which is of a feminine character¬ 
istic? For as it was necessary that the soul should descend to these 
lower regions, but being incorporeal and divine, it was impossible for 
her to be conjoined with body without a medium, hence she becomes 
united with it through the irrational soul. But this irrational soul was 
called Pandora, because each of the Gods bestowed on it some particular 
gift. And this signifies that the illuminations which terrestrial natures 
receive take place through the celestial bodies. 1 

Again, in the Phaedo, mention is made by Plato of Cadmus, who, 
according to Olympiodorus, is the sublunary world, as being Dionysiacal, 
on which account Harmonia or Harmony is united to the God, and also 
as being the father of the four Bacchuses. The four dements likewise 
he informs us are said to be Dionysiacal, viz. jire to be Semele; earth, 
Agave, tearing in pieces her own offspring; water, lno ; and lastly, air, 
Autonoe. There is great beauty in conjoining Harmony, the daughter of 
Venus and Mars, with Cadmus. For Venus, as we have before observed, 
is the came of all the harmony and analogy in the universe, and beauti¬ 
fully illuminates the order and communion of all mundane concerns. But 
Mars excites the contrarieties of the universe, that the world may exist 
perfect and entire from all its parts. The progeny, therefore, of these 
two divinities must be the concordant discord, or harmony of the sublunary 
world. 

1 For the irrational soul is an immaterial body, or in other words, vitalized extension , such as 
the mathematical bodies which we frame in the phantasy; and the celestial bodies are of this kind. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


232 

Farther still, the Syrens are mentioned by Plato, both in the 10th 
book of the Republic, and in the Cratylus. And Proclus, in the 6th 
book of this work, has explained the meaning of what Plato says of them 
in the former of those dialogues. But in his MS. Scholia on the Cratylus 
he says, “ The divine Plato knew that there are three kinds of Sirens ; 
the celestial, which is under the government of Jupiter; that which 
produces generation, and is under the government of Neptune; and that 
which is cathartic, and is under the government of Pluto. It is common 
to all these, to incline all things through an harmonic motion to their 
ruling Gods. Hence, when the soul is in the heavens, the Sirens are 
desirous of uniting it to the divine life which flourishes there. But it is 
proper that souls living in generation should sail beyond them, like the 
Homeric Ulysses, that they may not be allured by generation, of which 
the sea is an image. And when souls are in Hades, the Sirens are 
desirous of uniting them through intellectual conceptions to Pluto. So 
that Plato knew that in the kingdom of Hades there are Gods, daemons, 
and souls, who dance as it were round Pluto, allured by the Sirens that 
dwell there.” 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


In the next place, let us direct our attention to Plato’s theological 
conceptions of Nature, Fate, and Fortune. From the Timaeus, therefore, 
it appears that Plato does not consider either matter, or material form, or 
body, or natural powers, as worthy to be called Nature, though it has 
been thus denominated by others. Nor does he think proper to call 
Nature soul; but establishing its essence between soul and corporeal 
powers, he considers it as inferior to the former through its being divided 
about bodies, and its incapacity of conversion to itself, but as surpassing 
the latter through containing the productive principles, and generating 


Digitized by 


Google 


d 



CHAP. XXXVII. 


Ob' PLAT6. 


233 


and vivifying every part of the visible world. For Nature verges towards 
bodies, and is inseparable from their fluctuating empire. But soul is 
separate from body, is established in herself, and subsists- both from 
herself and another; from another, that is, from intellect through partici¬ 
pation ; and from herself, on account of not verging to body, but abiding 
in her own essence, aud at the same time illuminating the obscure nature 
of matter with a secondary life. Nature, therefore, is the last of the 
causes which fabricate this corporeal and sensible world; bounds the 
progressions of incorporeal essences; and is full of reasons and powers 
through which she governs mundane afiaits. And stie is a Goddess 
indeed considered as deified, and not according to the primary significa¬ 
tion of the word; for divine bodies also are called Gods, as beihg the 
statues or images of the Gods. But she governs the whole world by her 
powers; by her summit comprehending the heavens ; but through heavetf 
governing generation. And she every where weaves partial natures in 
amicable conjunction with wholes. 

Nature, however, thus subsisting, she proceeds from the Vivific God¬ 
dess Rhea; (for 44 immense Nature, says the Chaldean oracle, is 
suspended from the shoulders of the Goddess;”) from whom all life is 
derived, both that which is intellectual, and that which is inseparable 
from the subjects of its government. But Nature being from thence 
suspended, she pervades through and inspires all things without impedi¬ 
ment. Hence, the most inanimate beings participate of a certain soul, 
and corruptible natures remain perpetually in the world, being connected 
and comprehended by the causes of forms which she contains. And 
those indeed who call Nature demiurgic art, if they mean by this the 
Nature which abides in the demiurgus himself, tl»ey do not speak rightly; 
but if they mean that which proceeds from him, their conception is 
accurate. For art must be considered as having a three-fold subsistence; 
one, that which does not proceed out of the artist; the second, that which 
proceeds indeed, but is converted to him; and the third, that which has 
now proceeded, and has its subsistence in something else. The art, there¬ 
fore, which is in the demiurgus, abides indeed in him; but the intellectual 
soul is art, yet at the same time both abiding and proceeding. And 
Proc. Vol. II, 2 G 


Digitized by boogie 



234 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


Nature is art, alone proceeding into something different from herself. 
Hence, she is said to be the organ of the Gods, not deprived of life, nor 
alter-motive alone, but having in a certain respect, a self-motive power, in 
consequence of energizing from herself. For the organs of the Gods are 
essentialized in efficacious powers, are vital, and concur with their ener¬ 
gies. And thus much concerning Nature according to the conceptions of 
Plato, as unfolded by Proclus. 

In the next place with respect to Fate, in the fable in the Politicus, 
Plato says, that “ Fate and connate desire convolve the world, when it is 
considered by itself as a corporeal nature, without the intellectual Gods." 
And in the Timaeus he represents the demiurgus exhibiting to souls the 
nature of the universe, and announcing to them the laws of Fate. On 
which Proclus admirably comments as follows: It must not be said, that 
Pate is a partial nature, as some of the Peripatetics assert it is; as for 
instance, Alexander; for such a nature is imbecil and not perpetual. 
For from common conceptions, we pre-assume that the power of Fate is 
something very great and stable. Nor must it be said, that it is the 
order of the mundane periods, as Aristotle asserts it to be, who denomi¬ 
nates the increase which is contrary to order preterfatal, as if order and 
Fate were the same. For the cause of order is one thing, but order itself 
is another. Nor is it soul subsisting in habitude, as Theodorus says; for 
such a form of life in wholes is not a principle. Nor is it simply Nature, 
as Porphyry says it is. For many things which are supernatural, and 
out of the dominion of Nature are produced by Fate, such as nobility, 
renpwn, and wealth. For where is it seen that physical motions become 
the cause of these? Nor is it the intellect of the universe, as again Aris¬ 
totle says in a certain place, if the treatise On the World was written by 
him. For intellect produces every thing which it produces at once, and 
is not at all in yvant of an administration which proceeds according to a 
certain period, and a continued and well-ordered series of things. But 
the chain, the order, the periodic production of many causes constitute 
the peculiarity of Fate. 

If, however, it be requisite to comprehend the whole form of it concisely, 
we must say, that ^subject matter as it were of it is Nature herself, but 


Digitized by L300Q e 



chap, xxxvri. 


OF PLATO. 


235 


considered as deified, and filled with divine, intellectual, and. psychical 
illuminations. For the order of Gods called the presidents of destiny, 
(rcuv fiotpyytToir xa\oofitva>v) and the genera that are more excellent than 
man terminate in Nature. For these impart powers from themselves 
to the one life of Nature; and the demiurgus of wholes collects and 
unites all these gifts, and demonstrates them to be one power. For if 
visible bodies [i. e. the celestial bodies], are filled with divine ' powers, 
Nature, is by a much greater priority divine. And if the whole visible 
world is one, much more is the whole essence of Fate one, and derives 
from many causes the completion of its composition. For being sus¬ 
pended from the providence of the Gods, and from demiurgic 
goodness, it is united and governed by it, being a productive principle 
subsisting from productive principles, one multiform power, a divine 
life, and an order of things that have a prior arrangement. Hence, the 
ancients looking to this its various and multiform nature, were led to 
form different opinions concerning it. And some indeed said that it is a 
Goddess, on account of that which is divine in it; others, that it is a 
daemon, on account of the efficacious and at the same time multiform 
nature of its production; others, that it is intellect, because a certain 
participation of intellect reaches it; but others, that it is order, so that 
every thing which has an arrangement is invisibly comprehended by it. 
Plato, however, alone surveyed the essence of it, asserting indeed that it 
is Nature, but Nature suspended from the demiurgus. For how could 
the demiurgus exhibit Nature to souls, otherwise than by containing 
the principle of it in himself? And how could he announce to them 
the laws of Fate, after exhibiting to them the Nature of the universe, 
except by constituting Nature as the one power that comprehends these 
laws ? 

Farther still, in the Politicus, Plato more clearly suspends the second 
life of the universe from Fate, after the departure of the one daemon, 
that governed it, and the many daemons that were the followers of that 
one. Hence, he separates all the providential care of these powers from 

■ It is necessary here to supply the word 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



236 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK" vir. 


the universe, and alone leaves it the government according to Fate; the 
world, indeed, always possessing both these, but the fable separating the 
first from the second. For he says, “ that Fate and connate desire 
convolve the world,” just as the Chaldaean oracles say, “ that unwearied 
Nature rules over the worlds and works, and draws downward in 'order 
that the heavens may run an eternal course; and that the other periods 
of the sun, the moon, the seasons, night and day may be accomplished,” 
Thus, therefore, Plato also says, that the second period of the world is 
convolved by Fate, and not the first and intellectual period, all but 
clearly asserting that Fate is the power which proximately moves the 
sensible world, and is suspended from the invisible providence of the 
Gods. For establishing Necessity the mother of the Fates prior to these, 
he represents her in the Republic convolving ‘ the world on her knees. 
And if it be requisite to give my opinion* Plato arranges these three 
causes of order successive to each other, vie. Adrastia, Necessity, and 
Fate; the first being intellectual, the second supermundane, and the 
third mundane. For the demiurgus as Orpheus says, was nourished 
indeed by Adrastia, but associated with Necessity, and generated Fate. 
And as Adrastia was comprehensive of divine institutions, 1 and the 
collector of alhvarious laws, thus also Fate is comprehensive of all the 
mundane laws, which the demiurgus now inscribes in souls, that he may - 
lead them in conjunction with wholes, and may define what is adapted 
to them according to the different elections of lives. Hence, a vicious 
life tends to that which is dark and atheistical, but a pious life leads the 
soul to the heavens to which she is also conducted by wholes ; because 
each, of these lives is full of the Jpws of Fate; and souls lead themselves, 
as Plotinus says, thither where the law that is in them announces. For 
this is the peculiarity of the providence of the Gods, to conduct inwardly 
the subjects for which it provides. And why is it wonderful that this 
should be the case, since Nature also inserting material and corporeal- 
formed powers in bodies, moves them through these powers; earth indeed 


*' Tor r;i$u here, it is necessary to read rrgipi. 
* For here raad W/tusv. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXXVII. 


OF PLATO. 


237 


through gravity, but fire through levity. In a much greater degree, 
therefore, do the Gods move souls through the powers which they 
disseminate in them. Hence, if they lead souls according to die laws of 
Fate, these laws also subsist in souls. And they pre-exist indeed intel¬ 
lectually in the demiurgus ; for the divine law is established with him. 
But they exist in divine souls; for according to these laws they govern 
the universe. And they are participated by partial souls; for through 
these they conduct themselves to an appropriate place, themselves 
moving themselves. And through deliberate choice,, indeed, they act 
erroneously and with rectitude; but through law they distribute to 
themselves an order adapted to their former conduct. 

In the last place with respect to Fortune, it is necessary to observe 
that Plato does not assert as the Stoics do, that the worthy man has no 
need of the assistance of this divinity; but he is of opinion that the 
energies of our reasoning power, since according to their external 
progression they are complicated with corporeal energies, require the 
inspiration of good Fortune, m order that they may be prosperous* and 
benefit others. Hence in the Timaeus and the Parmenides, the persons 
of the dialogues, are represented as meeting together through a certain 
good Fortune. And in the Laws he says, that God, and after God 1 , 
Fortune and Time govern all human affairs. “ Fortune, therefore,” says 
Proclus/ “ and- her gifts, are not things destitute of design and indefinite ; 
but she is a power collective of many dispersed causes, and which adorns 
things disordered, and gives completion to the allotments assigned to 
every thing from the universe.” According to Sallust in his elegant 
treatise On the Gods and the World, “^Fortune must be considered as a 
power of the Gods, disposing things differing from each other, and 
happening contrary to expectation, to beneficent purposes.” He adds, 
“ On this account it is proper that cities should celebrate this Goddess- 
in common ; since every city is composed of different particulars. But 
this Goddess holds her dominion in sublunary concerns, since every 
thing fortuitous is excluded from the regions above the moon.” 

v 

.*■ In Tim. p. <9. 


Digitized by boogie 



238 ON THE THEOLObY BOOK Vlf. 

In conformity to this, Simplicius also, in his Commentary On the 
Physics of Aristotle,' admirably observes concerning Fortune as follows : 
“ The power of Fortune particularly disposes in an orderly manner the 
sublunary part of the universe, in which contingencies subsist, and which 
being essentially disordered. Fortune, in conjunction with other primary 
Causes, directs, places in order, and governs. Hence she is represented 
guiding a rudder, because she governs things sailing on the sea of gene¬ 
ration, Her rudder too is fixed on a globe, because she directs that 
which is unstable in generation. In her other hand, she holds the horn 
of Amalthea, which is full of fruits, because she is the cause of obtaining 
all divine fruits. And on this account, we venerate the fortunes of cities 
and houses, and of each individual; because being very remote from 
divine union, we are in danger of being deprived of its participation, 
and require in order to obtain it the assistance of the Goddess Fortune, 
and of those natures' superior to the human who possess the characteristic 
of this divinity. Indeed, every fortune is good ; for every attainment 
respects something good, nor does any thing evil subsist from divinity. 
But of things that are good, some are precedaneous, and others are of a 
punishing or revenging characteristic, which we are accustomed to call 
evils. Hence we speak of two Fortunes, one of which we denominate 
Good, and which is the cause of our obtaining precedaneous goods, but 
the other Evil, which prepares us to receive punishment or revenge” 
And thus much concerning Fortune. 

* Lib. ii. p. 81. 

* i, e. Angel*, daemons, and heroes, 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXXVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


239 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

It remains that we should consider in the next place, what Time, Day 
and Night, Month and Year are, so far as they are deities, according to 
the theology of Plato; the Commentaries of Proclus on the Timaeus 
fortunately presenting us with much valuable information respecting the 
nature of these divinities. The speculation also of Time in this place will 
be very appropriate, as immediately after, the discussion of divine souls, 
angels, daemons and heroes will naturally follow, with whose essence 
Time is intimately and inseparably connected. Plato therefore in the 
Timaeus says, “ that while the demiurgus was adorning and distributing 
the universe, he at the same time formed an eternal image flowing 
according to number, of eternity abiding in one ; and which receives 
from us the appellation of time. But besides this he fabricated the 
generation of days and nights, and months and years, which had no 
subsistence prior to the universe, but which together with it rose into 
existence^ And all these indeed, are the proper parts of Time.” Proclus' 
in commenting on what Plato here says about Time, after having shown 
that it is neither any thing belonging to motion, nor an attendant on 
the energy of soul, nor, in short, the offspring of soul, investigates what it 
is in tiie following admirable manner: 

“ Perhaps, says he, it is not sufficient to say that it is the measure of 
mundane natures, nor to enumerate the goods of which it is the cause, 
but to the utmost of our power we should endeavour to apprehend its 
peculiarity. May we not therefore say, since its essence is most excel¬ 
lent, perfective of soul, and present to all things, that it is an intellect not 
only abiding but also subsisting in motion? Abiding indeed according to 
its inward energy, and by which it is truly eternal, but being moved 
according to its externally proceeding energy, by which it becomes the 
boundary of all transition. For eternity possessing permanency, both 

1 Lib. iv. p. 240, &c. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



240 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


according to its inward energy, and that which it exerts to things eternal. 
Time being assimilated to it, according to the former of these energies, 
becomes separated from it according to the latter, abiding and being 
moved. And as with respect to the essence of the 6oul, we say that it is 
intelligible and at the same time generated, partible, and at the same 
time impartible, and are no otherwise able to apprehend its middle 
nature than by employing after a manner opposites, what wonder is there 
if, perceiving the nature of Time to be partly immoveable, and partly 
subsisting in motion, we, or rather not we, but prior to us, the philoso¬ 
pher, through the eternal , should indicate its intellectual monad abiding 
in sameness, and through the moveable its externally proceeding energy, 
which is participated by soul and the whole world ? For we must not 
think that the expression the eternal simply indicates that Time is the 
image of eternity; for if this were the case, what would have hindered 
Plato from directly saying that it is the image, and not the eternal image 
of eternity ? But he was willing to indicate this very thing, that time has 
tin eternal nature, but not in such a manner as animal itself [the 
paradigm of the universe] is said to be eternal. For that is eternal both 
in essence and energy; but Time is partly eternal, and partly, by its 
external gift, moveable. Hence theurgists call it eternal; and Plato very 
properly denominates it not only so. For one thing is alone moveable, 
both essentially and according to the participants of it, being alone the 
cause of motion, as soul, and hence it alone moves itself and other things; 
but another thing is alone immoveable, preserving itself without transi¬ 
tion, and being the cause to other things of a perpetual subsistence after 
the same manner, and to moveable natures through soul. It is necessary 
therefore, that the medium between these two extremes should be that 
which, both according to its own nature, and the gifts which it imparts 
to others, is immoveable and at the same time moveable, essentially 
immoveable indeed, but moved in its participants. A thing however of 
tbis kind is Time. 

Hence Time is truly, so far as it is considered in itself, immoveable; 
but so far as it is in ,its participants, it is moveable, and subsists together 
with them, unfolding itself into them. It is therefore, eternal, and a 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. XXXVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


241 




monad and center essentially, and according to its own abiding energy; but 
it is at the same time, continuous, and number, and a circle, according to 
its proceeding and being participated. Hence, it is a certain proceeding 
intellect, established indeed in eternity, and on this account is said to be 
eternal. For it would not otherwise contribute to the assimilation of 
mundane natures to more perfect paradigms, unless it were itself 
previously suspended from them. But it proceeds and abundantly flows, 
into the things which are guarded by it. Whence I think the chief of 
theurgists celebrate Time as a God, as Julian in the seventh of the Zones, 
and venerate it by those names, through which it is unfolded in its 
participants, causing some things to be older, and others to be younger, 
and leading all things in a circle. Time therefore, possessing a certain 
intellectual nature, circularly leads according to number, both its other 
participants and souls. For Time is eternal, not in essence only, but also 
in its inward energy ; but so far as it is participated by externals, it is 
alone moveable, coextending and harmonizing with them the gift which 
it imparts. But every soul is transitively moved, both according to its 
inward and external energies, by the latter of which it moves bodies. 
And it appears to me that those who thus denominated Time xt ov °s had this 
conception of its nature, and were therefore willing to call it as it were 
Xogauovrof voug, an intellect moving in measure; but dividing the words, 
perhaps for the sake of concealment, they called it Perhaps too, 

they gave it this appellation because it abides and is at the same time 
moved in measure; by one part of itself abiding, and by the other 
proceeding with measured motion. By the conjunction therefore of both 
these, they signify the wonderful and demiurgic nature of this God. 
And it appears, that as the demiurgus being intellectual began from 
intellect to adorn the universe, so Time being itself supermundane, began 
from soul to impart perfection. For that Time is not only mundane, but by 
a much greater priority supermundane, is evident; since as eternity is 
to animal itself, the paradigm of the universe, so is Time to the world, 
which is animated and illuminated by intellect, and wholly an image of 
animal itself, in the same manner as Time of eternity. And thus much 
Proc. Vol. II. 8 H 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



242 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Vlt. 


concerning Time, according to its first subsistence, and considered as a 
God. 

With respect to Day and Night, according to their more principal 
subsistence, they are demiurgic measures of Time, exciting and convolving 
all the apparent and unapparent life and motion, and orderly distribution 
of the inerratic sphere. For these are the true parts of Time, are present 
after the same manner to all things, and comprehend the primary cause 
of apparent day and night, each of these having a different subsistence 
in apparent time; to which also Timaeus looking reminds us how time 
was generated together with the world. Hence he says in the plural 
number nights and days, and also months and years. But these are 
obvious to all men. For the unapparent causes of these have a uniform 
subsistence prior to things multiplied, and which circulate infinitely. 
Things immoveable also subsist prior to such as are moved, and intellec¬ 
tual natures are prior to sensibles. Such therefore, must be our 
conceptions of N ight and Day according to their first subsistence. 

By Month we must understand that truly divine temporal measure 
which convolves the lunar sphere, and every termination of the circulation 
about the zodiac. But Year is that which perfects and connects the 
whole of middle fabrication, according to which the Sun is seen possessing 
the greatest strength, and measuring all things in conjunction with Time. 
For neither Day nor Night, nor Month is without the Sun, nor much 
more Year, nor any other mundane nature. I do not here speak 
according to the apparent fabrication of things alone; for the apparent 
Sun is the cause of these measures; but also according to that fabrication 
which is unapparent. For, ascending higher, we shall find that the more 
true Sun 1 measures all things in conjunction with Time, being itself in 
reality Time of Time, according to the Chaldaean oracle concerning it. 
For that Plato not only knew these apparent parts of Time, but also 
those divine parts to which these are homonymous, is evident from the 
10th book of his Laws. For he there asserts that we call Hours and 
Months divine, as having the same divine lives, and divine intellects 

' Viz. the Sun considered as subsisting in the supermundane order of Gods. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXXVIII. 


OF PLATO. 


243 


presiding over them, as the universe. Let these therefore be the parts 
of Time, of which some are accommodated to the inerratic Gods, others 
to the Gods that revolve about the poles of the oblique circle, and others 
to other Gods, or attendants of the Gods, or to mortal animals, or the 
more sublime or more abject parts of the universe. 

Farther still, concerning Night and Day, Plato afterwards says, “ that 
through these, the period of one most wise circulation [i. e. the circulation 
of the inerratic sphere,] was produced on which Proclus observes as 
follows: “It may be doubted how Plato calls Night and Day the measure 
of the circulation of this sphere. For this measure is every where, 
originating supernally from the one intelligible cause of the universe, and 
the first paradigm ; but in the sublunary region it is the space of day and 
night. In answer to this, it must be said that the temporal interval 
which first subsists in the circulation of the inerratic sphere, and the solar 
light are productive of the nycthemeron or space of day and night. From 
the last of things therefore, and which are known to us, the whole 
measure is defined. For this nycthemeron is one thing, but another that 
which subsists in unapparent time. And the former is the image and 
ultimate termination of the latter. For there are many orders of Night 
and Day, intelligible and intellectual, supermundane, celestial and sub¬ 
lunary, as we are taught by the Orphic theology. And some of these 
indeed, are prior to fabrication ; but others are comprehended in it; and 
others proceed from it. Some also are unapparent, but others are 
apparent. For with respect likewise to Month and Year, one order of 
these is unapparent, measures, connectedly contains, and gives perfection 
to the intellectual and corporeal periods of the sun and moon; but 
another is apparent, which terminates and is the measure of the solar 
revolution. Thus too in the other Gods, the unapparent Saturnian 
number is one thing, and the apparent another. And in a similar 
manner the unapparent and apparent Martial, Jovian and Mercurial 
numbers differ from each other. For with respect to Month and Year, 
each of these being one according to each period, and always the same, 
is a certain God, immoveably bounding the measure of motion. For 
whence have the periods alwaj's an invariable sameness, except from a 


Digitized by v^oogle 



244 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


certain immoveable cause ? And whence do they derive the difference of 
their restitutions to their pristine state, except from different immoveable 
causes ? Whence also the unceasing, and the again and again to infinity, 
except from the infinite powers they contain ? But Plato considering all 
this series as temporal, arranges it under one and that the first Time, 
which defines the periodic time of a perpetually circulating body, and is, 
as we have before observed, true number. From these invisible causes 
however, we must conceive the visible periodic times are derived, 
proceeding from them according to that which is numbered, since they 
are able both to number and generate them. And in all these astronomy 
beautifully instructs us, doxastically apprehending the number of the 
periodic restitutions of each; and making comparisons of the ratios of 
the periods to each other; such as that the Saturnian period, is the 
double and a half of the period of Jupiter, and in a similar manner of 
the rest. For though their restitutions differ, yet they have a ratio to 
each other. Sacred rumour also venerates the unapparent causes of 
these, proclaiming the divine names of Night and Day, and also the 
causes that constitute, and the invocations, and self-manifestations of 
Month and Year. Hence, they are not to be surveyed superficially, but 
as having a subsistence in divine hyparxes. And these the laws of 
sacred institutions, and the oracles of Apollo ordered to be worshiped 
and honoured by statues and sacrifices, as histories inform us. When 
these also are reverenced, mankind are supplied with the benefits arising 
from the periods of the Seasons, and of the other divinities in a similar 
manner; but a preternatural disposition of every thing about the earth, 
is the consequence of the worship of these being neglected.” 1 Plato 
likewise in the Laws proclaims that all these are Gods, viz. the Seasons, 
Years and Months, in the same manner as the stars and the sun; and 

1 << But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense 
unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our 
fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: for 
then had we plenty of victuals , and were well , and saw no evil. But since we left off to bum 
incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things , 
and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.” Jeremiah. Chap. xliv. v. 17, IB. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


245 


we do not introduce any thing new by thinking it proper to direct our 
attention to the unapparent powers of these prior to those that are 
apparent.” And thus much concerning Time, Day and Night, Month 
and Year, considered according to their first subsistence, by which they 
are Gods. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


After the Gods, it is necessary in the next place to consider the order 
of divine souls, who are deified by always participating of the Gods. 
This order, Plato in the Parmenides denies of the one as follows : “ Does 
it appear that the one can be either older or younger, or be of the same 
age? What should hinder? If it had in any respect the same age, either 
with itself, or with another, it would participate equally of time and 
similitude, which we have nevertheless asserted the one does not partici¬ 
pate. We have asserted so. And this also we have said, that it neither 
participates of dissimilitude nor inequality. Entirely so. How therefore 
being such, can it either be older or younger than any thing, or possess 
the same age with any thing ? It can in no respect. The one therefore, 
will neither be younger nor older, nor will it be of the same age, either 
with itself or with another. It does not appear that it will. Will it not 
therefore, be impossible that the one should be at all in time, if it be such? 
Or, is it not necessary that, if any thing is in time, it should always 
become older than itself? It is necessary. But is not that which is older, 
always older than the younger? What then? Hence that which is 
becoming to be older than itself, is at the same time becoming to be 
younger than itself, if it is about to have that through which it may 
become older. How do you say ? Thus: It is requisite that nothing 
should subsist in becoming to be different from another, when it is already 
different, but that it should be now different from that which is different, 


Digitized by boogie 



246 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


have been from that which was , and will be from that which is to be here¬ 
after. But from that which is becoming to be different, it ought neither to 
have been , nor to be hereafter , nor to be, but to subsist in becoming to be 
different, and no otherwise. It is necessary. But the older differs from 
the younger, and no other. Certainly. Hence, that which is becoming 
to be older than itself, must necessarily at the same time subsist in becoming 
to be younger than itself. It seems so. But likewise it ought not to 
subsist in becoming to be in a longer time than itself, nor yet in a shorter ; 
but in a time equal to itself it should subsist in becoming to be , should be, 
have been , and be hereafter. For these are necessary. It is necessary, 
therefore, as it appears, that such things as are in time, and participate 
an affection of this kind, should each one possess the same age with 
itself, and should subsist in becoming to be both older and younger than 
itself. It seems so. But no one of these passions belongs to the one. 
None. Neither, therefore, is time present with it, nor does it subsist 
in any time. It does not indeed according to the decisions of reason." 

Plato having proceeded, says Proclus, as far as to the mundane Gods, 
always taking away things in a consequent order from the one , through 
the middle genera, or, to speak more clearly, the negations always 
producing things secondary, through such as are proximate to the one , 
from the exempt cause of wholes, he is now about to separate from the 
one the divine essence itself, which first participates of the Gods, and 
receives their progression into the world; or, to speak more accurately, 
he is now about to produce this essence from the ineffable fountain of 
all beings. For, as every thing which has being derives its subsistence 
from the monad of beings, both true being , and that which is assimilated 
to it, which of itself indeed is not, but through its communion with true 
being receives an obscure representation of being; in like manner from 
the one unity of every deity, the peculiarity of which, if it be lawful so 
to speak, is to deify all things according to a certain exempt and ineffable 
transcendency, every divine number subsists, or rather proceeds, and 
every deified order of things. The design, therefore, as we have before 
observed, of what is now said, is to show that the one is exempt from, 
and therefore produces this essence. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XXXIX. 


OF PLATO. 


247 


And here we may see how Parmenides subverts their hypothesis who 
contend that the first cause is soul, or any thing else of this kind, and 
this by showing that the one does not participate of time. For it is 
impossible that a nature which is exempt from time should be soul; 
since every soul participates of time, and uses periods which are 
measured by time. The one also is better than, and is beyond intellect, 
because every intellect is both moved and permanent; but it is demon¬ 
strated that the one neither stands still, nor is moved. Hence through 
these things, the three hypostases which rank as principles, viz. the one , 
intellect , and soul, become, known to us. But that the one is perfectly 
exempt from time, Parmenides demonstrates by showing in the first 
place, that it is neither older nor younger, nor of the same age with itself, 
nor with any other. For every thing which participates of time neces¬ 
sarily participates of these ; so that by showing that the one is exempt 
from these which happen to every thing that participates of time, he also 
shows that the one has no connexion with time. This, however, is 
incredible to the many, and appeared so to the physiologists prior to 
Plato, who thought that all things were comprehended in time, and 
that, if there is any thing perpetual, it is infinite time, but that there is 
not any thing which time does not measure. For, as they were of 
opinion that all things are in place, in consequence of thinking that all 
things are bodies, and that nothing is incorporeal, so they thought that 
all things subsist in time, and are in motion, and that nothing is 
immoveable; for the conception of bodies introduces with itself place, 
but motion time. As, therefore, it was demonstrated that the one is not 
in place, because it is not in another, and on this account is incorporeal, 
—in like manner through these arguments it is also shown that neither is 
it in time, and on this account that it is not soul, nor any thing else 
which requires and participates of time, either according to essence or 
according to energy. 

And here it is well worthy our observation that Parmenides no longer 
stops at the dyad as in the former conclusions, but triadically enumerates 
the peculiarities of this order, viz. the older, the younger , and the posses¬ 
sion of the same age, though he might have said dyadically, of an equal 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



248 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK Vlf. 


age, and of an unequal age , as there the equal and the unequal. But 
there indeed having previously introduced the dyad, he passes from the 
division of the unequal to the triadic distribution; but here he begins 
from the triad. For there union precedes multitude, and the whole the 
parts; but in this order of things multitude is most apparent, and a 
division into parts, as Timaeus says, whom Parmenides, in what is now 
said imitating, begins indeed from the triad, but proceeds as far as to the 
hexad. For, the older and the younger , and the possession of the same 
age , are doubled, being divided into itself and relation to another. That 
the triad, indeed, and the hexad are adapted to this order is not 
immanifest. For the triple nature of soul, consisting of essence , same and 
different , and its triple power, which receives its completion from the 
charioteer and the two horses, as we learn from the Phaedrus,' evince its 
alliance with the triad; and its essence being combined from both these 
shows its natural alliance with the hexad. 

It is likewise necessary to observe, that as the discourse is about divine 
souls who are deified by always participating of the Gods, Time according 
to its first subsistence pertains to these souls,—not that which proceeds 
into the apparent, but that which is liberated, and without habitude; 
and this is the Time which is now denied of the one. All the periods of 
souls, their harmonious motions about the intelligible, and their circula¬ 
tions, are measured by this Time. For it has a supernal origin, imitates 
eternity, and connects, evolves, and perfects every motion, whether vital, 
or pertaining to soul, or in whatever other manner it may be said to 
subsist. This Time also is indeed essentially an intellect, as we have 
before observed ; but it is the cause to divine souls, of their harmonic and 
infinite motion about the intelligible, through which these likewise are 


* In this dialogue, Plato assimilates the intimate form of the soul to a winged chariot and 
charioteer, drawn by two horses; and says, “ that all the horses and chariots of the Gods are 
good, and composed of things that are good.” In which passage, by the chariots of the Gods are 
to be understood all the inward discursive powers of their souls, which pursue the intelligence of 
all things, and can at the same time equally contemplate and provide for inferior concerns. But 
the horses signify the efficacy and motive vigour of these powers. And the wings are elevating 
powers, which particularly belong to the charioteer, or intellect. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XXXTX. 


OF PLATO. 


249 


led to the older and to the same age : and this in a twofold respect. For 
the older in these* with respect to themselves takes place, so far as with 
their more excellent powers they enjoy in a greater degree the infinity of 
Time, and participate it more abundantly. For they are not filled with 
similar perfection from more divine natures, according to all their powers, 
but with some more, and with others less. But that is said to be older 
which participates more of time. That which is older in these divine 
souls srith respect to other things is effected, so far as some of these receive 
the whole measure of Time, and the whole of its extension proceeding to 
souls, but others are measured by more partial periods. Those therefore 
are older, whose period is more total, and is extended to a longer time. 
They may also be said to be older and at the same time younger toith 
respect to themselves , by becoming hoary as it were above, through 
extending themselves to the whole power of Time, but juvenile beneath, 
by enjoying Time more partially. But, as with respect to others , they 
fnay be said to be older and at the same time younger according to a 
diminution of energy. For that which has its circulation measured by a 
less period is younger than that whose circulation is measured by a more 
extended period. 

Again, among things co-ordinate, that which has the same participation 
and the same measure of perfection with othere may be said to be of the 
same age with itself and others. But every divine soul, though its own 
period is measured according to one Time, and that of the body which 
is suspended from it according to another, yet it has an equal restitution 
to the same condition; itself always according to its own Time, and its 
body also according to its time. Hence, again, it is of the same age 
with itself and its body, according to the analogous. By thus inter¬ 
preting what is now said of the one , we shall accord with Plato in the 
Timeeus, who there evinces that Time is the measure of every transitive 
life, and who says that soul is the origin of a divine and wise life through 
the whole of time. And we shall also accord with his assertion in the 
Phaedrus, that souls see true being through Time, because they perceive 
temporally and not eternally. 

Farther still, Plato here demonstrates that the one is neither older nor 
Pivc, Vo l. II. 2 I 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



250 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


book vn* 


younger than itself, or another. For it was necessary to show that the 
one is beyond every divine soul, prior to other souls, in the same manner 
as it is demonstrated to be prior to true beings, and to be the cause of 
all things. Hence, since it is the cause of every divine soul, so far as 
these derive their subsistence as well as all beings from the divine unities, 
with great propriety is it necessary to show that the one is beyond the 
order of deified souls. For these souls so far as they are intellectual 
have intellect for their cause; so far as they are essences they originate 
from being; and so far as they have the form of unity, they are derived 
from the one ; receiving their subsistence from this, so far as each is a 
multitude consisting of certain unities, and of these as elements. 

Again, that which participates of time is twofold, the one proceeding, 
as it were, in a right line, and beginning from one thing, and ’ending in 
another; but the other proceeding circularly, and having its motion from 
the same to the same, to which both the beginning and the end are the 
same, and the motion is unceasing, every thing in it being both beginning 
and end. That, therefore, which energizes circularly, participates of 
time periodically: and so far as it departs from the beginning it becomes 
older, but so far as it approaches to the end it becomes younger. For 
becoming nearer the end, it becomes nearer to its proper beginning. But 
that which becomes nearer to. its beginning becomes younger. Hence, 
that which circularly approaches to the end becomes younger, the same 
also according to the same becoming older; for that which approximate* 
to its end proceeds to that which is older. That to which the beginning 
therefore is one thing, and the end another, to this the younger is different 
' from the older; but that to which the beginning and the end are the 
same* is in no respect older than younger, but as Plato says, at the same 
time becomes younger and older titan itself. Every thing, therefore, 
which participates of time, if it becomes both older and younger than 
itself,'is circularly moved. But divine souls are of this kind: for they 
participate of time, and the time of their proper motion is periodical 


Digit ized by 


Google 


CHAP. XL. 


OF PLATO.. 


251 


CHAPTER XL. 


Having in the preceding chapters presented the reader from the most 
genuine sources, with all the information that can at present be obtained 
concerning the mundane Gods, the order of scientific theology requires 
that those perpetual attendants of the Gods, denominated angels, daemons 
and heroes, should be in the next place considered. As all these 
ministrant powers however, are frequently called by one name daemons ; 
and as Love is denominated by Plato a great daemon, and contains in 
himself the paradigm of the whole daemoniacal series, it is necessary that 
the developement of the nature of Love should precede the discussion of 
the peculiarities of daemons. The following admirable account therefore 
of this mighty divinity, by Proclus the Coryphaeus of all true philosophers, 
is extracted firom his MS. Commentary on the First Alcibiades of Plato. 

There are different properties of different Gods. For some are the 
fabricators of wholes, of the form of beings, and of their essential 
ornament. But others are the suppliers of life, and are the sources of 
its various genera. Others again preserve the unchangeable order, and 
guard the indissoluble connexion of things. And others lastly, who are 
allotted a different power, preserve all things by their beneficent energies. 
In like manner every amatory order is the cause to all things of conversion 
to divine beauty, leading back, conjoining, and establishing all secondary 
natures in the beautiful, replenishing them from thence, and irradiating 
all things with the gifts of its light. On this account it is asserted in the 
Banquet of Plato that Love is a great daemon, because Love first 
demonstrates in itself a power of this kind, and is the medium between 
the object of desire and the desiring nature, and is the cause of the 
conversion of subsequent to prior natures. The whole amatory series 
therefore, being established in the vestibule of the cause of beauty, calls 
upwards all things to this cause, and forms a middle progression between 
the object of Love and the natures which are recalled by Love. Hence it 


Digitized by boogie 



25 * 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK nr. 


pre-establishes in itself the paradigm of the whole daerUoniacal order, 
obtaining the same middle situation among the Gods as daemons between 
divine and mortal natures. Since therefore, every amatory series pos¬ 
sesses this property among the Gods, we must consider its uniform and 
occult summit as ineffably established in the first orders of the Gods, 
and conjoined with the first and intelligible beauty; its middle process as 
shining forth among the supermundane Gods, with an intellectual: 
condition; its third progression as possessing an exempt power among, 
the liberated Gods; and its fourth as multifariously distributed about 
the world, producing, many orders and powers from itself,.and distributing, 
gifts of this kind to the different parts of the world. 

But after the unific and first principle of Love, and after the tripartite- 
essence perfected from thence, a various multitude of Loves shines forth 
with divine light, from whence the choirs of angels are filled with Love > 
and the herds of daemons full, of this God attend on the Gods who are 
recalled to intelligible beauty. Add too, that the army of heroes, together 
with daemons and angels, are agitated about the participation of the 
beautiful with divine bacchanalian fury. Lastly, all. things are excited,, 
revive and flourish through the influx of the beautiful. But the souls of 
such men as receive an inspiration of this kind, and are naturally allied 
to the God, assiduously move about beauty, and fall into the realms of 
generation, for the purpose of benefiting more imperfect souls, and 
providing for those natures which require to be saved. The Gods indeed,, 
and the attendants on the Gods, abiding in their proper habits, benefit all 
following natures, and convert them to themselves; but the souls of men. 
. descending, and touching on the coasts of generation, imitate the benefit 
cent providence of the Gods. As, therefore, souls established according, 
to some other God descend with purity into the regions of mortality, 
and benefit souls that revolve in it and some indeed benefit more' 
imperfect souls by prophecy, others by mystic ceremonies, and others by 
divine medicinal skill;—thus also souls that chuse an amatory life, are 
moved about the deity who presides over beautiful natures, for the 
purpose of taking care of well-born souls. But from apparent beauty they 
arc led back to divine beauty, and together with themselves elevate those 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. XL. 


OF PLATO. 


f5S 

who are the objects of their love- And this also divine Love primarily 
effects in intelligibles. For he unites himself to the object of love, 
extends to it the participants of his power, and inserts in all things one 
bond, and one indissoluble friendship with each other, and with the 
beautiful itself. Souls therefore possessed with Love, and participating 
the inspiration thence derived, in consequence of using an undefiled 
vehicle, are led from apparent to intelligible beauty, and make this the end 
of their energy. Likewise enkindling a light in more imperfect souls, 
they also lead these back to a divine nature, and are divinely agitated 
together with them about the fountain of all-perfect beauty. 

But such souls as from a perverse education fall from the gift which » 
thence derived, yet are allotted an amatory nature, these, through theii 
ignorance of true beauty, are busily employed about that which is material 
and divisible, at which also they are astonished in consequence of not 
knowing the passion which they suffer. Hence, they abandon every 
thing divine, and gradually decline into impiety and the darkness of 
matter. They appear indeed to hasten to a union, with the beautiful, ht 
the same manner as perfectly amatory souls; but they are ignorant of 
the union, and tend to a dissipated condition of life, and to matter, which 
Plato calls the sea of dissimilitude. They are also conjoined with the 
base itself, and material privation of form. For where are material 
natures able to pervade through each other ? Or where is apparent beauty, 
pure and genuine, being thus mingled with matter, and replete with the 
deformity of its subject ? Some souls therefore genuinely participate the 
gifts of Love, and by others these gifts are perverted. For as according 
to Plotinus the defluxion of intellect produces craft, and an erroneous 
participation of wisdom sophistry, so likewise the illumination of Love 
when it meets with a depraved recipient, produces a tyrannic and 
intemperate life. 


Digitized by 


Google 



154 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


CHAPTER XLI. 

In another part, likewise, of the same admirable Commentary, Proclus 
presents us, as he says, with some of the more arcane assertions con¬ 
cerning Love; and these are as follow: 

Love is neither to be placed in the first, nor among the last of beings. 
Not in the first, because the object of Love is superior to Love: nor yet 
among the last, because the lover participates of Love. It is requisite, 
therefore, that love should be established between the object of Love and 
the lover, and that it should be posterior to the beautiful, but prior to 
evety nature endued with love. Where then does it first subsist? How 
does it extend itself through the universe, and with what monads does it 
leap forth? 

There are three hypostases, therefore, among the intelligible and occult 
Gods. And the first, indeed, is characterized by the good, understanding 
the good itself, and residing in that place where according to the oracle 
the paternal monad abides. But the second is characterized by wisdom, 
where the first intelligence flourishes. And the third by the beautiful, 
where, as Tknteus says, the most beautiful of intelligibles abides. There 
are, however, three monads according to these intelligible causes, subsist¬ 
ing uniformly and causally in intelligibles, but first unfolding themselves: 
into light in the ineffable order of the Gods, * I mean Faith, Truth, and 
Love. And Faith indeed establishes all things in good; but Truth : 
unfolds all the knowledge in beings; and lastly. Love converts all things, 
and congregates them into the nature of the beautiful. This triad* 
indeed, thence proceeds through all the orders of the Gods, and imparts 
to all things, by its light, a union with intelligible itself. It also unfdlds 
itself differently in different orders, every where combining its powers 
with the peculiarities of the Gods. And among some jt subsists ineffably, 
incomprehensibly, and unifically; but among others, as the cause of 

* i. (C. In the summit of that order which is called intelligible and at the same time intellectual. 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. XLl. 


OF PLATO. 


255 


connecting and binding; and among others, as endued with a perfective 
and forming power. Here again, it subsists intellectually and paternally; 
but there in a manner entirely motive, vivific, and effective. Here, as 
governing and assimilating; there in a liberated and undefiled manner; 
and elsewhere according to a multiplied and dividing mode. Love, there* 
fore, supernally descends from intelligibles to mundane natures, calling 
all things upwards, to divine beauty.. Truth also proceeds through all 
things, illuminating all things with knowledge. And lastly, Faith 
proceeds through the universe, establishing all things unically in 
good. Hence the Chaldaean oracles assert that all things are governed 
by, and abide in, these. And on this account they order Theurgists to 
conjoin themselves to divinity through this triad. Intelligibles themselves, 
indeed, db not require the amatory medium, on account of their inefiable 
union. But where there is a union and separation of beings, there also 
Love abides. For it is the binder and conciliator of natures posterior 
and prior to itself ; but the converter of subsequent into prior, and the 
elevating and perfecting cause of imperfect natures. 

The Chaldaean oracles, therefore, speak of Love as binding, and residing 
in all things: and hence, if it connects all things, it also copulates us 
with the governments of daemons. But Diotima in the Banquet, calls 
Love a great daemon, because it every where fills up the medium between 
desiring and desirable natures. And indeed that which is the object of 
Love vindicates to itself the first order; but that which loves is in the 
third order from the beloved object. . Lastly, Love usurps a middle 
situation between each, congregating and collecting together that which 
desires and that which is desired, and filling subordinate from better 
natures. But among the intelligible and occult Gods, it unites intelligi* 
ble intellect to the first and secret beauty by a certain life better than 
intelligence. Hence, the theologist of the Greeks [Orpheus}, calls this. 
Love, blind; for he says. 

In his breast feeding, eyless, rapid Lenre * 


' woifmuttw npeanStvav) eanp^urw axuv tpanat 


Digitized by boogie 



ON THB THEOLOGY 


BOOK Ytl. 


*56 

But in natures posterior to intelligibles, it imparts by illumination an 
indissoluble bond to all things perfected by itself; for a bond is a certain 
union, but accompanied with much separation. On this account the 
Cbialdtean oracles are accustomed to call the fire of this Love a copulator. 
For proceeding from intelligible intellect, it binds all following natures to 
each other, and to itself. Hence, it conjoins all the Gods with intelligible 
beauty, and daemons with Gods; but it conjoins us both with Gods and 
daemons. Tn the Gods indeed it has a primary subsistence; in daemons 
a secondary one; and in partial souls a subsistence through a certain 
third procession from principles. Again, in the Gods it subsists above 
essence; for every genus of Gods is superessential. But in daemons it 
subsists according to essence; and in souls according to illuminationw 
And this triple order appears similar to the triple power of intellect. For 
one intellect subsists as imparticipahie, being exempt from all partial 
genera; but another as participated, of which also the souls of the Gods 
participate as of a better nature; and another is from this ingenerated in 
souls, and which is indeed their perfection. And these three distinctions 
of intellect Thnseus himself indicates. Hence, that Love which subsists 
in the Gods must be considered as analogous to imparticipable intellect; 
for this is exempt from all the beings which receive and are illuminated 
by its nature. But daemoniacal Love is analogous to participated intel¬ 
lect ; for this is essential and is perfected from itself, in the same manner 
as participated intellect is proximately resident in souls. And the third 
Love is analogous to intellect which subsists as a habit, and which inserts 
an illumination in souls. Nor is it unjustly that wc consider Love as 
co-ordinate with this intellectual difference; for in intelligible intellect it 
possesses its first and occult subsistence. And if it thence leaps forth, it 
is also established there according to cause. It likewise appears to me 
that Plato finding that intelligible intellect was called by Orpheus 
both Love and a great daemon, was himself pleased to celebrate Love in 
a similar manner. Very properly, therefore, does Diotima call it a great 
daemon. And Socrates conjoins the discourse about Love with that 
concerning daemons. For as every thing daetnoniacal is suspended from 
the amatory medium, so likewise the discourse concerning a daemo'niacal 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XLII. 


OF PLATO. 


257 


nature is conjoined with that concerning Love, and is allied to it. For 
Love is a medium between the object of Love and the lover ; and a 
daemon is a medium between man and divinity. 


CHAPTER XLII. 


The nature of daemons, therefore, remains in the next place to be more 
fully disclosed; for the reader has been already presented with some very 
important information concerning them, in the discussion of the sublunary 
Gods. As there is no vacuum then in corporeal, so neither in incorporeal 
natures. Hence, between divine essences which are the first of things, 
and partial essences such as ours, which are nothing more than the dregs 
of the rational nature, there must necessarily be a middle rank of beings, 
in order that divinity may be connected with man, and that the progres¬ 
sion of things may form an entire whole, suspended like the golden chain 
of Homer from the summit of Olympus. This middle rank of beings, 
considered according to a two-fold division, consists of daemons and 
heroes, the latter of which is proximate to partial souls such as ours, and 
the former to divine natures, just as air and water subsist between fire 
and earth. Hence, whatever is ineffable and occult in the Gods, daemons 
and heroes express and unfold. They likewise conciliate all things, and 
are the sources of the harmonic consent and sympathy of all things with 
each other. They transmit divine gifts to us, and equally carry back 
ours to the divinities. But the characteristics of divine natures are unity, 
permanency in themselves, a subsistence as an immoveable cause of 
motion, transcendent providence, and which possesses nothing in common 
with the subjects of their providential energies. And these characteristics 
are preserved in them according to essence, power and euergy. On the 
other hand, the characteristics of partial souls are, a declination to raul- 
JProc. Vol. II. • 2 K 


/ 


Digitized by boogie 



258 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


titude and motion, a conjunction with the Gods, an aptitude to 
receive something from other natures, and to mingle together all things 
in itself, and through itself. And these characteristics they also possess 
according to essence, power and energy. Such then being the peculia¬ 
rities of the two extremes, we shall find that those of daemons are to con¬ 
tain in themselves the gifts of divine natures, in a more inferior manner 
indeed than the Gods, but yet so as to comprehend the conditions of 
subordinate natures, under the idea of a divine essence. In other words, 
the prerogatives of deity characterize and absorb as it were by their 
powerful light, whatever daemons possess peculiar to inferior beings. 
Hence, they are multiplied indeed but unitedly; mingled, but yet so that 
the unmingled predominates; and are moved, but with stability. On the 
contrary, heroes possess unity, identity, permanency, and every excel¬ 
lence, under the condition of multitude, motion, and mixture; viz. the 
prerogatives of subordinate predominate in these over the characteristics 
of superior natures, yet so as never to induce a cessation of energy 
about, or oblivion of, divinity. In short, daemons and heroes are composed 
of the properties of the two extremes—Gods and partial souls; but in 
daemons there is more of the divine, and in heroes more of the human 
nature. 

Having premised thus much, 1 shall next present the reader with all 
the information I have been able to collect from the most genuine Plato- 
nists, and especially from Proclus, on the nature of this middle order of 
beings. In the first place, therefore, what follows on this subject is 
derived from the MS. Commentary of Proclus On the First Alcibiades, 
in which extract also the nature of the daemon of Socrates is unfolded, 
about which modern wit has been so much puzzled, and so egregiously 
mistaken. 

Let us now speak first, concerning daemons in general; secondly, 
concerning those that are allotted us in common; and thirdly, concerning 
the daemon of Socrates. For it is always requisite that demonstrations 
should begin from things more universal, and proceed from these as far 
as to individuals. For this mode of proceeding is natural, and is more 
adapted to science. Daemons, therefore, deriving their first subsistence 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XLII. 


OF PLATO. 


259 


from the vivific Goddess [Juno], and flowing from thence as from a 
certain fountain, are allotted an essence characterized by soul. This 
essence in those of a superior order is more intellectual, and more perfect 
according to hyparxis; in those of a middle order it is more rational; 
and in those which rank in the third degree, and which subsist at the 
extremity of the daemoniacal order, it is various, more irrational, and 
more material. Possessing, therefore, an essence of this kind, they are 
distributed in conjunction with the Gods, as being allotted a power 
ministrant to deity. Hence, they are in one way subservient to the libe¬ 
rated Gods, who are the leaders of wholes prior to the world; and in 
another to the mundane Gods, who proximately preside over the parts of 
the universe. For there is one division of daemons according to the 
twelve supercelestial Gods, and another according to all the peculiarities 
of the mundane Gods. For every mundane God is the leader of a certain 
daemoniacal order, to which he proximately imparts his power; viz. if he 
is a demiurgic God, he imparts a demiurgic power; if immutable, an 
undefiled power; if telesiurgic, a perfective power. And about each 
of the divinities, there is an innumerable multitude of daemons, and 
which are dignified with the same appellations as their leading Gods. 
Hence, they rejoice when they are called by the names of Jupiter, 
Apollo, and Hermes, &c. as expressing the peculiarity of their proper 
deities. And from these, mortal natures also participate of divine in¬ 
fluxions. And thus animals and plaints are fabricated, bearing the images 
of different Gods; daemons proximately imparting to these the represen¬ 
tations of their leaders. But the Gods in an exempt manner supernally 
preside over daemons; and through this last natures sympathize with such 
as are first. For the representations of first are seen in last natures; and the 
causes of things that are last are comprehended in primary beings. The 
middle genera, too, of daemons give completion to wholes, the commu¬ 
nion of which they bind and connect; participating indeed of the Gods, 
but participated by mortal natures. He, therefore, will not err who 
asserts that the mundane artificer established the centres of the order of 
the universe in daemons; since Diotima also assigns them this order, viz. 
that of binding together divine and mortal natures, of deducing supernal 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



260 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


streams, elevating all secondary natures to the Gods, and giving comple¬ 
tion to wholes through the connexion of a medium. 

Hence, we must not assent to their doctrine, who say that daemons are 
the souls of men that have changed the present life. For it is not proper 
to consider a daemoniacal nature according to habitude, as the same with 
a nature essentially daemoniacal; nor to assert that the perpetual medium 
of all mundane natures consists from a life conversant with multiform 
mutations. Fora daemoniacal guard subsists always the same, connecting 
the mundane wholes. But soul does not always thus retain its own order, 
as Socrates says in the Republic; since at different times it chooses 
different lives. Nor do we praise those who make certain of the Gods to 
be daemons, such as the erratic Gods, fi. e. the planets] according to 
Amelius. But we are persuaded by Plato, who calls the Gods the rulers 
of the universe, but subjects to them the herds of daemons. And we shall 
every where preserve the doctrine of Diotima, who assigns the middle 
order, between all divine and mortal natures, to a daemoniacal essence. 
Let this then be the conception respecting the whole of the daemoniacal 
order in common. 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


In the next place, let us speak concerning the daemons, who are 
allotted the superintendence of mankind. For of these daemons, which, 
as we have said, rank in the middle order, the first and highest are divine 
daemons, and who often appear as Gods, through their transcendent simi¬ 
litude to the divinities. For, in short, that which is first in every order 
preserves the form of the nature prior to itself. Thus, the first intellect 
is a God, and the most ancient of souls is intellectual. Hence, the highest 
genus of daemons, as being proximate to the Gods, is uniform and divine. 
The next to these in order are those daemons who participate of an intel- 



Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XL1II. 


OF PLATO. 


261 


lectual peculiarity, and preside over the ascent and descent of souls, and 
who unfold into light and deliver to all things the productions of the Gods. 
The third are those who distribute the productions of divine souls to 
secondary natures, and complete the bond of those that receive effluxions 
from thence. The fourth are those that transmit the efficacious powers 
of whole natures to things generated and corrupted, and who inspire 
partial natures with life, order, reasons, and the all-various perfect opera¬ 
tions which things mortal are able to effect. The fifth are corporeal, and 
bind together the extremes in bodies. For, how can perpetual accord 
with corruptible bodies, and efficients with effects, except through this 
medium ? For it is this ultimate nature which has dominion over corpo¬ 
real goods, and provides for all natural prerogatives. The sixth in order 
are those that revolve about matter, connect the powers which descend 
from celestial to sublunary matter, perpetually guard this matter, and 
defend the shadowy representation of forms which it contains. 

Daemons, therefore, as Diotima also says, being many and all-various, 
the highest of them conjoin souls proceeding from their father to their 
leading Gods. For every God, as we have said, is the leader in the first 
place of daemons, and in the next of partial souls. For the demiurgus 
disseminated these, as Timaeus says, into the sun and moon, and the 
other instruments of time. These divine daemons, therefore, are those 
which are essentially allotted to souls, and conjoin them to their proper 
leaders. And every soul, though it revolves together with its leading 
deity, requires a daemon of this kind. But daemons of the second rank 
preside over the ascensions and descensions of souls; and from these the 
souls of the multitude derive their elections. For the most perfect souls, 
who are conversant with generation in an undefiled manner, as they 
choose a life conformable to their presiding God, so they live according 
to a divine daemon, who conjoined them to their proper deity when they 
dwelt on high. Hence, the Egyptian priest admired Plotinus, as being 
governed by a divine daemon. To souls, therefore, who live as those that 
will shortly return to the intelligible world whence they came, the supernal 
is the same with the daemon which attends them here. But to imperfect 





Digitized by 


Google 



262 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


souls the essential is different from the daemon that attends them at their 
birth. 

If these things then are rightly asserted, we must not assent to those 
who make our rational soul a daemon. For a daemon is different from 
man, as Diotima says, who places daemons between Gods and men, and 
as Socrates also evinces, when he divides a daemoniacal oppositely to the 
human nature. “ For,” says he, “ not a human but a daemoniacal obstacle 
detains me.” But man is a soul using the body as an instrument. A 
daemon, therefore, is not the same with the rational soul. 

This also is evident from Plato in the Timaeus, where he says that intel¬ 
lect has in us the relation of a daemon. But this is only true as far as 
pertains to analogy. For a daemon according to essence is different from 
a daemon according to analogy. For in many instances, that which 
proximately presides, subsisting in the order of a daemon with respect to 
that which is inferior, is called a daemon. Thus Jupiter in Orpheus calls 
his father Saturn an illustrious daemon; and Plato in theTimaeus calls those 
Gods who proximately preside over, and orderly distribute the realms of 
generation, daemons. ** For,” says he, “ to speak concerning other daemons, 
and to know their generation, exceeds the ability of human nature.” But 
a daemon according to analogy is that which proximately presides over any 
thing, though it should be a God, or though it should be some one of the 
natures posterior to the Gods: And the soul that through similitude to 
the daemoniacal genus produces energies more wonderful than those which 
belong to human nature, and which suspends the whole of its life from 
daemons, is a daemon Kara <r^«<r<v, according to habitude, i. e. proximity 
or alliance. Thus, as it appears to me, Socrates in the Republic calls 
those daemons, who have lived well, and who in consequence of this are 
transferred to a better condition of being, and to more holy places. But 
an essential daemon is neither called a daemon through habitude to 
secondary natures, nor through an assimilation to something different 
from itself; but is allotted this peculiarity from himself, and is defined 
by a certain hyparxis, by appropriate powers, and by different modes of 
energies. In short, the rational soul is called in the Timaeus the daemon 



Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XLIU. 


OF PLATO. 


263 


of the animal ; but we investigate the daemon of man, and not of the 
animal; that which governs the rational soul itself, and not its instrument; 
and that which leads the soul to its judges, after the dissolution of the 
animal, as Socrates says in the Phaedo. For when the animal is no more, 
the daemon which the soul was allotted while connected with the body, 
conducts it to its judge. For, if the soul possesses that daemon while 
living in the body, which is said to lead it to judgment after death, this 
daemon must be the daemon of the man, and not of the animal alone. 
To which we may add, that beginning from on high, it governs the whole 
of our composition. 

Nor again, dismissing the rational soul, must it be said that a daemon is 
that which energizes in the soul: as for instance, that in those who live 
according to reason, reason is the daemon; in those that live according to 
anger, the irascible part; and in those that live according to desire, the 
epithymetic or desiring part. Nor must it be said that the nature which 
proximately presides over that which energizes in our life, is a daemon: as 
for instance, that reason is the daemon of the irascible, and anger of those 
that live according to desire. For, in the first place, to assert that 
daemons are parts of our soul, is to admire human life in an improper 
degree, and oppose the division of Socrates in the Republic, who after 
Gods and daemons places the heroic and human race, and blames the 
poets for introducing in their poems heroes in no respect better than 
men, but subject to similar passions. By this accusation, therefore, it is 
plain that Socrates was very far from thinking that daemons, who are of 
a sublimer order than heroes, are to be ranked among the parts and 
powers of the soul. For from this doctrine it will follow that things 
essentially more excellent give completion to such as are subordinate. 
And in the second place, from this hypothesis, mutations of lives would 
also introduce multiform mutations of daemons. For the avaricious 
character is frequently changed into an ambitious life, this again into a 
life which is formed by right opinion, and this last into a scientific life. 
The daemon, therefore, will vary according to these changes; for the 
energizing part will be different at different times. If, therefore, either 
this energizing part itself is a daemon, or that part which has an arrange- 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



264 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VH. 


ment prior to it, daemons will be changed together with the mutation of 
human life, and the same person will have many daemons in one life; 
which is of all things the most impossible. For the soul never changes 
in one life the government of its daemon; but it is the same daemon which 
presides over us till we are brought before the judges of our conduct, as 
also Socrates asserts in the Phaedo. 

Again, those who consider a partial intellect, or that intellect which 
subsists at the extremity of the intellectual order, as the same with the 
daemon which is assigned to man, appear to me to confound the intellec¬ 
tual peculiarity with the daemoniacal essence. For all daemons subsist in 
the extent of souls, and rank as the next in order to divine souls. But 
the intellectual order is differeift from that of soul, and is neither allotted 
the same essence, nor power, nor energy. 

Further still, this also may be said, that souls enjoy intellect then only 
when they convert themselves to it, receive its light, and conjoin their 
own with intellectual energy; but they experience the presiding care of 
a daemoniacal nature through the whole of life, and in every thing which 
proceeds from fate and providence. For it is the daemon that governs 
the whole of our life, and that fulfils the elections which we made prior 
to generation, together with the gifts of fate, and of those Gods that 
preside over fate. It is likewise the daemon that supplies and measures 
the illuminations from providence. And as souls indeed, we are suspended 
from intellect, but as souls using the body we require the aid of a daemon. 
Hence, Plato in the Phaedrus calls intellect the governor of the soul; but 
he every where calls a daemon the inspector and guardian of mankind. 
And no one who considers the affair rightly, will find any other one and 
proximate providence of every thing pertaining to us, besides that of a 
daemon. For intellect, as we have said, is participated by the rational 
soul, but not by the body; and nature is participated by the body, but 
not by the dianoetie part. And further still, the rational soul rules over 
anger and desire, but it has no dominion over fortuitous events. But the 
daemon alone moves, governs, and orderly disposes all our affairs. For 
he gives perfection to reason, measures the passions, inspires nature, 
connects the body, supplies things fortuitous, accomplishes the decrees 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XLIV. 


OF PLATO. 


265 


of fate, and imparts the gifts of providence. In short, he is the king of 
every thing in and about us, and is the pilot of the whole of our life. 
And thus much concerning our allotted daemons. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


In the next place, with respect to the daemop of Socrates, these three 
things are to be particularly considered. First, that he not only ranks as 
a daemon, but also as a God. For in the First Alcibiades Socrates clearly 
says, “ 1 have long been of opinion that the God did not as yet direct me 
to hold any conversation with you/' He calls the same power therefore 
a daemon and a God. And in the Apology he more clearly evinces that 
this daemon is allotted a divine transcendency, considered as ranking in a 
' daemoniacal order. And this is what we before spid, that the daemons of 
divine souls, and who make choice of an intellectual and elevating life, 
are divine, transcending the whole of a daemoniacal genus, and being the 
first participants of the Gods. For, as is a daemon among Gods, such 
also is a God among daemons. Among the divinities however the 
hyparxis is divine; but in daemons on the contrary, the peculiarity of 
their essence is daemoniacal, but the analogy which they bear to divinity 
evinces their essence to be godlike. For on account of their transcen¬ 
dency with respect to other daemons they frequently appear as Gods. 
With great propriety therefore, does Socrates call his daemon a God ; for 
he belonged to the first and highest daemons. Hence Socrates was most 
perfect, being governed by such a presiding power, and conducting 
himself by the will of such a leader and guardian of his life. This then 
was one of the illustrious prerogatives of the daemon of Socrates. The 
second was this: that Socrates perceived a certain voice proceeding from 
his daemon. For this is asserted by him in the Theaetetus and in the 
Proc. Voi.. II. 2 L 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 




266 ON THE THEOLOGY BOOK VU. 

Pheedrus. This voice also is the signal from the daemon, which he speaks 
of in the Theages. And again in the Phaedrus, when he was about to 
pass over the river, he experienced the accustomed signal from the 
daemon. What then, does Socrates indicate by these assertions, and 
what was the voice through which he says the daemon signified to him 
his will ? 

In the first place, we must say that Socrates, through his dianoetic 
power, and his science of things, enjoyed the inspiration of his daemon, 
who continually recalled him to divine love. In the second place, in the 
affairs of life, Socrates supernally directed his providential attention to 
more imperfect souls. And according to the energy of his daemon, he 
received the light proceeding from thence, neither in his dianoetic part 
alone, nor in his doxastic powers, but also in his spirit, the illumination of 
the daemon suddenly diffusing itself through the whole of his life, and now 
moving sense itself. For it is evident that reason, imagination, and sense, 
enjoy the same energy differently; and that each of our inward parts is 
passive to, and is moved by the daemon in a peculiar manner. The voice 
therefore, did not act upon Socrates externally with passivity; but the 
daemoniacal inspiration, proceeding inwardly through his whole soul, and 
diffusing itself as far as to the organs of sense, became at last a voice, 
which was rather recognized by consciousness than by sense. For such 
are the illuminations of good daemons and the Gods. 

In the third place, let us consider the peculiarity of the daemon of 
Socrates; for it never exhorted, but perpetually recalled him. This also 
must be again referred to the Socratic life. For it is not a property 
common to our allotted, daemons, but was the characteristic of the 
guardian of Socrates. We must say therefore, that the beneficent and 
philanthropic disposition of Socrates, and his great promptitude with 
respect to the communication of good, did not require the exhortation of 
the daemon. For he was impelled from himself, and was ready at all 
times to impart to all men the most excellent life. But since many of 
those that came to him were unadapted to the pursuit of virtue and the 
science of wholes, his governing good daemon restrained him from a 
providential care of such as these. Just as a good charioteer alone 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XLIV. 


OF PLATO. 


267 


restrains the impetus of a horse naturally well adapted for the race, but 
does not stimulate him, in consequence of his being excited to motion 
from himself, and not requiring the spur, but the bridle. And hence 
Socrates, from his great readiness to benefit those with whom he conversed, 
rather required a recalling than an exciting daemon. For the inaptitude 
of auditors, which is for the most part concealed from human sagacity, 
requires a daemoniacal discrimination ; and the knowledge of favourable 
opportunities can by this alone be accurately announced to us. Socrates 
therefore being naturally impelled to good, alone required to be recalled 
in his unseasonable impulses. 

But farther still, it may be said, that of daemons, some are allotted a 
purifying and undefiled power; others a perfective; and others a 
demiurgic power. And in short, they are divided according to the 
characteristic peculiarities of the Gods, and the powers under which they 
are arranged. Each likewise, according to his hyparxis, incites the object 
of his providential care to a blessed life; some of them moving us to an 
attention to inferior concerns; and others restraining us from action, and 
an energy verging to externals. It appears therefore, that the daemon 
of Socrates being allotted this peculiarity, viz. cathartic, and the source 
of an undefiled life, and being arranged under this power of Apollo, and 
uniformly presiding over the whole of purification, separated also Socrates 
from too much commerce with the vulgar, and a life extending itself into 
multitude. But it led him into the depths of his soul, and an energy 
undefiled by subordinate natures. And hence it never exhorted, but 
perpetually recalled him. For, what else is to recall, than to withdraw 
him from the multitude to inward energy? And of what is this the 
peculiarity except of purification? Indeed, it appears to me, that as 
Orpheus places the Apolloniacal monad over king Bacchus, which recalls 
him from a progression into Titannic multitude, and a desertion of his 
royal throne, in like manner the daemon of Socrates conducted him to an 
intellectual place of survey, and restrained his association with the 
multitude. For the daemon is analogous to Apollo, being his attendant, 
but the intellect of Socrates to Bacchus; for our intellect is the progeny of 
the power of this divinity. 


Digitized by google 



1268 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


CHAPTER XLV. 


From the MS. Scholia also of Prod us on the Cratylus, we derive the 
following important information concerning this order of beings who 
connect the divine and human nature together. Of the genera posterior 
to the Gods, and which are indeed their perpetual attendants, but 
produce, in conjunction with them mundane fabrications from on high, 
as far as to the last of things,—of these genera, some unfold generation 
into light; others are transporters of union ; others of power; and others 
call forth the knowledge of the Gods, and an intellectual essence. But 
of these, some are called angelic, by those that are skilful in divine 
concerns, in consequence of being established according to the hyparxis 
itself of the Gods, and making that which is uniform in their nature 
commensurate with things of a secondary rank. Hence, the angelic 
tribe is boniform , as unfolding into light the occult goodness of the Gods. 
Others among these are called by theologists daemoniacal, as binding the 
middle of all things, and as distributing divine power, and producing it 
as far as to the last of things. For Sanrai is ro^nrat. But this genus 
possesses abundance of power, and is multifarious, as giving subsistence 
to those last daemons who are material, who draw down souls, and pro¬ 
ceed to the most partial and material form of energy. Others again, are 
denominated by them heroic, who lead human souls on high through 
love, and who are the suppliers of an intellectual life, of magnitude of 
operation, and transcendency of wisdom. In short, they are allotted a 
convertive order and providence, and an alliance to a divine intellect, to 
which they also convert secondary natures. Hence, they are allotted 
this appellation, as being able to raise and extend souls to the Gods. 
(wf otigfiv xat Hvartmiv rag -J/v%ag rri 6tov$ Bvmfieya) 

These triple genera posterior to, are indeed, always suspended from 
the Gods, but they are divided from each other. And some of them are 
essentially intellectual; others are essentialized in rational souls; and 


Digitized by {jOoq ie 



CHAP. XLV. 


OF PLATO. 


269 


others subsist in irrational and phantastic lives, i. e. in lives characterised 
by imagination. It is also evident that such of them as are intellectual, 
are allotted a prudence or wisdom transcending that of human nature, 
and which is eternally conjoined with the objects of their intellection. 
But such of them as are rational, energize discursively according to 
prudence.' And the irrational kind are destitute of prudence. For they 
dwell in matter, and the darkest parts of the universe. They also bind 
souls to image-producing bosoms, ( xeu iruvSii rag ipu%ag roig iiSmXorowif xoXroif) 
and strangle such as are brought into that region, until they have suffered 
the punishment which is their due. These three genera therefore, which 
are more excellent than us, Socrates now calls daemons. And thus much 
concerning these triple genera, according to Proclus. 

Again, with respect to daemons properly so called, there are threA 
species of them according to the Platonic theology ; the first of which is 
rational only, and the last is irrational only; but the middle species is 
partly rational and partly irrational. And again, of these the first is 
perfectly beneficent, but many among the other two species are malevo¬ 
lent and noxious to mankind: not indeed essentially malevolent (for 
there is nothing in the universe, the ample abode of all-bountiful Jove, 
essentially evil), but only so from the office which they are destined to 
perform. For nothing which operates naturally, operates as to itself 
evilly. But the Platonic Hermeas in his MS. Commentary on tho 
Phaedrus, and on that part of it in which Plato says, “ There are indeed, 
other evils besides these, but a certain daemon immediately mingles 
pleasure with most of them," admirably observes respecting daemons As 
follows: “The distribution-of good and evil originates from the daerno- 
niacal genus. For every genus transcending that of daemons, uniformly 
possesses good. There are therefore, certain genera of daemons, some of 
which adorn and administer certain parts of the world; but others certain 
species of animals. Hence, the daemon who is the inspective guardian 
of life, hastens souls into that condition which he himsell is allotted; as 
for instance, into injustice or intemperance, and continually mingles plea¬ 
sure in them as a snare. But there are other daemons transcending these, 


Digitized by 


Google 



270 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


who are the punishers of souls, converting them to a more perfect and 
elevated life. And the first of these it is necessary to avoid; but the 
second sort we should render propitious. There are other daemons how¬ 
ever, more excellent than these, who distribute good in an uniform 
manner.” 

Farther still, Plato in the Phaedo, says, “ that the daemon of each 
person, which was allotted to him while living, endeavours to lead each 
to a certain place, where it is necessary that all of them being collected 
together, after they have been judged, should proceed to Hades, together 
with their leader, who is ordered to conduct them from hence thither. 
But there receiving the allotments proper to their condition, and abiding 
for a necessary time, another leader brings them back hither again, in 
many and long periods of time.” Olympiodorus in his MS. Commentary 
on that dialogue, observes on this passage as follows : 

“ Since there are in the universe, things which subsist differently at 
different times, and since there are also natures which are conjoined with 
the superessential unities, it is necessary that there should be a certain 
middle genus, which is neither immediately suspended from deity, nor 
subsists differently at different times according to better and worse, but 
which is always perfect, and does not depart from its proper virtue; and 
is immutable indeed but is not conjoined with the superessential. The 
whole of this genus is daemoniacal. There are also different genera of 
dsemons ; for they are arranged under the mundane Gods. The highest 
of these subsists according to the one of the Gods, which is called an 
unific and divine genus of daemons. The next according to the intellect 
which is suspended from Deity, and is called intellectual. The third 
subsists according to soul, and is called rational. The fourth according 
to nature, and is denominated physical. The fifth according to body, 
and is called corporeal-formed. And the sixth according to matter, and 
this is denominated material. Or after another manner it may be said, 
that some of these are celestial, others ethereal, others aerial, others 
aquatic, others terrestrial, and others subterranean. With respect also 
to this division, it is evident that it is derived from the parts of the 


Digitized by 


CHAP. XLV. 


OF PLATO. 


271 

Universe. But irrational daemons originate from the aerial governors, 
whence also the [Chaldean J Oracle says, 

qfgiaw tAanjga xvvaov yimwv rt xcu uygoov. 

i. e. “ being the charioteer of the aerial, terrestrial and aquatic dogs." 
Our guardian daemons, however, belong to that order of daemons, which 
is arranged under the Gods that preside over the ascent and descent of 
souls.” 

Olympiodorus further observes, “ that the daemon endeavours tQ lead 
the soul as exciting its conceptions and imaginations, at the same time, 
however, yielding to the self-motive power of the soul. But in conse¬ 
quence of the daemon exciting, one soul follows voluntarily, another 
violently, and another according to a mode subsisting between these. 
There is also one daemon who leads the soul to its judges from the present 
life; another who is ministrant to the judges, giving completion, as it 
were, to the sentence which is passed ; and a third who is allotted the 
guardianship of life.’* 

In the next place, with respect to irrational daemons, it remains to 
investigate how they subsist. For if they derive their subsistence from 
the junior Gods, how, since these are the fathers of mortal natures, are 
these daemons immortal ? But if from the demiurgus how are they 
irrational? For he is the father of things in conjunction with intellect. 
This doubt is beautifully solved by Proclus as follows: irrational 
daemons derive their subsistence from the junior Gods, yet are not on 
this account mortal, since of these Gods some generate others. And 
perhaps the generated Gods are called by Plato, in the Timaeus, daemons, 
because those that are truly daemons are produced by the junior Gods. 
But they likewise proceed from the one demiurgus. For as Timaeus 
says, he is the cause of all immortal natures. If, however, the demiurgus 
imparts intellect to all things, there is also in irrational daemons an 
ultimate vestige of the intellectual peculiarity, so far as they have a 
facility of imagination ; for this is the last echo as it were of intellect. 
And on this account the phantasy is not improperly called by others 
passive intellect. *• 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



272 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


Lastly, after essential heroes, an order of souls follows, who proximately 
govern the affairs of men, and are daemoniacal according to habitude or 
alliance, but not essentially. These souls likewise are the perpetual 
attendants of the Gods, but they have not an essence wholly superior to 
man. Of this kind, as we are informed by Proclus in his MS. Scholia 
on the Cratylus, are the Nymphs that sympathize with waters, Pans 
with the feet of goats and the like. They also differ from those powers 
that are essentially of a dsemoniacal characteristic in this, that they 
assume a variety of shapes (each of the others immutably preserving one 
form) are subject to various passions, and are the causes of every kind of 
deception to mankind. Proclus likewise observes, that the Minerva 
which so often appeared to Ulysses and Telemachus belonged to this 
order of souls. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


After the triple genera that are the perpetual attendants of the Gods, 
those human souls follow that are of an heroic characteristic, are unde¬ 
filed, associating with generation, and abandoning their proper order but 
for a little time. For the souls that descend and are defiled with vice, 
are very remote from those that abide on high with immaculate purity. 
The media, therefore, between these, are the souls that descend indeed, 
but without defilement; since it is not lawful for the contrary to take 
place, viz. to be defiled with vice, and yet to abide on high. For evil is 
not in the Gods, but in the regions of mortality, and material affairs. 
The first genus of souls, therefore, is divine. For every where, that 
which is the recipient of deity has a ruling and leading order, in essences, 
in intellects, in souls and in bodies. Rut the second genus of souls is 
always conjoined to the Gods, in order that through this those that some- 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XLVI. 


OF PLATO. 


273 


times depart from, may again be recalled to them. The third genus is 
that which descends indeed into generation, but descends with purity, 
exchanges a more divine life for one of a subordinate nature, but is 
exempt from vice, and liberated from the dominion of the passions. For 
this genus exists in continuity with that which always abides on high, 
and is always undefiled. And the fourth and last genus is that of the 
souls of the bulk of mankind, which wanders abundantly, descends as far 
as to Tartarus, and is again excited from thence. It likewise evolves 
all-various forms of life, uses a variety of manners, is under the influence 
of different passions at different times, and assumes the forms of daemons, 
men, and irrational animals. At the same time, however, it is corrected 
and amended by Justice, recurs from earth to heaven, and is led round 
from matter to intellect, but according to certain orderly periods of 
wholes. 

Plotinus beautifully alludes to this undefiled genus of human souls in 
the 9th book of his 5th Ennead, On Intellect, Ideas, and Being, as 
follows: “ Since all men from their birth employ sense prior to intellect, 
and are necessarily first conversant with sensibles, some proceeding no 
farther pass through life, considering these as the first and last of things, 
and apprehending that whatever is painful among these is evil, and 
whatever is pleasant is good ; thus thinking it sufficient to pursue the 
one and avoid the other. Those too, among them, who pretend to a 
greater share of reason than others, esteem this to be wisdom, being 
affected in a manner similar to more heavy birds, who, collecting many 
things from the earth, and being oppressed with the weight, are unable 
to fly on high, though they have received wings for this purpose from 
nature. But others are in a small degree elevated from things subordi¬ 
nate, the more excellent part of the soul recalling them from pleasure to 
a more worthy pursuit. As they are, however, unable to look on high, 
and as not possessing any thing else which can afford them rest, they 
betake themselves together with the name of virtue to actions and the 
election of things inferior, from which they at first endeavoured to raise 
themselves, though in vain. In the third class is the race of divine men , 
who through a more excellent power, and with piercing eyes, acutely 
Proc. Vol. II. 2 M 


Digitized by boogie 



874 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VI r. 


perceive supernal tight, to the vision of which they raise themselves 
above the clouds and darkness as it were of this lower world, and there 
abiding despise every thing in these regions of sense; being no otherwise 
delighted with the place which is truly and properly their own, than he 
who after many wanderings is at length restored to his lawful country.” 

These undefiled souls are called by the author of the Golden Verses, 
« terrestrial daemons,” because, as Hierocles observes, they are by nature 
men, but by habitude dpemons, and possess a scientific knowledge of 
divinity. For since all men are terrestrial, as ranking in the third degree 
of rational beings, but all are not skilful (imtuwmv) and wise, the 
author of the verses very properly calls wise men hoth terrestrial and 
daemons conjointly. For neither are all men wise, nor are all the beings 
that are wise, men. But the illustrious heroes 1 and the immortal Gods, 
being naturally more excellent than men, are wise and good. The verses 
therefore exhort us to reverence those men who are co-arranged with the 
divine genera, and who (according to habitude) are equal to angels and 
daemons, and are similar to the illustrious heroes, 

Plato, in the Cratylus, calls these undefiled souls both daemons and 
heroes, and speaks of them as follows ; “ Soc. Do you not know who 
those daemons are which Hesiod speaks of? Herm. I do not. Soq, And 
are you ignorant that he says the golden race of men was first generated ? 
Herm, This I know. Soc. He says, therefore, that after this race was 
concealed by Fate, it produced daemons denominated holy, terrestrial, 
good, expellers of evil, and guardians of mortal men. Herm. But what 
then? Soq. I think, indeed, that he calls it a golden race, not as 
naturally consisting of gold, but as being beautiful and good. 1 infer 
this, however, from his denominating our race an iron one. Herm. You 
speak the truth. Soc. Do you not therefore think, that if any one of 
the present times should appear to be good, Hesiod would say he belonged 
to the golden race? Herm. It is probable he would. Soc. But are the 
good any other than such as are [intellectually] prudent ? Herm. They 

€ 

' The author of these verses comprehends the triple genera that are more excellent than man, 
viz. angels, daemons and heroes, under the appellation o£ illustrious heroes. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XLVI. 


OP PLATO. 


275 


are not. Soc. On this account, therefore, as it appears to me, more than 
any other he calls them daemons, because they Were prudent and learned 
(iSay/MPis). And in our ancient tongue this very name is to be found. 
Hence both he and many other poets, speak in a becoming manner, Whert 
they say that a good man after death wi41 receive a mighty destiny and 
renown, and will become a dam on, according to the surname of prudence. 
1 therefore assert the same, that every good man is learned and skilful; 
that he is demoniacal both while living and when dead ; and that he is 
properly denominated a daemon. Herm. And I also, Socrates, seem to 
myself to agree with you perfectly in this particular. But what does 
the name hero signify ? Soc. This is by no means difficult to under¬ 
stand. For this name is very little different from its original, evincing 
that its generation is derived from love. Herm. How is this? Soc. Do 
you not know that heroes are demigods ? Herm. What then ? Soc. All 
of them were doubtless generated either from the love of a God towards 
a mortal maid, or from the love of a man towards a Goddess. If, 
therefore, you consider this matter according to die ancient Attic tongue, 
you will more clearly understand the truth of this derivation. For it 
will be evident to you that the word hero is derived from love, with a 
trifling mutation for the sake of the name/' 

The meaning of Plato in this passage, and also the characteristic 
properties of terrestrial heroes are beautifully unfolded by Proclus as 
follows, in his very rare and invaluable MS. Scholia on the Cratylus. 
“ Every where the extremities of a prior, are conjoined with the summits 
of a secondary order. Thus for instance, our master Hermes (« tiunrotiif 
ijftwy Bg/xtjf) being an archangelic monad, is celebrated as a God. But 
Plato calls the whole extent between Gods and men daemons. And they 
indeed, are daemons by nature. Those daemons, however, that are now men¬ 
tioned, together with the demigods heroes, are not daemons and heroes by 
nature, for they do not always follow the Gods; but they are only so from 
habitude, being souls who naturally deliver themselves to generation, such 
as was the great Hercules, and others of the like kind. But the peculia¬ 
rity of heroic souls is magnitude of operation, deration and magnificence. 


Digitized by s^OOQle 



♦ - 


276 ON THE THEOLOGY BOOK Vlf. 

Such heroes also it is necessary to honour, and to perform funeral rites to 
their memory, conformably to the exhortation of the Athenian guest in 
the Laws. This heroic genus of souls, therefore, does not always follow 
the Gods, but is undefiled, and more intellectual than other souls. And 
it descends indeed for the benefit of the life of men, as partaking of a 
destiny inclining downwards; but it has much of an elevated nature, 
and which is properly liberated from matter. Hence souls of this kind 
are easily led back to the intelligible world, in which they live for many 
periods; while on the contrary, the more irrational kind of souls, are 
either never led back, or this is accomplished with great difficulty, or 
continues for a very inconsiderable period of time. 

Each of the Gods indeed is perfectly exempt from secondary natures, 
and the first and more total of daemons are likewise established above a 
habitude of this kind. They employ, however, terrestrial and partial 
spirits in the generations of some of the human race, not physically 
mingling with mortals, but moving nature, perfecting its power, expand* 
ing the path of generation, and removing all impediments. Fables, 
therefore, through the similitude of appellation conceal the things them¬ 
selves. For spirits of this kind are similarly denominated with the Gods, 
the leading causes of their series. Hence they say, either that Gods have 
connexion with women, or men with Goddesses. But if they were 
willing to speak .plainly and clearly, they would say that Venus, Mars, 
Thetis, and the other divinities, produce their respective series, beginning 
from on high, as far as to the last of things; each of which series 
comprehends in itself many essences differing from each other; such as' 
the angelical, daemoniacal, heroical, nymphical, and the like. The lowest 
powers, therefore, of these orders, have much communion with the 
human race; for the extremities of first are connascent with the summits 
of secondary natures. And they contribute to our other natural opera¬ 
tions, and to the production of our species. On this account it is 
frequently seen that from the mixture of these powers with men heroes 
are generated, who appear to possess a certain prerogative above human 
nature. Not only a daemoniacal genus, however, of this kind, physically 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XLVI. 


OP PLATO. 


277 


sympathizes with men, but a different genus sympathizes with other 
animals, as Nymphs with trees, others with fountains, and others with 
stags, or serpents. 

But how is it that at one time the Gods are said to have connexion 
with mortal females, and at another time mortal females with the Gods ? 
We reply, that the communion of Gods with Goddesses gives subsistence 
to Gods or daemons eternally; but heroic souls having a two-fold form of 
life, viz. doxastic and diandetic , the former of which is called by Plato in 
the Timaeus the circle of difference t and the latter, the circle of sameness , 
and which are characterized by the properties of male and female ;— 
hence these souls at one time exhibit a deiform power, by energizing 
according to the masculine prerogative of their nature, or the circle of 
sameness , and at another time according to their feminine prerogative, or 
the circle of difference ; yet so as that according to both these energies 
they act with rectitude, and without merging themselves in the darkness of 
body. They likewise know the natures prior to their own, and exercise a 
providential care over inferior concerns, without at the same time having 
that propensity to such concerns which is found in the bulk of mankind. 

• But the -souls which act erroneously according to the energies of both 
these circles, or which, in other words, neither exhibit accurate specimens 
of practical, nor of intellectual virtue—these differ in no respect from 
gregarious souls, or the herd of mankind, with whom the circle of 
sameness is fettered, and the circle of difference sustains all-various 
fractions and distortions. 

As it is impossible therefore, that these heroic souls can act with equal 
vigour and perfection, according to both these circles at once, since this 
is the province of natures more divine than the human, it is necessary 
that they should sometimes descend and energize principally according 
to their doxastic part, and sometimes according to their more intellectual 
part. Hence, one of these circles must energize naturally, and the other 
be hindered from its proper energy. On this account heroes are called 
demigods , as having only one of their circles illuminated by the Gods. 
Such of these therefore, as have the circle of sameness unfettered, as are 
excited to. an intellectual life, and are moved about it according to a 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



278 


BOOK VII. 


ON THE THEOLOGY 

deific energy,—these are said to have a God for their father, and a mortal 
for their mother, through a defect with respect to the doxastic form of 
life. But such, on the contrary, as energize without impediment 
according to the circle of difference, who act with becoming rectitude in 
practical affairs, and at the same time enthusiastically, or in other words, 
under the inspiring influence of divinity,—these are said to have a 
mortal for their father, and a Goddess for their mother. In short, 
rectitude of energy in each of these circles is to be ascribed to a divine 
cause.' Hence when the circle of sameness has dominion, the divine 
cause of illumination is said to be masculine and paternal; but when the 
circle of difference predominates, it is said to be maternal. Hence too, 
Achilles in Homer acts with rectitude in practical affairs,* and at the 
same time exhibits specimens of magnificent, vehement, and divinely* 
inspired energy, as being the son of a Goddess. And such is his 
attachment to practical virtue, that even when in Hades, he desires a 
union with body, that he may assist his father. While on the contrary, 
Minos and Rhadamanthus, who were heroes illuminated by Jupiter, 
raised themselves from generation to true being, and meddled with mortal 
concerns no further than absolute necessity required. 

In the last place Proclus adds, that heroes are very properly denpmi- 
nated from Love, since Love is a great daemon: and from the co-operation 
of daemons heroes are produced. To which may also be added, that 
Love originated from Plenty as the more excellent cause, and from 
Poverty as the recipient and the worse cause; and heroes are analogously 
produced from different genera.” 

Plato who was one of these heroes or demigods, was the offspring of 
Apollo in the way above explained by Proclus, as we are informed by 
Olympiodorus in his life of him. For he says, “It is reported that an 

1 It must however, be carefully observed, that this divine cause illuminates, invigorates, and 
excites these circles in the most unrestrained and impassive manner^ without destroying freedom of 
energy in the circles themselves, or causing any partial affection, sympathy or tendency in illumi¬ 
nating deity. 

1 See a most masterly defence of the character of Achilles as a hero in my translation of 
Proclus’s noble apology for Homer, in the first Volume of my Plato. 


Digitized by boogie 



CHAP. XLV1I. 


OP PLATO. 


279 


Apolloniacal spectre had connection with Perictione the mother of Plato, 
and that appearing in the night to Aristo the father of Plato, it 
commanded him not to sleep with Perictione during the time of her 
pregnancy—which mandate Aristo obeyed.” The like account of the 
divine origin of Plato is also given by Apuleius in his treatise on the 
dogmas of Plato, and by Plutarch in the 8th book of his Symposiacs. 
Epimenides likewise, Eudoxus and Xenocrates asserted that Apollo 
becoming connected with Parthenis the mother of Pythagoras, and 
causing her to be pregnant, had in consequence of this predicted 
concerning Pythagoras by his priest.' And thus much concerning those 
undefiled souls who were called by the ancients terrestrial daemons, heroes 
and demigods, and who descended into the regions of mortality for the 
benevolent purpose of benefiting those apostate souls, who are elegantly 
called by Empedocles, 

Heaven's exiles straying from the orb of light 


CHAPTER XLVII. 

The triple genera that are the perpetual attendants of the Gods, and 
which have been unfolded in the preceding chapters, are indicated by 
the following division of time, in the first hypothesis of the Parmenides; 
from which division the one is shown to be exempt: “ Do not the terms 
it was, it has "been , it did become , seem to signify the participation of the 
time past ? Certainly. And do not the terms it will be, it may become, 
and it will be generated, signify that which is about to be hereafter ? 
Certainly. But are not the terms it is, and it is becoming to be, marks of 
the present time ? Entirely so. If then the one participates in no respect 

1 Vid. Iamblich. de vita Fythsg. Cap. 2. 


Digitized by 


Google 



280 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


of any time, it neither ever was, nor has been, nor did become. Nor is it 
now generated, nor is becoming to be, nor is, nor may become hereafter, nor 
will be generated, nor will be. It is most true.” 

The commentary of Proclus on this passage is as follows: “ This divi¬ 
sion of time accords with the multitude of the divine genera, which are 
suspended from divine souls, viz. with angels, daemons, and heroes. And 
in the first place, this division proceeds to them supernally, according to 
a triadic distribution into the present, past, and future; and in the next 
place, according to a distribution into nine, each of these three being 
again subdivided into three. For the monad of souls is united to the one 
whole of time, but this is participated secondarily by the multitude of 
souls. And of this multitude, those participate of this whole totally, that 
subsist according to the past, or the present , or the future ; but those 
participate of it partially, that are essentialized according to the differ¬ 
ences of these. For to each of the wholes a multitude is co-ordinated, 
divided into things first, middle, and last. For a certain multitude 
subsists in conjunction with that which is established conformably to the 
past, the summit of which is according to the was, but the middle accord¬ 
ing to it has been, and the end according to it did become. With that also 
which is established according to the present, there is another multitude, 
the principal part of which is characterized by the is, the middle by it is 
generated, and the end by it is becoming to be. And there is another triad 
with that which subsists according to the future, the most elevated part of 
which is characterized by the will be, that which ranks in the middle by it 
may become, and the end by it will be generated. And thus there will be 
three triads proximately suspended from these three totalities, but all 
these are suspended from their monad. 

All these orders, likewise, which are distributed according to the parts 
of time, energize according to the whole of time; this whole containing 
in itself triple powers, one of which is perfective of all motion, the second 
connects and guards things which are governed by it, and the third unfolds 
divine natures into light. For, as all such things as are not eternal, are 
led round in a circle, the wholeness or the monad of time, perfects and 
connects their essence, and discloses to them the united infinity of eter- 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XLVII. 


OF PLATO. 


281 


nity, evolving the contracted multitude which subsists in eternal natures; 
whence also this apparent time, as Timaeus says, unfolds to us the 
measures of divine periods, perfects sensibles, and guards things which 
are generated in their proper numbers. Time, therefore, possesses triple 
powers prior to souls, viz. the perfective , the connective, and the unfolding, 
according to a similitude to eternity. For eternity, possessing a middle 
order in intelligibles, perfects the order posterior to itself, supplying it 
with union, but unfolds into light that which is prior to itself, producing 
into multitude its ineffable union, and connects the middle bond of intel¬ 
ligibles, and guards all things intransitively through its power. Time, 
therefore, receiving supernally the triple powers of eternity, imparts them 
to souls. Eternity, however, possesses this triad unitedly; but time 
both unitedly and distributively; and souls distributively alone. ' Hence, 
of souls, some are characterized according to one, and others according 
to another power of time; some imitating its unfolding , others its perfec¬ 
tive, and others its connective power. Thus also with respect to the Fates, 
some of these being adapted to give completion and perfection to things, 
are said to sing the past, always indeed energizing, and always singing, 
their songs being intellections, and fabricative energies about the world : 
for the past is the source of completion. Others again of these are 
adapted to connect things present ; for they guard the essence and the 
generation of these. And others are adapted to unfold the future ; for 
they lead into essence and to an end that which as yet is not. 

We may also say, since there is an order of souls more excellent than 
ours divided into such as are first, such as are middle, and such as are 
last, the most total of these are adapted to the past. For as this compre¬ 
hends in itself the present and the future, so these souls comprehend in 
themselves the rest. But souls of a middle rank are adapted to the 
present; for this was one e future, but is not yet the past. As, therefore, 
the present contains in itself the future, so these middle souls comprehend 
those posterior, but are comprehended in those prior to themselves. And 
souls of the third order correspond to the future. For this does not 
proceed through the present, nor has become the past, but is the future 
alone; just as these third souls are of themselves alone, but through 
Proc. Vol. II. • 2 N 


Digitized by 


Google 



ON THI THEOLOGY 


BOOK Vll. 


.282 

fatting into a rare partial subsistence, are by no means comprehensive of 
others. For they convolve the boundary according to a triadic division 
of the. genera posterior to the Gods. 

The whole of the first triad, therefore, has the once, for this is the pecu¬ 
liarity of the post, and of completion; but it is divided into the was, it 
was generated , and it did become. Again, therefore, of these three, the was 
signifies the summit of the triad, bounded according to hyparxis itself; 
but it was generated, signifies an at-once-collected perfection; and it did 
become, an extension in being perfected; these things being imitations 
of intelligibles. For the was is an imitation of being, it was generated, of 
eternity, and it did become, of that which is primarily eternal. For being 
is derived to all things from the first of these; a subsistence at once as alt, 
and a whole front the second; and an ewtension into multitude from the 
third. 


CHAPTER XL VIII. 


Having, therefore, unfolded to the reader the orders and characteristic 
properties of the mundane Gods, and of the triple genera that are perpe¬ 
tually suspended from them, I shall in the next place present him with 
what Plato, says, in celebration of the divinity of the World, the great 
monad which, comprehends all these, so far as the whole of it is a God, 
consisting; of! a superessential unity derived from the ineffable principle of 
all things* a divine intellect, a divine soul, and a deified body. In the 
Timmus then, Plato celebrates the world as a deity in the following 
manner; “When, therefore* that God who is an eternally reasoning 
divinity cogitated about the God who at a certain time would exist, he 
fabricated his body smooth and equable, and every way from the middle 
equal and whole, and perfect from the composition of perfect bodies. 
But placing soul in the middle of the world, he extended it through the 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. XLV1II. 


OF PLATO. 


283 


whole; and besides this, externally surrounded the body of the universe 
with soul. And causing circle to revolve in a circle, he established 
heaven (i. e. the world) one, only, solitary nature, able through virtue to 
converse with itself, indigent of nothing external, and sufficiently known 
and friendly to itself. And on all these accounts the world was generated 
by him, a blessed God. The first part of this extract, as far as to the 
word “ perfect bodies,” is admirably elucidated by Proclus as follows: 

What is here said, imitating the one intellect which comprehends the 
intellection of wholes in one, collects all things into sameness, and refers 
to one summit all the fabrication of the corporeal system. It is neces¬ 
sary, therefore, that we should recal to our memory what has been 
already asserted. It has been said then, that the elements through 
analogy rendered all things in concord with each other. That the 
universe was generated a whole consisting of wholes. That it is spherical 
and smooth, and has itself a knowledge of itself, and a motion in itself. 
Hence, it is evident that the whole world is assimilated to [its paradigm^ 
all-perfect animal. But the orderly distribution according to the wholes 
which it contains proceeds analogous to its second and third causes. And 
the number of its elements indeed, and the unifying bond of them through 
analogy, corresponds to the essence which is without colour, without 
figure, and without contact; * for number is there. The first wholeness 
of the world which adorns all things, and which consists of the wholes of 
the elements, proceeds analogous to the intellectual wholeness. * Its sphe¬ 
ricity is analogous to intellectual figure.* Its sufficiency, intellectual 
motion, and sameness of convolution, are analogous to the God who 
absorbs all his offspring in himself. 4 Its animation corresponds to its 
vivific cause ^Rhea]- And its possession of intellect is analogous to the 
demiurgic intellect; though from this all things proceed, and from the 

' And thit essence^ as is shown in the 4th book, subsists at the summit of the intelligible and at 
the same time intellectual order. 

* This forms the middle of the above-mentioned order. 

* This forms the extremity of that order. 

* Viz. to Saturn, who subsists at the summit of the intellectual order. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



284 


on the; theology 


BOOK Vlf. 


natures prior to it, different things being analogous to different causes. 
And the more excellent natures indeed are the causes of all that 
proceeds from secondary principles; but secondary principles are the 
causes of less numerous and less excellent effects. For with respect to 
the demiurgus himself, so far as he is intellectual, he produces all things 
intellectual; but so far as he is being, he is the father of all bodies and of 
every thing incorporeal; and so far as he is a God, he also gives subsist¬ 
ence to matter itself. In what is now said, therefore, Plato makes a 
summary repetition of every thing which the universe derives from the 
intellectual Gods. And thus much concerning the whole theory. 

Let us survey, however, more particularly the truth of what is now said. 
When, therefore, Plato calls the demiurgus, “ an eternally reasoning 
being," he makes the essence and at the same time the intellection of him 
through which the world is perpetual, to be eternal. It is requisite, like¬ 
wise, to observe how he arranges the demiurgus among beings that always 
exist, assigning to him an eternal order; so that he will not be soul. For 
in the Laws Plato says that soul is immortal indeed, and indestructi¬ 
ble, but is not eternal. Hence, it appears that every one who fancies 
soul is the demiurgus, is ignorant of the difference between the eternal 
and the indestructible. But reasoning is significant of distributed or 
divided fabrication. And the words, “ who at a certain time would 
exist,” do not indicate a temporal beginning, as Atticus imagined they 
did, but an essence conjoined with time. For Plato says in this dialogue, 
“ that time was generated together with the universe,” and the world is 
temporal, and time is mundane. For tipie and the world are consubsistent 
with each other, and co-produced from the one fabrication of things. 
And a temporal ever , may be said to be at a certain time , when compared 
with that which is eternal, just as that which is generatively being , is non- 
being, when compared with that which is intelligibly being. Though the 
world, therefore, exists through the whole of lime, yet its being consists in 
becoming to be, and is in a part of time. But this is the aw« or the at a certain 
time, mentioned by Plato, and is not a simultaneous subsistence in all 
time, but is always at a certain time. For the eternal is always in the 
whole of eternity; but the temporal in a certain time, is. always differently 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XLVllI. 


OF PLATO. 


283 


in a different time. Hence, the world, as with reference to an eternally 
existing God, is very properly called a God, who at a certain time would 
exist. For the former is sensible with reference to the latter, who is 
intellectual. That which is sensible, therefore, is always generated , but is 
at a certain time. For it possesses existence partibly, and is perpetually 
advancing into being from that which always is. For since, as we have 
before observed, it derives from something else an infinite power of exist¬ 
ing, and that which it possesses is finite, but it is perpetual by always 
receiving, the ability of existing infinitely, being numbered in that which 
is finite, it is evident that it is at a certain time; from a certain time 
always possessing existence; and in consequence of that which is im¬ 
parted to it never ceasing, always becoming to be; ‘ but in its own 
nature existing at a certain time, and having, as Plato says in the Politi¬ 
cos, a renovated immortality. For subsisting in rising into existence, the 
whole of it does not at once participate of the whole of being, but again 
and again, not existing without an extension of being. Unless, perhaps, 
the expression at a certain time , signifies the whole of time. For the 
evolution of time, as with reference to an eternal infinity is tot* a certain 
time. And the , whole of time has the same ratio to eternity, that a part of 
time the tot* has to the whole. 

If, also, you are willing, it may be said after another manner, that 
Plato denominates the world “ a God that at a certain time would exist,*’ 
since he has now fashioned a corporeal nature, and given.subsistence to 
intellect, but not yet to soul, because the world also as a God will have a 
subsistence in the course of his narration. For divinity produces at once 
both parts and the whole, but language divides things that are consub- 
sistent, generates things that are unbegotten, and distributes eternal 
natures according to time. The God, therefore, that at a certain time 
would exist, is that which is fashioned in the narration of Plato, and 
according to which there are division and composition. For this, also, 
the Pythagoric Timaeus himself indicates to those who are able to under- 

1 Instead of xai ha to fir) X *yew, to out ywofievos, it is necessary to read ha to w Ai jyuv to 

hlov, mi yivoiwvo$. 


Digitized by boogie 



286 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


stand him, when he says in his treatise [On the soul of the world], 
“ Before heaven (i. e. the world) was generated in words, there were idea 
and matter, and God the demiurgus.” For he clearly manifests that he 
fashions in words the generation of the world. 

When Plato, likewise, says that the demiurgus fabricated the body of 
the world smooth and equable, this manifests the one comprehension in 
the world, and its supreme aptitude to the participation of a divine soul. 
But the words, “ every way from the middle equal,” exhibit the peculia¬ 
rity of a spherical figure; for this is every way equally distant according 
to all intervals. And the words “ whole and perfect from the composition 
of perfect bodies," give to the world a consummate similitude to all¬ 
perfect animal; for that was in all things perfect; and also to the demi¬ 
urgus himself. For as he is the father of fathers, and the supreme of 
rulers, so the world is the most perfect of perfect natures, and the most 
total of wholes. You may also say, that Plato calls the world smooth, as 
not being in want of any motive, or nutritive, or sensitive organs; for this 
had just before been demonstrated by him. But that it is every way 
equal from the middle, as having a spherical figure. And that it is whole 
and perfect, as being all-perfect, and leaving nothing external to itself; 
for this is properly a whole and perfect. It likewise consists of perfect 
bodies, as- being composed of the four elements. But Plato calls it in 
the singular number a body, as being only-begotten. And thus beginning 
from the only-begotten, and proceeding as far as to perfection, he again 
returns to it through the above-mentioned words, imitating the progression 
of the world from its paradigm, and its perfect conversion to it. 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


In the next place, let us direct our attention to the words, “ But 
placing soul in the middle of the world, he extended it through the 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XLIX. 


OF PLATO. 


287 


whole; and besides this, externally sarrounded the body of the universe 
with soul." Divinity, says Proclus, at once and eternally prodaces all 
things. For according to his very being, and according to the eternal 
intellection of wholes, he generates all things from himself, supermundane 
and mundane beings, intellects, souls, natures, bodies, and matter itself. 
And indeed, an at-once-collected subsistence in a greater degree belongs 
to the demiurgic progeny, than to the solar illumination; though in this 
the whole light proceeds simultaneously with the sun. But it is evident 
that the sun imitating the father of the universe through visible fabrica¬ 
tion is inferior to eternal and invisible production. All things, therefore, 
as we hare said, being produced from the invisible fabrication at once 
and eternally, at the same time, the order of the effects is likewise pre¬ 
served. For all things proceed collectively together with their own 
proper order. For in the producing cause, there was also an eternal 
inteHectiow, and order prior to the things that were arranged. Hence, 
though all things proceed at once from one cause, yet some have a first , 
and others a diminished dignity. For some things proceed in a greater, 
but others in a less degree. And some are co-arranged with the demiur- 
gus according to union, others according to contact, and others according 
to participation. For intellect is able to be connascent with' intellect 
through union; but soul is naturally adapted to be conjoined with 
intellect; and bodies participate of it only, just as things in the profun¬ 
dity of the earth participate of the splendour of the sun. All these, 
therefore, subsisting in the world, viz. intellect, soul, and body, and all 
these being produced at once, and at the same time, there being an 
ordfer in these proceeding from the demiutgus, language at one time 
beginning supernally according to progression, ends at the boundaries 
of fabrication, but at another time being incited * from things last, 
according to conversion, recurs to the summits of the universe, conform¬ 
ably to things themselves. For all things proceed, and are converted to 
the cause and principle from which they proceeded; in so doing exhibiting 
a certain demiurgic circle. 

* For epm/uvos here, it is necessary to read 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



288 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK V1L 


Plato, however, delivered to us the order of the plenitudes {^Mp <0 H MTa>y )' 
of the world, according to progression, in what he before said, when the 
demiurgus placing intellect in soul, and soul in body fabricated 1 the 
universe, but in the present passage, he unfolds to us the order according 
to conversion. And in the first place, he assumes two contraries in the 
universe, adds two media to these, and unites them through analogy. 
Afterwards giving completion to the world, by rendering it a whole of 
wholes, he surrounds it with an intellectual [i. e. with a spherical] figure, 
gives it the power of participating a divine life, and a motion imitating 
intellect. * Always, likewise, causing the world to be more perfect by the 
additions, he introduces soul into it as her proper place of abode, and 
fills all things with life, but different things with a different life. He also 
inserts intellect in soul, and through this conjoins her with her fountain. 
For the soul of the universe participating of intellect, is connected with 
intelligibles themselves. And thus he ends at the principle from which 
the mundane intellect, soul and the body of the world proceed. For 
giving a three-fold division to the universe, viz. into intellect, soul, and 
body, he discusses in the first place the two latter which are subordinate. 
For such is the mode according to conversion. And he terminates 
indeed the discussion of the body of the world, having unfolded its 
essence, its figure, and its motion. But the theory of soul is connected 
with this, just as the body itself of the world is suspended from a divine 
soul. 

With respect, however, to the position of soul in the middle of the 
universe, it is differently explained by the different interpreters of Plato. 
For some call the centre of the earth the middle, but others the moon, as 
being the isthmus of generated and divine natures. Others again say 
that the sun is the middle, as being established in the place of a heart 
[in the world], others the inerratic sphere, others the equinoctial, as 
bounding the breadth of the universe, and others the zodiac. And some 

1 Wholes whether corporeal or incorporeal are thus denominated. 

1 For o-tmxTiivixTo, it is necessary to read rvMTcxnuvtrv. 

1 i. e. a circular motion. 


« 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



■CHAP. XLIX. 


OP PLATO. 


289 


indeed place the governing principle in the centre of the universe, others 
in the moon, others in the sun, others in the equinoctial, and others in the 
zodiac. And the power of the centre testifies in favour of the first of 
these, since it is connective of every circulation; the motion of the moon, 
in favour of the second, since it variously changes generation ; the vivific 
heat of the sun, in favour of the third; the facility of the motion of the 
equinoctial circle, of the fourth; and in favour of the fifth, the circulation 
of the stars about the zodiac. Porphyry, however, and Jamblichus, 
oppose all these interpretations, and reprobate them as understanding the 
middle in a way accompanied with interval, and enclosing in a certain 
part the soul of the whole world, which is every where similarly present, 
which rules over all things, and leads all things by its own motions. Of 
these divine men, however, Porphyry assuming the soul to be the soul of 
the universe, interprets the middle according to the psychical essence; for 
soul is the middle of intelligibles and sensibles. This interpretation, 
however, does riot appear to say any thing as with reference to the words 
of Plato. But if we assume this, that the universe derives its completion 
from intellect, soul and body, and that it is a psychical and intellectual 
animal, we shall find in this system that soul is the middle. This, there¬ 
fore, Plato had before asserted; and now he will appear to say nothing 
else, than that the soul of the world is extended through the universe, being 
allotted a middle order in it. But the philosopher Jamblichus thinks 
that by soul we should understand the exempt, supermundane, and libe¬ 
rated soul, and which has dominion over all things. For according to 
him, Plato does not here speak of the mundane soul, but of the soul which 
is not'participated by body, and which is arranged as a monad above all 
mundane souls. For the first soul is of this kind, and the middle is 
asserted of this, as being similarly present to all things, because it does 
not belong to any body, has no manner of habitude whatever, similarly 
animates all things, and is equally distant from all things. For it is not 
distant from some things in a less, and from others in a greater degree, • 

since it is without habitude; but it is alike distant front all things; though 
all things are not after the same manner distant from it. For in its par¬ 
ticipants there is the more and the less. 

Proc. Vol. II, 2 0 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



890 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


Our leader, however, [Syrianus] more aptly interprets Hie words of 
Plato. For the soul of the world has indeed that which is supermundane 
and exempt from the universe, according to which it is conjoined with 
intellect, which Plato in the Phssdrus, and Orpheus in his verses con¬ 
cerning Ippa 1 denominate the head or summit of the soul. It has also 
another multitude of powers proceeding from this monad, divided about 
the world, and appropriately present to all the parts of the universe. 
And these subsist in one way indeed about the middle, in another way 
about the earth, in another about the sun, and in another about each of 
the spheres. Our leader, therefore, says that all these are comprehended 
in the present words of Plato, who indicates by them, that the soul of the 
world in one way animates the middle, in another the whole bulk, and 
that it leaves something else prior to these exempt from the universe. 

That we may not, however, carelessly attend to what is here said by 
Plato, but may offer something demonstrative about tbe psychical powers, 
it must be said, that soul by a much greater priority than body is a vital 
world, and is both one and number. And by the one indeed, it is better 
than every form of habitude; but by the multitude it rules over the difc 
ferent parts of the universe. For in its guardian powers it contaius the 
centre; since from thence the whole sphere is governed, to which also it 
converges. Farther still, every thing turbulent in the world is impelled 
to the middle, and requires a divine guard, which is able to arrange it, and 
detain it in its proper boundaries. Hence also, theologists terminate the 
progressions of the highest Gods in that place; and the Pythagoreans 
call the middle either the tower or the prison of Jupiter. But in its stable 
and at the same time vivific powers, it oontains the sphere of the earth. 
In its perfective and generative powers, the sphere of water. In its 
connective and motive powers it comprehends the air. In its undefiled 
powers, fire. And in Rs intellectual powers, the whole heaven. In these 
powers, likewise, it in one way contains tbe lunar, in another the solar, 
and in another the inerratic sphere. 

• Proclua elsewhere informs us in these Commentaries, that the soul of the world is called by 
Orpheus Jppa. 



Digitized by t^OOQLe 



CHAP. XUX. 


OF PLATO. 


m 


Such therefore, being the animation of the world, or itk^participation of 
soul, Plato, as it is usual with him, beginning according to conversion 
from things that are last, first imparts soul to the middle, afterwards to 
the universe, and in the third place leaves something of soul external to 
the universe. For as be gave subsistence to body prior to soul, and to 
parts prior to wholes, thus also he imparts soul to the world, beginning 
from things that have an idti mate existence. When Plato therefore 
delivered the order of the plenitudes of the world according to progression, 
beginning supernally, he placed intellect in soul, and soul in body. But 
here where he delivers the order according to conversion, he first animates 
the middle, and afterwards the universe itself. For the river of 
vivification proceeds as far as to the centre; as the Chaldaean oracles 
also assert, when speaking about the middle of the five centres, which ’ 
from on high passes entirely to the opposite part, through the centre of 
the earth. For they say: “ And another fifth middle fiery centre, where 
a life-bearing fire descends as far as to the material rivers." Hence 
Plato beginning from those things in which animation ends, Recurs to 
the whole vivification, and prior to this surveys the exempt power of the 
soul. We must not therefore place the ruling part of the soul in the 
centre; for this is exempt from the universe; but a certain power of it 
which guards the whole order of the. world. For nothing else in the 
universe has so much the power of entirely subverting the whole of things, 
as the centre and the power of the centre, about which the universe with 
measured motion harmoniously revolves. Hence it appears to me that 
Plato divinely says that the demiurgus placed soul and not the soul in the 
middle of the universe. For these differ from each other, because 
the latter establishes the whole soul in the centre, but the former a 
certain power of it, and a different power in different parts. 

The philosopher himself however, shortly after, when speaking of the 
animation itself of the world says, “ But the soul being extended from 
the middle to the very extremities of the universe, and investing it 
externally in a circle, gave rise to the divine commencement of an 
unceasing and wise life through the whole of time.” For the words w to 
be every way extended from the middle,” have the same meaning as •* to 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



29$ 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VIL 


be extended from the middle to the very extremities of the universe.” 
But in the latter, the soul herself illuminates from herself the centre of 
the universe and the whole sphere of it by her powers; while in the 
former, the demiurgus is the cause of the animation, himself introducing 
the soul into the universe as into her proper place of abode. For the 
same thing is effected by both, but demiurgically indeed and intellectually; 
by the cause, and self-motively by soul. Now however, the philosopher 
delivers the bond which proceeds from fabrication alone. For we 
particularly refer wholes and such things as are good to a divine cause; 
but we consider partial natures, and such things- as are not good, to be 
unworthy of divine fabrication; and we suspend them from other 
proximate causes, though these also, as it is frequently said, subsist from 
divinity. Since therefore both a divine and a partial soul have communi¬ 
cation with bodies, the former indeed subsisting according to boniform 
will, and not departing from intelligible progressions is deific; but the 
latter which takes place through a defluxion of the wings of the soul, or 
through audacity, or flight, is atheistical, though the former is- complicated 
with the self-motive energy, and the latter with providential care. But 
in the one a subsistence according to deity is apparent through the 
presence of divinity ; and in the other, a subsistence from soul, through, 
the representation of aberration. 


CHAPTER L. 

In the next place Timseus, or rather Plato adds, “ And causing circle 
to revolve in a circle, he established heaven (i. e. the* world) one, only, 
solitary nature;” on which Proclus observes as follows: The philosopher ' 
Porphyry weil interprets the meaning of circle revolving in a circle. 
For it is possible, says he, for that which is not a circle to be moved in a 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. L. 


OF PLATO. 


393 


circle, as a stone when whirled round; and also for a circle to be moved 
not in a circle, as a wheel when rolled along. But it is the peculiarity 
of the world, that being circular it is moved in a circle, through 
harmoniously revolving about •;the centre. In a still greater degree 
however, the divine Jamblichus well interprets the meaning of these 
words. For he says that the circle is twofold, the one being psychical, 
bnt the other corporeal, and that the latter is moved in the former. For 
this is conformable to what has been before said, and accords with what 
, is afterwards asserted. For Plato himself shortly after moves the 
eorporeal nature according to the psychical circle, and renders the 
twofold circulations analogous to the periods in the soul. 

Moreover, to comprehend the whole blessedness of the world in three 
appellations, is most appropriate to that which subsists according to a 
triple cause, viz; the final, the paradigmatic, and the demiurgic. For of 
the appellations themselves, the first of them, viz. one , is assumed from 
the final cause ; for the one is the same with the good. But the second, 
viz. only, is assumed from the paradigmatic cause. For the only-begotten 
and onlyness (jMvmtns) were, prior to the universe, in all-perfect animal: 
And the third, viz. the solitary , is assumed from the demiurgic cause: 
For the ability of using itself, and through itself governing the world, 
proceeds from the demiurgic goodness. The world therefore is one, so far 
as it is united, and is converted to the one. But it is only, so far as it 
participates of the intelligible, and comprehends all things in itself. And 
it is solitary, so far as it is similar to its father, and is .able to save itself: 
From the three however, it appears that it is a God. For the one, the 
perfect , and the self-sufficient, axe the elements of deity. Hence, the 
world receiving these, is also itself a God; being one indeed, according to 
hyparxis; but alone, according to a perfection which derives its completion 
from all sensible natures; and solitary, through being sufficient to itself. 
For those that lead a solitary life, being converted to themselves, have 
the hopes of salvation in themselves. And that this is the meaning of 
the term solitary, will be evident from the following words of Plato: 
“Able through virtue to converse with itself, indigent of nothing external,, 
and sufficiently known and friendly to itself.” For in these words, he 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



394 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VIT. 


clearly manifests what the solitariness is which he ascribes to the world, 
and that he denominates that being solitary, who looks to himself, to 
that with which he is furnished, and to his own proper measure. For 
those that live in solitary places, are the saviours of themselves, so far as 
respects human causes. The universe therefore is likewise after this 
manner solitary, as being sufficient to itself, and preserving itself, not 
through a diminution, but from an exuberance of power; for self-suffi¬ 
ciency is here indicated; and as he says, through virtue. For he alone 
among partial animals [such as we are] who possesses virtue is able to 
associate with, and love himself with a parental affection. But the 
vicious man looking to his inward baseness, is indignant with himself and 
with his own essence, is astonished with externals, and pursues an 
association with others, in consequence of his inability to behold himself. 
On the contrary, the worthy man perceiving himself beautiful Fejoices 
and is delighted, and producing in himself beautiful conceptions, gladly 
embraces an association with himself. For we are naturally domesticated 
to the beautiful, but hastily withdraw ourselves from deformity. Hence, 
if the world possesses virtue adapted to itself, in its intellectual and 
psychical essence, and in the perfection of its animal nature, looking to 
itself, it loves itself, and is present with, and sufficient to itself. 

It is proper therefore to assert these things to those who place 
intelligibles external to intellect. For how can that which tends to other 
things, and as being deficient is indigent of externals, be blessed ? Hence, 
if the world is through virtue converted to itself, must not intellect do 
this in a much greater degree? Intellect therefore intellectually perceives 
itself. And this is among the number of things immediately known. 
This also deserves to be remarked, that Plato when he gives animation to 
the world, directly imparts virtue to it. For the participation of soul is 
immediately accompanied with the fulness of virtue, in the being which 
subsists according to nature; since the one cause of the virtues,’ is also 
ccvarranged with the fountain of souls, 1 and the progression of this 
fountain is conjoined with the progression of soul. For with respect to 

■ i. c, Vesta. * L«. Juno. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. L. 


Of PLATO. 


295 

virtue, one indeed is unite!, primary and all-perfect; but another subsists 
in the ruling supermundane Gods; another in the liberated Gods j and 
another is mundane, through which the whole world possesses undefiled 
intelligence, an undeviating life, an energy converted to itself, and a 
purity unmingled with the animals which it contains. From this virtue 
therefore, the world becomes known and friendly to itself. For knowledge 
precedes familiarity. 

Since the universe also is intellectual, an animal, and a Cod, so for 
indeed, as it is intellectual, it becomes known to itself; but so far as it is 
a God, it is friendly to itself. For union is more perfect than knowledge. 
If therefore, the universe is known to itself, it is intellectual; for that 
which is primarily known to itself is intellect. And if it is friendly to 
itself, it is united. But that which is united is deified; for the one which 
is in intellect is a God. Again therefore, you have virtue, a knowledge of, 
and a friendship with itself, in the world; the first of these proceeding^ 
into it from soul; the second from intellect; and the third from deity. 
Hence Plato very properly adds, that on account of these things, the 
world was generated by the demiurgus a blessed God ; for the presence of 
soul, the participation of intellect, and the reception of union, render the 
universe a God. And the blessed God which he now mentions is the 
God “whoat a certain time would exist," animated,endued with intellect, 
and united. Union however is present with it according to the bond of 
analogy ; but much more from the one soul and the one intellect which 
it participates. For through these, greater bonds ; and a more excellent 
union proceeded into the universe. And still beyond these unions* 
divine friendship, and the supply of good, contain and connect the whole 
world. For the bond which proceeds from intellect and soul is strong, 
as Orpheus also says; but the union of the golden chain [i. e. of the 
deific series] is still greater, and is the cause of greater good to all things. 

Moreover, felicity must likewise be assumed in a way adapted to the 
universe. For since it is suspended from the paternal intellect and the 
whole fabrication of things, and since it lives conformably to these causes, 
it is consequently happy (««8a»fu»») ’ from them. For the demiurgus also 

* i. e. Having a good daemon. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 



296 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


>8 denominated a daemon by Plato in the Pohticus, and a great daemon by 
Orpheus when he says, 

.One the great daemon and the loxd of alL* 

He therefore who lives according to the will of the father, and preserves 
the intellectual nature which was imparted to him from thence immu¬ 
table is happy, and blessed. The first, and the all-perfect form of felicity 
likewise, is that of the world. The second is that of the mundane Gods, 
whom Plato in the Phaedrus calls happy Gods, following the mighty 
Jupiter. The third is that of the genera superior to us [viz. the felicity 
of angels, daemons and heroes]. For there is one virtue of angels, 
another of daemons, and another of the heroic genera: and the form of 
felicity is triple being different according to each genus. The fourth 
form of felicity is that which subsists in the undefiled souls, who make 
blameless descents {[into the realms of generation,] and exert an inflexible 
and untamed life. The fifth is that of partial souls [such as ours]; and 
this is multiform. For the soul which is an attendant on the moon, is 
not similarly happy with the soul that is suspended from the solar order; 
but as the form of life is different, so likewise perfection is defined by 
different measures. And the last form of felicity is that which is seen in 
irrational animals. For every thing which obtains a perfection adapted 
to it according to nature, is happy. _ For through its proper perfection, 
it is conjoined to its proper daemon, and partakes of his providential care. 
The forms of felicity therefore, being so many, the first and highest must 
be placed in the world, and which also is now mentioned by Plato. 
We must not however wonder that he immediately calls the world a 
God, from its participation of soul. For every thing is deified through 
that which is proximately prior to it; the corporeal world indeed through 
soul; but 6oul through intellect, as the Athenian guest also says; and 
intellect through the one . Hence, intellect is divine, but. not a God. 

’ Instead of n; Sai fiam tyeve to ptyaf ctg^o; uiro xavrwv, It is requisite to read ti( laifim ytvirt 
fLtyeif etg%os aicurrw. 


Digitized by 


Google 



* 


CHAP. LI. OF PLATO. 2pj 

The one however is no longer a God through any thing else, but is 
primarily a God; just as intellect is primarily gnostic, as soul is primarily 
self-motive, and as body is primarily in place. 

f 


CHAPTER LI. 

Ik the last place, I shall present the reader with what Plato says in 
the Timaeus about the name of the world, and add to it the elucidations 
of Proclus; for thus every thing pertaining to the mundane Gods, and 
their great recipient the universe will have been amply, and I trust 
satisfactorily discussed. Plato therefore says on this subject: “We shall 
denominate the universe, heaven , or the world, or by any other appellation 
in which it may especially rejoice." These names, says Proclus, were 
attended with much ambiguity with the ancients. For some alone called 
the sublunary region xorpof kotrnos , the world , and the region above it 
***** ouranos , heaven ; but others called heaven a part of the world. And 
some indeed, considered the moon as the boundary of heaven; but others 
denominated the summits of generation heaven. Thus Homer, 

Extended heaven in ether and the cloud* 

Fell to the lot of Jove. 

Hence Plato very properly prior to the whole theory speaks definitively 
concerning these names, denominating the universe heaven and the world. 
And he calls it heaven indeed, as perceiving the things above, contempla¬ 
ting the intelligible, and participating an intellectual essence; but the 
world, as always being filled and adorned by true beings. He likewise 
denominates it heaven as being converted to the principles of its existence? 
but the world as proceeding from them. For it was generated by true 
beings, and is converted to them. As however, of statues which are 
Proc. Vol. II. 2 P 


D . zed by boogie 



S9B 


ON THE THEOLOGY 


BOOK VII. 


established by the telestic (or mystic) art, some things are apparent' in 
them, but others are inwardly concealed, which are symbolical * of the 
presence of the Gods, and are known to the mystic framers of them alone; 
after the same manner the universe being the statue of the intelligible 
world, and perfected by the father, has some things apparent which are 
indications of its divinity, but others unapparent, which are the marks, 
seals, or impressions of the participation of true being, 5 which it received 
from the father who gave it perfection ; in order that through these it may 
be eternally rooted in real essence. The appellations also heaven and the 
world are names significant of the apparent powers in the universe; the 
latter indeed, so far as they proceed from the intelligible, but the former, 
so far as they are converted to it. 

It is necessary however, to know that the divine name of the abiding 
power of the universe, and which is a symbol of the demiurgic seal, 
according to which also it subsists in unproceeding union with real being, 
is ineffable, and not vocal, and is known to the Gods themselves. For 
there are appropriate names in every order of things; divine indeed, in 
the Gods; but dianoetic in the subjects of the discursive power of reason; 
and doxastic in the objects of opinion. And this also Plato asserts in 
the Cratylus, assenting to Homer who places one kind of names of the 
same things in the Gods, and another kind in the opinions of men, as 

Gods call it Xanthus, but Scamander men. 

And ' 

Chalcis its name with those of heavenly birth, 

But call’d Cymindis by the sons of earth. 

And in a similar manner in many other names. For as the knowledge 
of the Gods is of one kind, but that of partial souls of another, so names 
in the former are different from those in the latter. Divine names 
however, unfold the whole essence of the things named; but those of 

1 For a$«vi) here, it is necessary to read 

1 For rm iem iragwnetf, it is requisite to read <ru/t/3oXixa rr,s toiv, x. X. 

* After row ©m>j here, it is requisite to supply ovtoj. 


Digitized by 


Google 



CHAP. LI. 


OF PLATO. 


299 


men only effect this partially. Plato therefore knowing that this pre¬ 
existed in the world, omits to mention what the divine and ineffable 
name of it is which is different from the apparent, and with great caution 
speaks of it as a symbol of the divine impression which the world 
contains. For the words, “or by any other appellation in which it may 
especially rejoice,” are a latent hymn of the mundane name so far as it 
is allotted an unspeakable and divine essence, in order that it may be 
co-ordinate to that which is signified by him. Hence also, divine 
mundane names are delivered by theurgists ; some being called by them 
ineffable, but others effable; and some of them being the names of the 
unapparent powers in the world, but others, of the visible elements from 
which it derives its completion. Plato therefore, here delivers both the 
apparent and the unapparent name of the world, the former indeed, 
dyadically, but the latter monadically ; for the words, “ or by any other,” 
are significant of oneness. And the ineffable name indeed of the universe, 
is indicative of its abiding in its father; the name world , of its progression ; 
and heaven , of its regression. But through the three, you have the final 
cause, on account of which it is full of good, abiding indeed ineffably, but 
proceeding perfectly, and returning to the goody as to the preexisting 
object of desire. 


Digitized by t^OOQLe 


