PA 

4397 

E5 

08 

1917 


ON  THE 

CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS  IN 

THE  THIRTEENTH  BOOK  OF 

THE  ODYSSEY 


On  the 

Cave  of  the  Nymphs  in 

the  Thirteenth  Book  of 

the  Odyssey 

From  the  Greeh  of  Porphyry 


Translated  by 

Thomas  Taylor 


q 

London 

John  M.  Watkins 

21  Cecil  Court,  Charing  Cross  Road 

1917 


ON  THE 

CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS  IN 

THE  THIRTEENTH  BOOK  OF 

THE  ODYSSEY 

I  i.  What  does  Homer  obscurely  signify  by 
the  cave  in  Ithaca,  which  he  describes  in  the 
following  verses  ? 

"  High  at  the  head  a  branching  olive  grows 
And  crowns  the  pointed  cliffs  with  shady  boughs. 
A  cavern  pleasant,  though  involved  in  night, 
Beneath  it  lies,  the  Naiades'  delight : 
Where  bowls  and  urns  of  workmanship  divine 
And  massy  beams  in  native  marble  shine ; 
On  which  the  Nymphs  amazing  webs  display, 
Of  purple  hue  and  exquisite  array. 
The  busy  bees  within  the  urns  secure 
Honey  delicious,  and  like  nectar  pure. 
Perpetual  waters  through  the  grotto  glide, 
A  lofty  gate  unfolds  on  either  side  ; 
That  to  the  north  is  pervious  to  mankind  : 
The  sacred  south  t'immortals  is  consign'd." 

That  the  poet,  indeed,  does  not  narrate  these 
particulars  from  historical  information,  is  evi 
dent  from  this,  that  those  who  have  given  us 
5 


6     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

a  description  of  the  island,  have,  as  Cronius 
(note  i)  says,  made  no  mention  of  such  a  cave 
being  found  in  it.  This  likewise,  says  he,  is 

manifest,  that  it  wnnlrf    hf>   ahgrn-j    fpr 


to  expectTthat  in_d^scfi5mga  cave  fabricated 


^jnerely  by  poetical  license  and  thus  artificially 
opening  a  path  to  Gods  and  men  in  the  region 
of  Ithaca,  he  should  gam  the  behei  of  man- 

-  •  7  *^ 

kind.  Andit  is  equally  absurd  to  suppose, 
that  nature  herself  should  point  out,  in  this 
place,  one  path  for  the  descent  of  all  mankind, 
and  again  another  path  for  all  the  Gods.  For, 
indeed,  the  whole  world  is  full  of  Gods  and 
men;  but  it  is  impossible  to  be  persuaded, 
that  in  the  Ithacensian  cave  men  descend, 
and  Gods  ascend.  Cronius  therefore,  having 
premised  this  much,  says,  that  it  is  evident,  not 
only  to  the  wise  but  also  to  the  vulgar,  that 
the  poet,  under  the  veil  of  allegory,  conceals 
some  mysterious  signification ;  thus  compel 
ling  others  to  explore  what  the  gate  of  men  is, 
and  also  what  is  the  gate  of  the  Gods :  what 
means  by  asserting  that  this  cave  of  the 
Nymphs  has  two  gates ;  and  why  it  is  both 
pleasant  and  obscure,  since  darkness  is  by  no 
means  delightful,  but  is  rather  productive  of 
aversion  and  horror.  Likewise,  what  is  the 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE   NYMPHS     7 

reason  why  it  is  not  simply  said  to  be  the  cave 
of  the  Nymphs,  but  it  is  accurately  added,  of 
the  Nymphs  which  are  called  Naiades  ?  Why 
also,  is  the  cave  represented  as  containing 
bowls  and  amphorae,  when  no  mention  is  made 
of  their  receiving  any  liquor,  but  bees  are  said 
to  deposit  their  honey  in  these  vessels  as  in 
hives?  Then,  again,  why  are  oblong  beams 
adapted  to  weaving  placed  here  for  the 
Nymphs ;  and  these  not  formed  from  wood, 
or  any  other  pliable  matter,  but  from  stone, 
as  well  as  the  amphorae  and  bowls  ?  Which 
last  circumstance  is,  indeed,  less  obscure ; 
but  that,  on  these  stony  beams,  the  Nymphs 
should  weave  purple  garments,  is  not  only 
wonderful  to  the  sight,  but  also  to  the  auditory 
sense.  For  who  would  believe  that  Goddesses 
weave  garments  in  a  cave  involved  in  dark 
ness,  and  on  stony  beams ;  especially  while  he 
hears  the  poet  asserting,  that  the  purple  webs 
of  the  Goddesses  were  visible.  In  addition  to 
these  things  likewise,  this  is  admirable,  that 
the  cave  should  have  a  twofold  entrance ;  one 
made  for  the  descent  of  men,  but  the  other  for 
the  ascent  of  Gods.  And  again  that  the  gate, 
which  is  pervious  by  men,  should  be  said  to 
be  turned  against  the  north  wind,  but  the 


8     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

portal  of  the  Gods  to  the  south ;  and  why  the 
poet  did  not  rather  make  use  of  the  west  and 
the  east  for  this  purpose,  since  nearly  all 
temples  have  their  statues  and  entrances 
turned  towards  the  east ;  but  those  who  enter 
them  look  towards  the  west,  when  standing 
with  their  faces  turned  towards  the  statues 
they  honour  and  worship  the  Gods.  Jlence, 
since  this  narration  is  full  of  siirh  nhgriirit;ifif::J 
it  can  neither  be  a  fiction  casually  devised  foiL 
_the  purpose  of  procuring  delight,  nor  an  ex 
position  of  a  topical  history;  but  something 
allegorical  must  be  indicated  in  it  by  the  ooetT 
who  likewise  mvsticallyplaces  an  olive  near 
thecaye.  All  which  particulars  the  ancients 
thought  very  laborious  to  investigate  and  un 
fold  ;  and  we,  with  their  assistance,  shall  now 
endeavour  to  develop  the  secret  meaning  of  the 
allegory.  Those  persons,  therefore,  appear  to 
have  written  very  negligently  about  the  situa 
tion  of  the  place,  who  think  that  the  cave,  and 
what  is  narrated  concerning  it,  are  nothing 
more  than  a  fiction  of  the  poet.  But  the  best 
and  most  accurate  writers  of  geography,  and 
among  these  Artemidorus  the  Ephesian,  in  the 
fifth  book  of  his  work,  which  consists  of  eleven 
books,  thus  writes :  "  The  island  of  Ithaca, 


ON  THE   CAVE   OF  THE   NYMPHS     9 

containing  an  extent  of  eighty-five  stadia 
(note  2),  is  distant  from  Panormus,  a  port  of 
Cephalenia,  about  twelve  stadia.  It  has  a  port 
named  Phorcys,  in  which  there  is  a  shore,  and 
on  that  shore  a  cave,  in  which  the  Phaeacians 
are  reported  to  have  placed  Ulysses."  This 
cave,  therefore,  will  not  be  entirely  an  Homeric 
fiction.  But  whether  the  poet  describes  it  as 
it  really  is,  or  whether  he  has  added  some 
thing  to  it  of  his  own  invention,  nevertheless 
the  same  inquiries  remain ;  whether  the  in 
tention  of  the  poet  is  investigated,  or  of  those 
who  founded  the  cave.  For,  neither  did  the 
ancients  establish  temples  without  fabulous 
symbols,  nor  does  Homer  rashly  narrate  the 
particulars  pertaining  to  things  of  this  kind. 
But  how  much  the  more  anyone  endeavours 
to  show  that  this  description  of  the  cave  is 
not  an  Homeric  fiction,  but  prior  to  Homer 
was  consecrated  to  the  Gods,  by  so  much  the 
more  will  this  consecrated  cave  be  found 
to  be  full  of  ancient  wisdom.  And  on  this 
account  it  deserves  to  be  investigated,  and 
it  is  requisite  that  its  symbolical  consecra 
tion  should  be  amply  unfolded  into  light. 

2.  Thp_anrt'p'rii'c:,  i"Hpfdt  v^ry  properly  con 
secrated  ajgyejbpjthe  world,  whether  assumed 


io    ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

collectively,  according  to  the  whole  of  itself, 
or  separately,  according  to  its  parts.  Hence 
they  considered  earth  as  a  symbol  of  that 
matter  of  which  the  world  consists ;  on  which 
account  some  thought  that  matter  and  earth 
are  the  same ;  through  the  cave  indicating 
the  world,  which  was  generated  from  matter. 
For  caves  are,  for  the  most  part,  spontaneous 
productions,  and  connascent  with  the  earth, 
being  comprehended  by  one  uniform  mass  of 
stone ;  the  interior  parts  of  which  are  con 
cave,  but  the  exterior  parts  are  extended  over 
an  indefinite  portion  of  land.  And  the  world 
being  spontaneously  produced  (i.e.,  being  pro 
duced  by  no  external,  but  from  an  internal 
cause),  and  being  also  self-adherent,  is  allied 
to  matter ;  which,  according  to  a  secret  signi 
fication,  is  denominated  a  stone  and  a  rock, 
on  account  of  its  sluggish  an/l  repercussive 
nature  with  respect  to  form  jQhe^ajricients,  at- 
the  same  time,  asserting  that  matter  is  infinite 
through  its  privation  of  form..  Since,  how- 
ever7it  is  continually  flowing,  and  is  of  itself 
destitute  of  the  supervening  investments  of 
form,  through  which  it  participates  of  morphe 
(note  3),  and  becomes  visible,  the  flowing 
waters,  darkness,  or,  as  the  poet  says, 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     II 

obscurity_o£  the_cavern».  were  considerexLby 
the  ancients  as  apt  symbols  of  what  the  world 

contains,  on  account  of  the  matter  with  which 
it  is  connected. ,  iThrough  matter,  therefore, 
The  world  is  obscure  and  dark ;  but  through 
the  connecting  power,  and  orderly  distribu 
tion  of  form,  from  which  also  it  is  called  world, 
it  is  beautiful  and  delightful.  Hence  it  may 
very  properly  be  denominated  a  cave;  as 
being  lovely,  indeed,  to  him  who  first  enters 
into  it,  through  its  participation  of  forms,  but 
obscure  to  him  who  surveys  its  foundation 
and  examines  it  with  an  intellectual  eye.  So 
that  its  exterior  and  superficial  parts,  indeed, 
are  pleasant,  but  its  interior  and  profound 
parts  are  obscure .^and  its  very  bottom  i 
darkness  itself).  (Thus  also  the  Persians,^ 
mystically  signifying  the  descent  of  the  soul 
into  the  sublunary  regions^  and  its  regression 
from  it,  initiate  the  mystic  (or  him  who  is 
admitted  to  the  arcane  sacred  rites}  in  a  place  \ 
which  they  denominate  a  cavern.  For,  as 
Eubulus  says,  ZoTbaster  was  the  first  who 
consecrated  in  the  neighbouring  mountains 
of  Persia,  a  spontaneously  produced  cave, 
florid,  and  having  fountains,  in  honour  of 
Mithra,  the  maker  and  father  of  all  things ; 


12     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

a  cave,  according  to  Zoroaster,  bearing  a 

resemblance  of  the  world,  which  was  fabri- 
c^tSdJfcUUMitb£a'y  But  t*16  things  contained 
in  the  cavern  being  arranged  according  to 
commensurate  intervals,  were  symbols  oL^he 
tmmHarjfi  gfatnpnts  and  «ffma±es.^ 

'3.  After  this  Zoroaster  likewise,  it  was 
usual  with  others  to  perform  the  rites  per 
taining  to  the  mysteries  in  caverns  and  dens, 
whether  spontaneously  produced,  or  made  by 
the  hands.  For  as  they  established  temples, 
groves,  and  altars  to  the  celestial  Gods,  but 
to  the  terrestrial  Gods,  and  to  heroes,  altars 
alone,  and  to  the  subterranean  divinities  pits 
and  cells;  so  to  the  world  they  dedicated 
caves  and  dens;  as  likewise  to  Nymphs 
(note  4),  on  account  of  the  water  which 
trickles,  or  is  diffused  in  caverns,  over  which 
the  Naiades,  as  we  shall  shortly  observe,  pre 
side.  y^Nfpt  only,  however,  did  the  ancients 
make  a  cavern,  as  we  have  said,  to  be  a 
symbol  of  the  world,  or  of  a  generated  and 
sensible  nature :  but  they  also  assu 


'symbol  oT  aH  invisible  powers ;  because  as 


caverns  are  obscure  and  dark,  so  the  essence 
of  these  powers  is  occult.  Hence  Saturn 
fabricated  a  cavern  in  the  ocean  itself. and 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     13 

concealed  in  it  his  children.  /Thus,  too.  Ceres 
educated  Proserpine  with  her  Nymphs  in  a 
cave  ;  and  many  other  particulars  of  this  kind 
may  be  found  in  the  writings  of  theologists. 
But  that  the  ancients  dedicated  caverns  to' 
Nymphs  and  especially  to  Naiades,  who  dwell, 
near  fountains,  and  who  are  called  Naiades? 
from  the  streams  over  which  they  preside,  is  y 
manifest  from  the  hymn  to  Apollo,  in  which  it 
is  said  :  "  The  Nymphs  residing  in  caves  shall 
deduce  fountains  of  intellectual  waters  to  thee 
(according  to  the  divine  voice  of  the  Muses), 
which  are  the  progeny  of  a  terrene  spirit. 
Hence  waters,  bursting  through  every  river, 
shall  exhibit  to  mankind  perpetual  effusions 
of  sweet  streams  "  (note  5).  n^rom  hence,  as  it 
appears  to  me.  the  Pythagoreans.  ancLafter 
tfiem  Plato,  showed  that  the  world  is  a  caveni 


and  a^den  For  the  powers  which  are  the 
leUcfers'^f  souls,  thus  speak  in  a  verse  of 
Empedocles  : 

"  Now  at  this  secret  cavern  we're  arrived." 

And  by  Plato,  in  the  seventh  book  of  his 
Republic,  it  is  said,  "  Behold  men  as  if  dwell 
ing  in  a  subterraneous  cavern,  and  in  a  den- 
like  habitation,  whose  entrance  is  widely 


14     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

expanded  to  the  admission  of  the  light 
through  the  whole  cave."  But  when  the 
other  person  in  the  dialogue  says:  "You 
adduce  an  unusual  and  wonderful  simili 
tude,"  he  replies,  "The  whole  of  this  image, 
friend  Glauco,  must  be  adapted  to  what 
has  been  before  said,  assimilating  this  re 
ceptacle,  which  is  visible  through  the  sight 
to  the  habitation  of  a  prison  ;  but  the  light 
of  the  fire  which  is  in  it  to  the  power  of 
the  sun." 

4.  That  theologists  therefore  considered 
caverns  as  symbols  of  the  world,  and  of  mun 
dane  powers,  is  through  this,  manifest.  And 
it  has  been  already  observed  by  us,  that  they 
also  considered  a  cave  as  a  symbol  of  the  in 
telligible  essence  ;  being  impelled  to  do  so  by 
different  and  not  the  same  conceptions.  For 
they  were  of  opinion  that  a  cave  is  a  symbol  oL 
the  sensible  world  because  cavern* 


stony,  and  humid  ;  and  they  asserted  that  the 
world  is  a  thing  of  this  kind,  through  the 
matter  j>fjyhich  it  consists,  and  through  its 
repercussive  and  flowing  nature.  BuTThev 
thought  it  to  be  a  symbol  of  the  intelligible 
world,  because  that  world  is  invisible  to 
sensible  perception,  and  possesses  a  firm  and 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     15 

[ stable  essence.  Thus,  also,  partial  powers  are 
unapparent,  and  especially  those  which  are 
inherent  in  matter.  For  they  formed  these 
symbols,  from  surveying  the  spontaneous  pro 
duction  of  caves,  and  their  nocturnal,  dark, 
and  stony  nature;  and  not  entirely,  as  some 
suspect,  from  directing  their  attention  to 
the  figure  of  a  cavern.  For  every  cave  is  not 
spherical,  as  is  evident  from  this  Homeric 
cave  with  a  twofold  entrance.  But  since  a 


cavernhas  a  twofold  similitude,  the  present 
cave^  musTnot  be~assumed  as  an  image  of  the 
intelligible  but  of  the  sensible  essenceT  For" 
in  consequence  of  containing  perpetually-flow 
ing  streams  of  water,  it  will  not  bp  a  symbol  of 
an  intelligible  hypostasis,  but  of  a  material 
essence.  On  this  account  also  it  is  sacred  to 
Nymphs,  not  the  mountain  or  rural  Nymphs,  or 
others  of  the  like  kind,  but  to  the  Naiades, 
who  are  thus  denominated  from  streams  of 
water.  Eox_we_p_eculiarly  call  the  Naiades, 
and  the_jMowers  that  pTesideT  pver^wajters, 
Nyjnph^  and  this^erm_also,  is  commonly  ap 
plied  to  all  souls  descending  into  generation. 
For  the  ancients  thought  that  these  souls 
are  incumbent  on  water  which  is  inspired 
by  divinity,  as  Numenius  says,  who  adds,  that 


16     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

on  this  account,  a  prophet  asserts,  that  the 
'  Spirit  of  God  moved  on  the  waters.  The 
Egyptians  likewise,  on  this  account,  represent 
all  daemons  and  also  the  sun,  and,  in  short,  all 
the  planets  (note  6),  not  standing  on  anything 
solid,  but  on  a  sailing  vessel ;  for  souls  de 
scending  into  generation  fly  to  moisture. 
Hence  also,  Heraclitus  says,  "that  moisture 
appears  delightful  and  not  deadly  to  souls  " ; 
but  the  lapse  into  generation  is  delightful  to 
them.  And  in  another  place  (speaking  of  un- 
embodied  souls),  he  says,  "We  live  their  death, 
and  we  die  their  life."  Hence,  thepoetjralls 
those  that  are  in  generation  humid,  because 
they  have  souls  whichare  profoundly  steeped 
in  moisture.  On  this  account,  such  soulsi 
f  delight  in  blood  and  humid  seed ;  but  water) 
.  is  the  nutriment  of  the  souls  of  plants./  Some 
likewise  are  of  opinion,  that  the  bodies  in  the 
air,  and  in  the  heavens,  are  nourished  by 
vapours  from  fountains  and  rivers,  and  other 
exhalations.  But  the  Stoics  assert,  that  the 
sun  is  nourished  by  the  exhalation  from  the 
sea ;  the  moon  from  the  vapours  of  fountains 
and  river ;  and  the  stars  from  the  exhalation 
of  the  earth.  Hence,  according  to  them,  the 
sun  is  an  intellectual  composition  formed  from 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     17 

the  sea ;  the  moon  from  the  river  waters  and 
the  stars  from  terrene  exhalations. 

5.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  souls, 
whether  they  are  corporeal  or  incorporeal, 
while  they  attract  to  themselves  body,  and 
especially  such  as  are  about  to  be  bound  to 
blood  and  moist  bodies,  should  verge  to 
humidity,  and  be  corporalised,  in  consequence 
of  being  drenched  in  moisture.  Hence  the 
souls  of  the  dead  are  evocated  by  the  effusion 
of  bile  and  blood  ;  and  souls  that  are  lovers  of 
body,  by  attracting  a  moist  spirit,  condense 
this  humid  vehicle  like  a  cloud.  For  moisture 
condensed  in  the  air  constitutes  a  cloud.  But 
the  pneumatic  vehicle  being  condensed  in 
these  souls,  becomes  visible  through  an  ex 
cess  of  moisture.  And  among  the  number  of 
these  we  must  reckon  those  apparitions  of 
images,  which,  from  a  spirit  coloured  by  the 
influence  of  imagination,  present  themselves 
to  mankind.  But  pure  souls  are  averse  from 
generation ;  so  that,  as  Heraclitus  says,  "  a 
dry  soul  is  the  wisest."  Hence,  here  also  the 
spirit  becomes  moist  and  more  aqueous 
through  the  desire  of  generation,  the  soul 
thus  attracting  a  humid  vapour  from  verging 
to  generation.  Souls,  therefore,  proceeding 


18     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

into  generation  are  the  nymphs  called  naiades. 
Hence  it  is  usual  to  call  those  that  are  married 
nymphs,  as  being  conjoined  to  generation,  and 
to  pour  water  into  baths  from  fountains,  or 
rivers,  or  perpetual  rills. 

6.  This  world,  then,  is  sacred  and  pleasant 
to  souls_wjio_have  now  proceeded  into  nature, 
and  to  natal  daemons,  though  it  is  essentially 
\4  darkand  obscure  ;  from  which  some  have  sus 
pected  that  souls  also  are  of  an  obscure  nature 
and  essentially  consist  of  air.^  Hence  a  cavern, 
which  is  both  pleasant  and  dark,  will  be  appro 
priately  consecrated  to  souls  on  the  earth, 
conformably  to  its  similitude  to  the  world,  in 
which,  as  in  the  greatest  of  all  temples,  souls 
reside.  To  the  nymphs  likewise,  who  preside 
over  waters,  a  cavern,  in  which  there  are  per 
petually  flowing  streams,  is  adapted.  Let, 
therefore,  this  present  cavern  be  consecrated 
to  souls,  and  among  the  more  partial  powers, 
to  nymphs  that  preside  over  streams  and 
fountains,  and  who,  on  this  account,  are 
called  fontal  and  naiades.  What,  therefore, 
are  the  different  symbols,  some  of  which  are 
adapted  to  souls,  but  others  to  the  aquatic 
powers,  in  order  that  we  may  apprehend 
that  this  cavern  is  consecrated  in  common  to 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     19 

both?  Let  the  stony  bowls,  jhen,  and  the 
amphorae  be  symbolsj)f  the  aguatic~nymipEsi 
For  these  are,  indeed,  the  symbols  of 
Bacchus,  but  their  composition  is  fictile,  i.e., 
consists  of  baked  earth,  and  these  are  friendly 
to  the  vine,  the  gift  of  God ;  since  the  fruit  of 
the  vine  is  brought  to  a  proper  maturity  by 
the  celestial  fire  of  the  sun.  But  the  stony 
bowls  and  amphorae  are  in  the  most  eminent 
degree  adapted  to  the  nymphs  who  preside 

over  the  water  that  flows  from  rocks.    And  to 

-- 

souls  that  descend  into  qreneratioi^and  are 

occupied  in  corporeal  energies,  what  symbol 
can  be  more  appropriate  than  those  instru 
ments  pertaining  to  weaving?     Hence,  also, 
the  poet  ventures  to  say,  "that  on  these,  the 
nymphs  weave  purple  webs,  admirable  to  the 
view."  '  For  the  formation  of  the  flesh  is  on 
and  about  the  bones,  which  in  the  bodies  of 
animals  resemble  stones.   Hence  these  instru 
ments  of  weaving  consist  of  stone,  and  not  of  ^ 
any  other  matter.     But  the  p\irple  webs  will    y 
evidently  be  the  flesh  which  is  woven  from    ^> 
the  blood.     For  purple  woollen  garments  are      C. 
tinged  from  nalood.  and  wool  is  dyed  from     / 
animal  juice.    The  generation  of  flesh,  also, 
is  through  and  from  blood.     Add,  too,  that 


20     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

the  body  is  a  garment  with  which  the  soul  is 
invested,  a  thing  wonderful  to  the  sight, 
whether  this  refers  to  the  composition  of  the 
soul,  or  contributes  to  the  colligation  of  the 
soul  (to  the  whole  of  a  visible  essence).  Thus, 
also,  Proserpine,  who  is  the  inspective  guar 
dian  of  everything  produced  from  seed,  is 
represented  by  Orpheus  as  weaving  a  web 
(note  7),  and  the  heavens  are  called  by  the 
ancients  a  veil,  in  consequence  of  being,  as  it 
were/the  vestment  of  the  celestial  Gods.  1 

-  -1i"^lHi.n*-iL -t-i-ir  *    ->-•  «,  ,  ^X 

7.  Why,  therefore,  are  the  amphorae  said 


not  to  be  filled  jwjth  water,  but  with  h_qney_- 
combs_?__  For  in  these,  Homer  says,  the  bees 
deposit  their  honey,  which  signifies  to  deposit 
aliment.  And  honey  is  the  nutriment  of  bees. 
Theologists  also  have  made  honey  subservient 
to  many  and  different  symbols  because  it  con 
sists  of  many  powers ;  since  it  is  both  cath 
artic  and  preservative.  Hence,  through  honey, 
bodies  are  preserved  from  ^utrefactiojn1_and 
inveterate  ulcers  are  purified.  Farther  ^stUJ. 
it  is  also  sweet  to  the J~a  «*•<*,  anH  js  collected 
jjy_bejg§l_who  are  ox-begotten  from  flowers. 
When,  therefore,  those  who  are  initiated  in 
the  Leontic  sacred  rites,  pour  honey  instead 
of  water  on  their  hands ;  they  are  ordered 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     21 

(by  the  initiator)  to  have  their  hands  pure 
from  everything  productive  of  molestation, 
and  from  everything  noxious  and  detestable. 
Other  initiators  {into  the  same  mysteries) 
employ  fire,  which  is  of  a  cathartic  nature,  as 
an  appropriate  purification.  And  they  like 
wise  purify  the  tongue  from  all  defilement  of 
evil  with  honey.  But  the  Persians,  when 
they  offer  honey  to  the  guardian  of  fruits, 
consider  it  as  the  symbol  of  a  preserving  and 
defending  power.  Hence  some  persons  have 
thought  that  the  nectar  and  ambrosia  (note  8), 
which  the  poet  pours  into  the  nostrils  of  the 
dead,  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  putre 
faction,  is  honey ;  since  honey  is  the  food  of 
the  Gods.  On  this  account  also,  the  same 
poet  somewhere  calls  nectar  golden ;  for  such 
is  the  colour  of  honey  (viz.,  it  is  a  deep  yellow). 
But  whether  or  not  honey  is  to  be  taken  for 
nectar,  we  shall  elsewhere  more  accurately 
examine.  In  Orpheus,  likewise,  Saturn  is 
ensnared  by  Jupiter  through  honey.  For 
Saturn,  being  filled  with  honey,  is  intoxicated, 
his  senses  are  darkened,  as  if  from  the  effects 
of  wine,  and  he  sleeps ;  just  as  Porus,  in  the 
banquet  of  Plato,  is  filled  with  nectar;  for 
wine  was  not  (says  he)  yet  known.  The  God- 


dess  Night,  too,  in  Orpheus,  advises  Jupiter 
to  make  use  of  honey  as  an  artifice.  For  she 
says  to  him : — 

"When  stretch'd  beneath  the  lofty  oaks  you  view 
Saturn,  with  honey  by  the  bees  produc'd 
Sunk  in  ebriety  (note  9),  fast  bind  the  God." 

This  therefore,  takes  place,  and  Saturn 
being  bound  is  emasculated  in  the  same 
manner  as  Heaven ;  the  theologist  obscurely 
signifying  by  this  that  divine  natures  become 
through  pleasure  bound,  and  drawn  down 
into  the  realms  of  generation  ;  and  also  that, 
when  dissolved  in  pleasure  they  emit  certain 
seminal  powers.  Hence  Saturn  emasculates 
Heaven,  when  descending  to  earth  through 
a  desire  of  generation  (note  10).  But  the 
sweetness  of  honey  signifies,  with  theologists, 
the  same  thing  as  the  pleasure  arising  from 
generation,  by  which  Saturn,  being  ensnared, 
was  castrated.  For  Saturn,  and  his  sphere, 
are  the  first  of  the  orbs  that  move  contrary 
to  the  course  of  Coelum  or  the  heavens. 
Certain  powers,  however,  descend  both  from 
Heaven  (or  the  inerratic  sphere)  and  the 
planets.  But  Saturn  receives  the  powers  of 
Heaven  and  Jupiter  the  powers  of  Saturn. 
Since,  therefore,  honey  is  assumed  in  purga- 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     23 

tions,  and  as  an  antidote  to  putrefaction,  and 
is  indicative  of  the  pleasure  which  draws 
souls  downward  to  generation  ;  jt_i§_a_symbol 
well  adapted  to  aquatic  Nymphs,  on  account 
oTthijInjnitrescent  nature  oi  tne  waters  over 
which  they  preside,  their  purifying  power, 
and  their  ro-operation  with  generation.  For 
water  co-operates  in  the  work  of  generation. 
On  this  account  the  bees  are  said,  by  the  poet, 
to  deposit  their  honey  in  bowls  and  amphorae ; 
the  bowls  being  a  symbol  of  fountains,  and 
therefore  a  bowl  is  placed  near  to  Mithra, 
instead  of  a  fountain ;  but  the_amphorae  are 
symbols_  of  the  vessels  with  which  we  draw 
water  from  fountains.  And  fountains  and 
streams  are  adapted  to  aquatic  Nymphs,  and 
still  more  so  to  the  Nymphs  that  are  souls, 
which  the  ancient  peculiarly  called  bees,  as 
the  efficient  causes  of  sweetness.  Hence 
Sophocles  does  not  speak  unappropriately 
when  he  says  of  souls  :— 

"  In  swarms  while  wandering,  from  the  dead, 
A  humming  sound  is  heard." 

8.  The  priestesses  of  Ceres,  also,  as  being 
initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  the  terrene 
Goddess,  were  called  by  the  ancients  bees; 
and  Proserpine  herself  was  denominated  by 


24     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

them  honied.  The  moon,  likewise,  who  pre 
sides  over  generation,  was  called  by  them  a 
bee,  and  also  a  bull.  And  Taurus  is  the 
exaltation  of  the  moon.  But  bees  are  ox- 
begotten.  And  this  application  is  also  given 
to  souls  proceeding  into  generation.  The 
God,  likewise,  who  is  occultly  connected  with 
generation,  is  a  stealer  of  oxen.  To  which 
may  be  added,  that  honey  is  considered  as  a 
symbol  of  death,  and  on  this  account  it  is 
usual  to  offer  libations  of  honey  to  the  terres 
trial  Gods ;  but  gall  is  considered  as  a  symbol 

T**5 

of  life;  whether  it  is  obscurely  signified  by 
this,  that  the  life  of  the  soul  dies  through 
pleasure,  but  through  bitterness  the  soul 
resumes  its  life,  whence,  also,  bile  is  sacrificed 
to  the  Gods ;  or  whether  it  is,  because  death 
liberates  from  molestation,  but  the  present 
life  is  laborious  and  bitter.  All  souls,  how 
ever,  proceeding  into  generation,  are  not 
simply  called  bees,  but  those  who  will  live  in 
it  justly  and  who,  after  having  performed 
such  things  as  are  acceptable  to  the  Gods, 
will  again  return  (to  their  kindred  stars). 
For  this  insect  loves  to  return  to  the  place 
from  whence  it  first  came,  and  is  eminently 
just  and  sober.  Whence,  also,  the  libations 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     25 

which  are  made  with  honey  are  called  sober. 
Bees,  likewise,  do  not  sit  on  beans,  which 
were  considered  by  the  ancients  as  a  symbol 
of  generation  proceeding  in  a  right  line,  and 
without  flexure ;  because  this  leguminous 
vegetable  is  almost  the  only  seed-bearing 
plant  whose  stalk  is  perforated  throughout 
without  any  intervening  knots  (note  n).  (We 
must  therefore  admit,  that  honeycombs  and 
bees  are  appropriate  and  common  symbols  of 
the  aquatic  nymphs,  and  of  souls  that  are 
married  (as  it  were)  to  (the  humid  and  fluctuat 
ing  nature  of)  generation.  I 

9.  Cayes^  therefore,  in  the  most  rpmntq 
periods  of  antiquity  were  consecrated  to  the 
Gods7  before  temples  were  erected  to  thejiL. 
Hence,  the  Curetes  in  Crete  dedicated  a  cavern 
to  Jupiter ;  in  Arcadia,  a  cave  was  sacred  to 
the  Moon,  and  to  Lycean  Pan  ;  and  in  Naxus, 
to  Bacchus.  But  wherever  Mithra  was 
known,  they  propitiated  the  God  in  a  cavern. 
With  respect,  however,  to  the  Ithacensian 
cave,  Homer  was  not  satisfied  with  saying 
that  it  had  two  gates,  but  adds^that  onej)fJ5F 
gates  was  turned  towards  the  north,  but  the 
other^which  was  more  divine,  to~~FRp  smiTfi. 
fiealso  says  that  the  northern  gate  was 


26    ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

pervious  to  descent,  but  does  not  indicate 
whether  this  was  also  the  case  with  the 
southern  gate.  For  of  this,  he  only  says, 
"  It  is  inaccessible  to  men,  but  it  is  the  path 
of  the  immortals." 

10.  It  remains,  therefore,  to  investigate  what 
4g_  indicated  by  thl^narration~PwhetheT'T:Be 
poet  describes  a  cavernwhich  was  in  reality_ 
cojisecrated  by  others7~or  whether  it  is  an 
enigma  of  his  own  invention.  Since,  however, 
a  cavern  is  an  imagelmd  symbol  of  the  world, 
as  Numenius  and  his  familiar  Cronius  assert, 
there  are  two  extremities  in  the  heavens,  y/z., 
the  winter  tropic,  than  which  nothing  is  more 
southern,  and  the  summer  tropic,  than  which 
nothing  is  more  northern.  But  the  summer 
tropic  is  in  Cancer,  and  the  winter  tropic  in 
Capricorn.  And  since  Cancer  is  nearest  to 
us,  it  is  very  properly  attributed  to  the  Moon, 
which  is  the  nearest  of  all  the  heavenly 
bodies  to  the  earth.  But  as  the  southern  pole 
by  its  great  distance  is  invisible  to  us,  hence 
Capricorn  is  attributed  to  Saturn,  the  highest 
and  most  remote  of  all  the  planets.  Again, 
the  signs  from  Cancer  to  Capricorn  are  situ 
ated  in  the  following  order :  and  the  first  of 
these  is  Leo,  which  is  the  house  of  the  Sun ; 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     27 

afterwards  Virgo,  which  is  the  house  of 
Mercury  ;  Libra,  the  house  of  Venus  ;  Scorpio, 
of  Mars  ;  Sagittarius,  of  Jupiter  ;  and  Capri 
corn,  of  Saturn.  But  from  Capricorn  in  an 
inverse  order  Aquarius  is  attributed  to 
Saturn;  Pisces  to  Jupiter;  Aries  to  Mars; 
Taurus  to  Venus  ;  Gemini  to  Mercury  ;  and 
in  the  last  place  Cancer  to  the  Moon. 
n.^Tb,eologists  therefore  assert,  that  these 
Are_jCancer  and  Capricorn  j__but 


__ 

Plato  calls  them  entrances.  And  of  these, 
theologists  say,  that  Cancer  is  the  gate  through 
which  souls  descend;  but  Capricorn  that 
through  which  they  ascend.  Cancer  is  indeed 
northern,  and  adapted  to  descent  ;  but  Capri 
corn  is  southern,  and  adapted  to  ascent 
(note  12).  The  northern  parts,  likewise,  per 
tain  to  souls  descending  into  generation. 
And  the  gates  of  the  cavern  which  are  turned 
to  the  north  are  rightly  said  to  be  pervious  to 
the  descent  of  men  ;  but  the  southern  gates 
are  not  the  avenues  of  the  Gods,  but  of  souls 
ascending  to  the  Gods.  On  this  account,  the 
poet  does  not  say  that  they  are  the  avenues 
of  the  Gods,  but  of  immortals  ;  this  appella 
tion  being  also  common  to  our  souls,  which 
are  per  se,  or  essentially,  immortal.  It  is  said 


28     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

that  Parmenides  mentions  these  two  gates  in 
his  treatise  "On  the  Nature  of  Things,"  as 
likewise  that  they  are  not  unknown  to  the 
Romans  and  Egyptians.  For  the  Romans 
celebrate  their  Saturnalia  when  the  Sun  is 
in  Capricorn,  and  during  this  festivity,  slaves 
wear  the  shoes  of  those  that  are  free,  and  all 
things  are  distributed  among  them  in  com 
mon  ;  the  legislator  obscurely  signifying  by 
this  ceremony  that  through  this  gate  of  the 
heavens,  those  who  are  now  born  slaves  will 
be  liberated  through  the  Saturnian  festival, 
and  the  house  attributed  to  Saturn,  i.e., 
Capricorn,  when  they  live  again  and  return 
to  the  fountain  of  life.  Since,  however,  the 
path  from  Capricorn  is  adapted  to  ascent, 
hence  the  Romans  denominate  that  month 
in  which  the  Sun,  turning  from  Capricorn  to 
the  east,  directs  his  course  to  the  north, 
Januarius,  or  January,  from  janua,  a  gate. 
But  with  the  Egyptians,  the  beginning  of  the 
year  is  not  Aquarius,  as  with  the  Romans, 
but  Cancer.  For  the  star  Sothis,  which  the 
Greeks  call  the  Dog,  is  near  to  Cancer.  And 
the  rising  of  Sothis  is  the  new  moon  with 
them,  this  being  the  principle  of  generation 
to  the  world.  On  this  account,  #ip  gatps-o£ 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS    29 

the  Homeric  cavern  are  not  Dedicated  to  the 
east  and  west,  nor  to  the  equinoctial  signs, 
Aries  and  Libra,  but  to  the  north  and  south, 
and  to  those  celestial  signs  which  towards  the 
south  are  most  southerly,  and, 


north  are  most  northerly  ;  because  this  cave 
was_  sacred  to  soulis   and   aquatic   nymphsT 


But  these  places  are  adapted  to  souls  de- 
scending  into  generation,  and  afterwards 
separating  themselves  from  it.  Hence,  a 
place  near  to  the  equinoctial  circle  was 
assigned  to  Mithra  as  an  appropriate  seat. 
And  on  this  account  he  bears  the  sword  of 
Aries,  which  is  a  martial  sign.  He  is  likewise 
carried  in  the  Bull,  which  is  the  sign  of  Venus. 

or  Mithra.  as  well  as  the  Bull,  is  fhe,  npminr- 
gus  and  lord  of  generation  (note  13).  \  But  he 
is  placed  near  the  equinoctial  circle,  having 
the  northern  parts  on  his  right  hand,  and  the 
southern  on  his  left.  They  likewise  arranged 
towards  the  south  the  southern  hemisphere 
because  it  is  hot ;  but  the  northern  hemi 
sphere  towards  the  north,  through  the  cold 
ness  of  the  north  wind. 

12.  The  ancients,  likewise,  very  reasonably 
connected  winds  with  souls  proceeding  into 
generation,  and  again  separating  themselves 


30     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

from  it,  because,  as  some  think,  souls  attract 
a  spirit,  and  have  a  pneumatic  essence.  But 
the  north  wind  is  adapted  to  souls  falling  into 
generation  ;  and,  on  this  account,  the  northern 
blasts  refresh  those  who  are  dying,  and  when 
they  can  scarcely  draw  their  breath.  On  the 
contrary  the  southern  gales  dissolve  life.  For 
the  north  wind,  indeed,  from  its  superior  cold 
ness,  congeals  (as  it  were  the  animal  life),  and 
retains  it  in  the  frigidity  of  terrene  generation. 
But  the  south  wind,  being  hot,  dissolves  this 
life,  and  sends  it  upward  to  the  heat  of  a 
divine  nature.  Since,  however,  our  terrene 
habitation  is  more  northern,  it  is  proper  that 
souls  which  are  born  in  it  should  be  familiar 
with  the  north  wind ;  but  those  that  exchange 
this  life  for  a  better,  with  the  south  wind. 
This  also  is  the  cause  why  the  north  wind  is, 
at  its  commencement,  great;  but  the  south 
wind,  at  its  termination.  For  the  former  is 
situated  directly  over  the  inhabitants  of  the 
northern  part  of  the  globe,  but  the  latter  is  at 
a  great  distance  from  them ;  and  the  blast 
from  places  very  remote,  is  more  tardy  than 
from  such  as  are  near.  But  when  it  is  co- 
acervated,  then  it  blows  abundantly  and  with 
vigour.  Since,  however,  souls  proceed  into 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     31 

generation  through  the  northern  gate,  hence 
this  wind  is  said  to  be  amatory.  For,  as  the 
poet  says, 

"  Boreas,  enamour'd  of  the  sprightly  train, 
Conceal'd  his  godhead  in  a  flowing  mane. 
With  voice  dissembled  to  his  loves  he  neighed, 
And  coursed  the  dappled  beauties  o'er  the  mead ; 
Hence  sprung  twelve  others  of  unrivalled  kind, 
Swift  as  their  mother  mares,  and  father  wind  "  (note  14). 

It  is  also  said,  that  Boreas  ravished  Orithya 
(note  15),  from  whom  he  begot  Zetis  and 
Calais.  But  as  the  south  is  attributed  to  the 
Gods,  hence,  when  the  Sun  is  at  its  meridian, 
the  curtains  in  temples  are  drawn  before  the 
statues  of  the  Gods ;  in  consequence  of  observ 
ing  the  Homeric  precept :  "  That  it  is  not 
lawful  for  men  to  enter  temples  when  the  Sun 
is  inclined  to  the  south,"  for  this  is  the  path 
of  the  immortals.  Hence,  when  the  God  is  at 
his  meridian  altitude,  the  ancients  placed  a 
symbol  of  midday  and  of  the  south  in  the 
gates  of  the  temples,  and  on  this  account,  in 
other  gates  also,  it  was  not  lawful  to  speak 
at  all  times,  because  gates  were  considered 
as  sacred.  Hence,  too,  the  Pythagoreans, 
and  the  wise  men  among  the  Egyptians,  for 
bade  speaking  while  passing  through  doors 
or  gates ;  for  then  they  venerated  in  silence 


32     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

that  God  who  is  the  principle  of  wholes  (and, 
therefore,  of  all  things). 

13.  Homer,  likewise,  knew  that  gates  are 
sacred,  as  is  evident  from  his  representing 
CEneus,  when  supplicating,  shaking  the 
gate: 

" The  gates  he  shakes,  and  supplicates  the  son"  (note  16). 

He  also  knew  the  gates  of  the  heavens 
which  are  committed  to  the  guardianship  of 
the  hours;  which  gates  originate  in  cloudy 
places,  and  are  opened  and  shut  by  the  clouds. 
For  he  says : 

"Whether  dense  clouds  they  close,  or  wide  unfold  "(note  17). 

And  on  this  account  these  gates  omit  a 
bellowing  sound,  because  thunders  roar 
through  the  clouds : 

"Heaven's  gates  spontaneous  open  to  the  powers; 
Heaven's  bellowing  portals,  guarded  by  the  Hours  " 

(note  18). 

He  likewise  elsewhere  speaks  of  the  gates 
of  the  Sun,  signifying  by  these  Cancer  and 
Capricorn,  for  the  Sun  proceeds  as  far  as 
to  these  signs,  when  he  descends  from  the 
north  to  the  south,  and  from  thence  ascends 
again  to  the  northern  parts.  But  Capricorn 
and  Cancer  are  situated  about  the  galaxy, 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     33 

being  allotted  the  extremities  of  this  circle ; 
Cancer  indeed  the  northern,  but  Capricorn 
the  southern  extremity  of  it.  According  to 
Pythagoras,  also,  the  people  of  dreams  (note  19) 
are  the  souls  which  are  said  to  be  collected  in 
the  galaxy,  this  circle  being  so  called  from 
the  milk  with  which  souls  are  nourished  when 
they  fall  into  generation.  Hence,  those  who 
evocate  departed  souls,  sacrifice  to  them  by  a 
libation  of  milk  mingled  with  honey ;  because, 
through  the  allurements  of  sweetness  they 
will  proceed  into  generation :  with  the  birth 
of  man,  milk  being  naturally  produced. 
Farther  still,  the  southern  regions  produce 
small  bodies ;  for  it  is  usual  with  heat  to 
attenuate  them  in  the  greatest  degree.  But 
all  bodies  generated  in  the  north  are  large, 
as  is  evident  in  the  Celtae,  the  Thracians  and 
the  Scythians ;  and  these  regions  are  humid, 
and  abound  with  pastures.  For  the  word 
Boreas  is  derived  from  Bo/>a,  which  signifies 
nutriment.  Hence,  also,  the  wind  which 
blows  from  a  land  abounding  in  nutriment, 
is  called  Boppas,  as  being  of  a  nutritive  nature. 
From  these  causes,  therefore,  the  northern 
parts  are  adapted  to  the  mortal  tribe,  and  to 
souls  that  fail  into  the  realms  of  generation. 

3 


34     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

But  the  southern  parts  are  adapted  to  that 
which  is  immortal  (note  20),  just  as  the  eastern 
parts  of  the  world  are  attributed  to  the  Gods, 
but  the  western  to  daemons.  For,  in  conse^ 
quence  of  nature  originating  from  diversity, 
the  ancients  eyej^whefe— . mg.de  that  which 
fias~"a  twofuld^entrance  to  be  a^symbol  of 
the  nature  of  things.  For  the  progression 


is  either  through  that  which  is  intelligible 
or  through  that  which  is  sensible.  And 
if  through  that  which  is  sensible,  it  is  either 
through  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  or 
through  the  sphere  of  the  planets.  And 
again,  it  is  either  through  an  immortal,  or 
through  a  mortal  progression.  One  centre 


likewise  is  above,  but  the  other  beneath  the 
earth~;f  and  the  one  is  eastern,  but  the 


western.  Thus,  too,  some  parts  of  the  world 
are  situated  on  the  left,  but  others  on  the 
right  hand;  and  night  is  opposed  to  day. 
On  this  account,  also,  harmony  consists  of 
and  proceeds  through  contraries.  Plato  also 
says  that  there  are  two  openings  (note  21)  qne 
of  which  affords  a  passagetosouls  ascending 
fo~~tlTe~lieavens.  _put  the~other  to  souls  de 
scending  to  the  eartju.  And  according  to 
theologists,  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  the  gates 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE   NYMPHS     35 
.oLsouls,  which  ascend  through  the  Sun,  and 

the     TvfnnrK_  With    Hnmpr 


likewise,  there  are  two  tubs, 

"  From  which  the  lot  of  every  one  he  fills, 
Blesrjn£3  to  these,  to  those  distributes  ills  "  (note  22). 

Plato  in  the  Gorgias  by  tubs  intends  to 
signify  souls,  some  of  which  are  malefic, 
but  others  beneficent  ;  and  some  which  are 
rational,  but  others  irrational  (note  23).  Souls, 
however,  are  (analogous  to)  tubs,  because 
they  contain  in  themselves  energies  and  habits, 
as  in  a  vessel.  In  Hesiod,  too,  we  find  one 
tub  closed,  but  the  other  opened  by  Pleasure, 
who  scatters  its  contents  everywhere,  Hope 
alone  remaining  behind.  For  in  those  things 
in  which  a  depraved  soul,  being  dispersed 
about  matter,  deserts  the  proper  order  of 
its  essence,  in  all  these  it  is  accustomed  to 
feed  itself  with  (the  pleasing  prospects  of) 
auspicious  hope. 

14.  Since,  therefore,  every  twofold  entrance 
is  a  symbol  of  nature,  this  Homeric  cavern 
has,  very  properly,  not  one  portal  only,  but 
two  gates,  which  differ  from  each  other  con 
formably  to  things  themselves  ;  of  which  one 
pertains  to  Gods  and  good  (daemons),  but  the 
other  to  mortals  and  depraved  natures.  Hence 


36    ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

Plato  took  occasion  to  speak  of  bowls,  and 
assumes  tubs  instead  of  amphorae,  and  two 
openings,  as  we  have  already  observed,  in 
stead  of  two  gates.  (Pherecydes  Syrus  also 
mentions  recesses 
doors  anc^  fflfp0  ' 


indicates  the  generations  of  souls,  and  their 
separation  from  these  material  realms.)  And 
thus  much  for  arrexpTaHatiori  of  the  Homeric 
cave,  which  we  think  we  have  sufficiently 
unfolded  without  adducing  any  further  testi 
monies  from  ancient  philosophers  and  theol- 
ogists,  which  would  give  a  needless  extent 
to  our  discourse. 

15.  One  particular,  however,  remains  to  be 
explained,  and  that_jg_the  symbol  of  the  olive 
planted  at  th^jpjpjpj^hejcavfir", 


appears  to  indicate  something  very  admirable 
by  givingjt  such  a  position.  For  he  does  not 
merely  say  that  an  olive  grows  in  this  place, 
but  that  it  flourishes  on  the  summit  of  the 
cavern^ 

"High  at  the  head  a  branching  olive  grows, 
Beneath,  a  gloomy  grotto's  cool  recess." 

But  the  growth  of  the  olive  in  such  a  situa 
tion  is  not  fortuitous,  as  some  one  may  suspect, 
but  contains  the  enigma  of  the  cavern.  For 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     37 

since  the  world  was  not  produced  rashly  and 
casually,  but  is  the  work  of  divine  wisdom 
and  an  inte.llfrtnal  nature;  fren£e._.an  olive, 
the  svnhr>i  of  t-hi.c  yngrtnmj  flpiirishes  nearthe 
Eicsent_pavern,  jwhich  is  an  image  of  the 

world.  /For_tJl«*  nlivp  is  t^Prplant'  t^"f^li^rva.J    \ 

.Minerva  is  wisdom?.  But  this  Goddess — 
Jeing  produced  from  the  head  of  Jupiter,  the 
theologist  has  discovered  an  appropriate 
place  for  the  olive  by  consecrating  it  at  the 
summit  of  the  port ;  signifying  by  this  that 
the  uniY.ej£e_  is  not  the  effecj^of  a  casual  event 

and  the_work  of  irrational  fortune,  but  that  it 

nature  and 
divine  wisdom, 


it  fby  a  difference  of  essence),  but  yet  is  near^ 
to  it,  through  being  established  on  the  summit 
of  the  whole  port  (i.e.,  from  Jhe_dignity  and 
excellence~ot  its  nature  governing  the  whole 
with  consummate  wisdom).    Since,  however,  ' 
jHj  olive  is^ever-flpjLinsh|ng.  it  possesses   a 
certain    peculiarity  .  in  ...  the    highest    degree_ 
adapted  to   the  revolutions  of  souls  in  the 
"noTTo  sucn  souls  this~caye_(aswe^jiave__ 
is  sacred.    For  in  summer  the  white 


leaves  of  the  olive  tend  upwards,  but  in  winter 
the  whiter  leaves  are  bent  downward.    On 


38     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 


this  account  also  in  prayers  and  supplications, 
men  extend  the  branches  of  an  olive,  ominat- 
ing  from  this  that  they  shall  exchange  the 
sorrowful  darkness  of  danger  for  the  fair  light 
of  security  and  peace.  The  olive,  therefore^ 
being  naturally_jever-flourIsKing,  bears  fruit 

labour 


which  is  the  auxiliary  of 

reward);  it_Js__sj.cjceAjtoJMinerva  ;  sj;ipj>lies 

thejvictors  in  athletic  labours  Ivith  crowns- 

ajid_ajifonls_aj*^^ 

petitioner.  _  Thus,  too,  the  world  is  governed 
^  by  an  intellectual  nature,  and  is  conducted  by 
/  a  wisdom  eternal  and  ever-flourishing;  by 
^s  which  the  rewards  of  victory  are  conferred 
/on  the  conquerors  in  the  athletic  race  of  life, 
the  reward  of  severe  toil  and  patient  perse- 


verance.  And  the  Demiurgus  who  connects 
and  contains  the  world  (in  ineffable  compre 
hensions)  invigorates  miserable  and  suppliant 
souls. 

16.  In   this   cave,  therefore,  says    Homer, 

all  external  possessions  must  hp-  fjpjjnsjtpfjL^ 

Here,  naked,  and  assuming  a  suppliant  habit, 

(    afflicted   in   body,  casting   aside  everything 

)  superfluous,  and  being  averse  to  the  energies 

(   of  sense,  it  is  requisite  to  sit  at  the  foot  of 

\he  olive  and  consult  with  Minerva  by  what 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     39 

means  we  may  most  effectually  destroy  that 
>  hostile  rout  of  passions  which  insidiously 
lurk  in  the  secret  recesses  of  the  soul.  In 
deed,  as  it  appears  to  me,  it  was  not  without 
reason  that  Numenius  and  his  followers 
thought  the  person  of  Ulysses  in  the  Odyssey 
represented  to  us^a_man.  who  passes  in  a 

rp£Tilar  rpannpr  QYfT  thff 


of  generation,  and  thus  at  length  arrives  at 
that  region  where  tempests  and  seas  are 
unknown,  and  nn(li>  a  nation 


"Who  ne'er  knew  salt,  or  heard  the  billows  roar." 

17.  Again,  according  to  Plato,  the  deep,  the 
7  sea,  and  a  tempest  are  images  of  a  material 
/nature.  And  on  this  account  I  think  the  poet 
called  the  port  by  the  name  of  Phorcys.  For 
he  says,  "  It  is  the  port  of  the  ancient  marine 
Phorcys  "  (note  24).  The  daughter  likewise  of 
this  God  is  mentioned  in  the  beginning  of  the 
Odyssey.  But  from  Thoosa  the  Cyclops  was 
born,  whom  Ulysses  deprived  of  sight.  And 
this  deed  of  Ulysses  became  the  occasion  of 
reminding  him  of  his  errors,  till  he  was  safely 
landed  in  his  native  country.  On  this  account, 
too,  a  seat  under  the  olive  is  proper  to  Ulysses, 
as  to  one  who  implores  divinity  and  would 


40     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

appease  his  natal  daemon  with  a  suppliant 
branch.  For  it  will  not  be  simply,  and  in  a 
concise  way,  possible  for  anyone  to  be  liber 
ated  from  this  sensible  life,  who  blinds  this 
daemon,  and  renders  his  energies  inefficacious ; 
but  he  who  dares  to  do  this,  will  be  pursued 
by  the  anger  (note  25)  of  the  marine  and 
material  Gods,  whom  it  is  first  requisite  to 
appease  by  sacrifices,  labours,  and  patient 
endurance;  at  one  time,  indeed,  contending 
with  the  passions,  and  at  another  employing 
enchantments  and  deceptions,  and  by  these, 
transforming  himself  in  an  all-various  manner ; 
in  order  that,  being  at  length  divested  of  the 
torn  garments  (by  which  his  true  person  was 
concealed)  he  may  recover  the  ruined  empire 
of  his  soul.  Nor  will  he  even  then  be  liber 
ated  from  labours ;  but  this  will  be  effected 
when  he  has  entirely  passed  over  the  raging 
sea,  and,  though  still  living,  becomes  so 
ignorant  of  marine  and  material  works 
(through  deep  attention  to  intelligible  con 
cern)  as  to  mistake  an  oar  for  a  corn-van. 

18.  It  must  not,  however,  be  thought_that_ 
interpretations  of  thiskind^  are  forced,  and 
nothing    morejthan   the^,rnnjfrtures  of  in- 
genious  men ;   but   when    we   consider   the 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     41 

great  wisdom  of  antiquity  and    how  much 
Homer  excelled  in  intellectual  prudence,  and 

Qypnf  every  virtue,  it 


must  not  be  denied  that  he  has  obscurely 
indicated  tne  images^  of  things  of  a  morel 
divine  nature  in  the  fiction j)f_a.Jakl£.  For  it 
would  not  have  been  possible  to  devise  the 
whole  of  this  hypothesis  unless  the  figment 
had  been  transferred  (to  an  appropriate  mean 
ing)  from  certain  established  truths.  But 
reserving  the  discussion  of  this  for  another 
treatise,  we  shall  here  finish  our  explanation 
of  the  present  Cave  of  the  Nymphs. 


Notes 

(1)  This  Cronius,  the  Pythagorean,  is  also 
mentioned  by  Porphyry  in  his  life  of  Plotinus. 

(2)  I.e.,  rather  more  than  ten  Italian  miles 
and  a  half,  eight  stadia  making  an  Italian 
mile. 

(3)  But   morphe,   as   we  are   informed   by 
Simplicius,  pertains  to  the  colour,  figure,  and 
magnitude  of  superficies. 

(4)  "  Nymphs,"  says  Hermias  in  his  Scholia 
on  the  Phcedrus  of  Plato,  "  are  Goddesses  who 
preside  over  regeneration,  and  are  ministrant 
to  Bacchus,  the  offspring  of  Semele.     Hence 
they  dwell  near  water,  that  is,  they  are  con 
versant  with  generation.     But  this  Bacchus 
supplies  the  regeneration  of  the  whole  sen 
sible  world." 

(5)  These    lines   are   not   to   be   found  in 
any  of  the  hymns  now  extant,  ascribed  to 
Homer. 

(6)  Martianus  Capella  in  lib.  ii.  De  Nuptiis 
Philologies,  speaking  of  the  sun,  says :    "  Ibi 
quandam  navim,  totius  naturae  cursibus  di- 

43 


44     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

versa  cupiditate  moderantem,  cunctaque  flam- 
marum  congestione  plenissimam,  beatis  cir- 
cumactum  mercibus  conspicatur.  Cui  nautce 
septem  germani,  tamen  suique  consimiles 
praesidebant,"  etc.  In  this  passage  the  seven 
sailors  are  evidently  the  seven  planets. 

(7)  The  theological  meaning  of  this  Orphic 
fiction  "is  beautifully  unfolded  by  Proclus  as 
follows :  "  Orpheus  says  that  the  vivific  cause 
of  partible  natures  (i.e.,  Proserpine),  while 
she  remained  on  high,  weaving  the  order  of 
celestials,  was  a  nymph,  as  being  undefiled ; 
and  in  consequence  of  this  connected  with 
Jupiter  and  abiding  in  her  appropriate 
manners ;  but  that,  proceeding  from  her 
proper  habitation,  she  left  her  webs  unfinished, 
was  ravished;  having  been  ravished,  was 
married ;  and  that  being  married,  she  gener 
ated  in  order  that  she  might  animate  things 
which  have  an  adventitious  life.  For  the 
unfinished  state  of  her  web  indicates,  I  think, 
that  the  universe  is  imperfect  or  unfinished, 
as  far  as  to  perpetual  animals  (i.e.,  the  universe 
would  be  imperfect  if  nothing  inferior  to  the 
celestial  Gods  was  produced).  Hence  Plato 
says,  that  the  one  Demiurgus  calls  on  the 
many  Demiurgi  to  weave  together  the  mortal 
and  immortal  natures ;  after  a  manner  remind 
ing  us,  that  the  addition  of  the  mortal  genera 
is  the  perfection  of  the  textorial  life  of  the 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     45 

universe,  and  also  exciting  our  recollection  of 
the  divine  Orphic  fable,  and  affording  us  inter 
pretative  causes  of  the  unfinished  webs  of 
Proserpine."— See  Vol.  II.,  p.  356,  of  my  trans 
lation  of  Proclus  on  the  Timceus. 

The  unfinished  webs  of  Proserpine  are  also 
alluded  to  by  Claudian  in  his  poem  "  De  Raptu 
Proserpinae,"  in  the  following  verse  :— 

"Sensit  adesse  Deas,  imperfec.tumque  laborem 
Deserit." 

[l  only  add,  that,  by  ancient  theologists,  the 
shuttle  was  considered  as  a  signature  of 
sepgrgtinflt  *  Qip  yf  niuiflo,  a  sceptre  of  ruling, 
and  a  key  (\fQ'f"rHin"  p™*"**-^ 

(8)  The  theological  meaning  of  nectar  and 
ambrosia  is  beautifully  unfolded  by  Hermias, 
in  his  Scholia  on  the  Phcedrus  of  Plato,  pub 
lished  by  Ast,  Lips.,  1810,  p.  145,  where  he 
informs  us,  "that  ambrosia  is  analogous  to 
dry  nutriment,  and  that  on  this  account  it 
signifies  an  establishment  in  causes :  but  that 
nectar  is  analogous  to  moist  food,  and  that  it 
signifies  the  providential  attention  of  the  Gods 
to  secondary  natures ;  the  former  being  de 
nominated,  according  to  a  privation  of  the 
mortal  and  corruptible ;  but  the  latter,  according 
to  a  priuation  of  the  funeral  and  sepulchral.  And 
when  the  Gods  are  represented  as  energising 
providentially,  they  are  said  to  drink  nectar. 


46     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

Thus  Homer  in  the  beginning  of  the  4th  Book 
of  the  Iliad  :— 

"Now  with  each  other,  on  the  golden  floor, 
Seated  near  Jove,  the  Gods  converse  ;  to  whom 
The  venerable  Hebe  nectar  bears 
In  golden  goblets ;  and  as  these  flow  round 
Th'  immortals  turn  their  careful  eyes  on  Troy." 

For  then  they  providentially  attend  to  the 
Trojans.  The  possession,  therefore,  of  immu 
table  providence  by  the  Gods  is  signified  by 
their  drinking  nectar ;  the  exertion  of  this 
providence,  by  their  beholding  Troy,  and  their 
communicating  with  each  other  in  providential 
energies,  by  receiving  the  goblets  from  each 
other. 

(9)  Ebriety,     when    ascribed     to     divine 
natures   by  ancient   theologists,  signifies  a 
deific   superessential    energy,  or  an  energy 
superior  to  intellect.     Hence,  when  Saturn 
is  said  by  Orpheus  to  have  been  intoxicated 
with  honey  or  nectar,  the  meaning  is,  that  he 
then  energised  providentially,  in  a  deific  and 
super-intellectual  manner. 

(10)  Porphyry,  though  he  excelled  in  philo 
sophical,  was  deficient  in  theological  know 
ledge  ;    of  which  what  he  now  says  of  the 
castrations  of  Saturn  and  Heaven  is  a  remark 
able  instance.      For  ancient  theologists,  by 
things  preternatural,  adumbrated  the  trans 
cendent  nature  of  the  Gods ;  by  such  as  are 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     47 

irrational,  a  power  more  divine  than  all  reason; 
and  by  things  apparently  base,  incorporeal 
beauty.  Hence  in  the  fabulous  narrations  to 
which  Porphyry  now  alludes,  the  genital  parts 
must  be  considered  as  symbols  of  prolific 
power ;  and  the  castration  of  these  parts  as 
signifying  the  progression  of  this  power  into 
a  subject  order.  So  that  the  fable  means  that 
the  prolific  powers  of  Saturn  are  called  forth 
into  progression  by  Jupiter,  and  those  of 
Heaven  by  Saturn ;  Jupiter  being  inferior  to 
Saturn,  and  Saturn  to  Heaven.— See  the 
"Apology  for  the  Fables  of  Homer"  in  Vol.  I. 
of  my  translation  of  Plato. 

(n)  Hence,  when  Pythagoras  exhorted  his 
disciples  to  abstain  from  beans,  he  intended 
to  signify,  that  they  should  beware  of  a  con 
tinued  and  perpetual  descent  into  the  realms 
of  generation. 

(12)  Macrobius,  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of 
his  Commentary  on  "Scipio's  Dream,"  has  de 
rived  some  of  the  ancient  arcana  which  it 
contains  from  what  is  here  said  by  Porphyry. 
A  part  of  what  he  has  farther  added,  I  shall 
translate  on  account  of  its  excellence  and 
connexion  with  the  above  passage  :  "  Pythag 
oras  thought  that  the  empire  of  Pluto  began 
downwards  from  the  milky  way,  because  souls 
falling  from  thence  appear  to  have  already 
receded  from  the  Gods.  Hence  he  asserts 


48     OH  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

that  the  nutriment  of  milk  is  first  offered  to 
infants,  because  their  first  motion  commences 
from  the  galaxy,  when  they  begin  to  fall  into 
terrene  bodies.  On  this  account,  since  those 
who  are  about  to  descend  are  yet  in  Cancer, 
and  have  not  left  the  milky  way,  they  rank  in 
the  order  of  the  Gods.  But  when,  by  falling, 
they  arrive  at  the  Lion,  in  this  constellation 
they  enter  on  the  exordium  of  their  future 
condition.  And  because,  in  the  Lion,  the  rudi 
ments  of  birth  and  certain  primary  exercises 
of  human  nature,  commence;  but  Aquarius 
is  opposite  to  the  Lion,  and  presently  sets 
after  the  Lion  rises ;  hence,  when  the  sun  is 
in  Aquarius,  funeral  rites  are  performed  to 
departed  souls,  because  he  is  then  carried  in 
a  sign  which  is  contrary  or  adverse  to  human 
life.  From  the  confine,  therefore,  in  which 
the  zodiac  and  galaxy  touch  each  other,  the 
soul,  descending  from  a  round  figure,  which 
is  the  only  divine  form,  is  produced  into  a 
cone  by  its  defluxion.  And  as  a  line  is  gen 
erated  from  a  point  and  proceeds  into  length 
from  an  indivisible,  so  the  soul,  from  its  own 
point,  which  is  a  monad,  passes  into  the  duad, 
which  is  the  first  extension.  And  this  is  the 
essence  which  Plato,  in  the  Timceus,  calls 
impartible  and  at  the  same  time  partible, 
when  he  speaks  of  the  nature  of  the  mundane 
soul.  For  as  the  soul  of  the  world,  so  like- 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     49 

wise  that  of  man,  will  be  found  to  be  in  one 
respect  without  division,  if  the  simplicity  of 
a  divine  nature  is  considered  ;  and  in  another 
respect  partible,  if  we  regard  the  diffusion  of 
the  former  through  the  world,  and  of  the 
latter  through  the  members  of  the  body. 

"  As  soon,  therefore,  as  the  soul  gravitates 
towards  body  in  this  first  production  of  her 
self,  she  begins  to  experience  a  material 
tumult,  that  is,  matter  flowing  into  her 
essence.  And  this  is  what  Plato  remarks  in 
the  Phcedo,  that  the  soul  is  drawn  into  body 
staggering  with  recent  intoxication ;  signify 
ing  by  this  the  new  drink  of  matter's  impetu 
ous  flood,  through  which  the  soul,  becoming 
defiled  and  heavy,  is  drawn  into  a  terrene 
situation.  But  the  starry  cup  placed  between 
Cancer  and  the  Lion  is  a  symbol  of  this  mystic 
truth,  signifying  that  descending  souls  first 
experience  intoxication  in  that  part  of  the 
heavens  throught  the  influx  of  matter.  Hence 
oblivion,  the  companion  of  intoxication,  there 
begins  silently  to  creep  into  the  recesses  of 
the  soul.  For  if  souls  retained  in  their  descent 
to  bodies  the  memory  of  divine  concerns,  of 
which  they  were  conscious  in  the  heavens, 
there  would  be  no  dissension  among  men 
about  divinity.  But  all,  indeed,  in  descending, 
drink  of  oblivion ;  though  some  more,  and 
others  less.  On  this  account,  though  truth 


50     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

is  not  apparent  to  all  men  on  the  earth,  yet 

all  exercise  their  opinions  about  it ;  because 

!  a  defect  of  memory  is  the  origin  of  opinion.     But 

1  those  discover  most  who  have  drunk  least  of 

oblivion,  because  they  easily  remember  what 

they  had  known  before  in  the  heavens. 

"  The  soul,  therefore,  falling  with  this  first 
weight  from  the  zodiac  and  milky  way  into 
each  of  the  subject  spheres,  is  not  only  clothed 
with  the  accession  of  a  luminous  body,  but 
produces  the  particular  motions  which  it  is 
to  exercise  in  the  respective  orbs.  Thus  in 
Saturn  it  energises  according  to  a  ratiocina- 
tive  and  intellective  power ;  in  the  sphere  of 
Jove,  according  to  a  practic  power;  in  the 
orb  of  the  Sun,  according  to  a  sensitive  and 
imaginative  nature;  but  according  to  the 
motion  of  desire  in  the  planet  of  Venus ;  of 
pronouncing  and  interpreting  what  it  per 
ceives  in  the  orb  of  Mercury ;  and  according 
to  a  plantal  or  vegetable  nature  and  a  power 
of  acting  on  body,  when  it  enters  into  the 
lunar  globe.  And  this  sphere,  as  it  is  the  last 
among  the  divine  orders,  so  it  is  the  first  in 
our  terrene  situation.  For  this  body,  as  it  is 
the  dregs  of  divine  natures,  so  it  is  the  first 
animal  substance.  And  this  is  the  difference 
between  terrene  and  supernal  bodies  (under 
the  latter  of  which  I  comprehend  the  heavens, 
the  stars,  and  the  more  elevated  elements), 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     51 

that  the  latter  are  called  upwards  to  be  the 
seat  of  the  soul,  and  merit  immortality  from 
the  very  nature  of  the  region  and  an  imitation 
of  sublimity ;  but  the  soul  is  drawn  down  to 
these  terrene  bodies,  and  is  on  this  account 
said  to  die  when  it  is  enclosed  in  this  fallen 
region,  and  the  seat  of  mortality.  Nor  ought 
it  to  cause  any  disturbance  that  we  have 
so  often  mentioned  the  death  of  the  soul, 
which  we  have  pronounced  to  be  immortal. 
For  the  soul  is  not  extinguished  by  its  own 
proper  death,  but  is  only  overwhelmed  for  a 
time.  Nor  does  it  lose  the  benefit  of  per 
petuity  by  its  temporal  demersion.  Since, 
when  it  deserves  to  be  purified  from  the 
contagion  of  vice,  through  its  entire  refine 
ment  from  body,  it  will  be  restored  to  the 
light  of  perennial  life,  and  will  return  to  its 
pristine  integrity  and  perfection." 

The  powers,  however,  of  the  planets,  which 
are  the  causes  of  the  energies  of  the  soul  in 
the  several  planetary  spheres,  are  more 
accurately  described  >by  Proclus  in  p.  260  of 
his  admirable  Commentary  on  the  Timceus, 
as  follows :  —  "If  you  are  willing,  also,  you 
may  say  that  of  the  beneficent  planets  the 
Moon  is  the  cause  to  Mortals  of  nature,  being 
herself  the  visible  statue  of  fontal  nature. 
But  the  Sun  is  the  Demiurgus  of  everything 
sensible,  in  consequence  of  being  the  cause 


52     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

of  sight  and  visibility.  Mercury  is  the  cause 
of  the  motions  of  the  phantasy;  for  of  the 
imaginative  essence  itself,  so  far  as  sense  and 
phantasy  are  one,  the  Sun  is  the  producing 
cause.  But  Venus  is  the  cause  of  epithymetic 
appetites  (or  of  the  appetites  pertaining  to 
desire),  and  Mars  of  the  irascible  motions 
which  are  conformable  to  nature.  Of  all 
vital  powers,  however,  Jupiter  is  the  common 
cause;  but  of  all  gnostic  powers,  Saturn. 
For  all  the  irrational  forms  are  divided  into 
these." 

(13)  Hence  Phanes,  or  Protogonus,  who  is 
the  paradigm  of  the  universe,  and  who  was 
absorbed  by  Jupiter,  the  Demiurgus,  is  repre 
sented  by  Orpheus  as  having  the  head  of  a 
bull  among  other  heads  with  which   he   is 
adorned.    And  in  the  Orphic  hymn  to  him  he 
is  called  bull-roarer. 

(14)  Iliad,  lib.  xx.,  v.  223,  etc. 

(15)  This  fable  is  mentioned  by  Plato  in  the 
Phcedrus,  and  is  beautifully  unfolded  as  follows 
by  Hermias,  in  his  Scholia  on  that  Dialogue : 
"A  twofold  solution  may  be  given  of  this 
fable :  one  from  history,  more  ethical ;  but  the 
other,  transferring  us  (from  parts)  to  wholes. 
And  the  former  of  these  is  as  follows :  Orithya 
was   the    daughter   of   Erectheus,  and   the 
priestess  of  Boreas;  for  each  of  the  winds 
has  a  presiding  deity,  which  the  telestic  art, 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     53 

or  the  art  pertaining  to  sacred  mysteries, 
religiously  cultivates.  To  this  Orithya,  then, 
the  God  was  so  very  propitipus,  that  he  sent 
the  north  wind  for  the  safety  of  the  country ; 
and  besides  this,  he  is  said  to  have  assisted 
the  Athenians  in  their  naval  battles.  Orithya, 
therefore,  becoming  enthusiastic,  being  pos 
sessed  by  her  proper  God  Boreas,  and  no 
longer  energising  as  a  human  being  (for 
animals  cease  to  energise  according  to  their 
own  peculiarities,  when  possessed  by  superior 
causes),  died  under  the  inspiring  influence, 
and  thus  was  said  to  have  been  ravished  by 
Boreas.  And  this  is  the  more  ethical  explana 
tion  of  the  fable. 

"  But  the  second,  which  transfers  the  narra 
tion  to  wholes,  and  does  not  entirely  subvert 
the  former,  is  the  following,  for  divine  fables 
often  employ  transactions  and  histories,  in 
subserviency  to  the  discipline  of  wholes.  It 
is  said,  then,  that  Erectheus  is  the  God  that 
rules  over  the  three  elements,  air,  water,  and 
earth.  Sometimes,  however,  he  is  considered 
as  alone  the  ruler  of  the  earth,  and  sometimes 
as  the  presiding  deity  of  Attica  alone.  Of  this 
deity  Orithya  is  the  daughter ;  and  she  is  the 
prolific  power  of  the  earth,  which  is,  indeed, 
co-extended  with  the  word  Erectheus,  as  the 
unfolding  of  the  name  signifies.  For  it  is  the 
prolific  power  of  the  earth,  flourishing  and  re- 


54     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

stored,  according  to  the  seasons.  But  Boreas  is 
the  providence  of  the  Gods,  supernally  illumi 
nating  secondary  natures.  For  the  providence 
of  the  Gods  in  the  world  is  signified  by  Boreas, 
because  this  divinity  blows  from  lofty  places. 
And  the  elevating  power  of  the  Gods  is  signi 
fied  by  the  south  wind,  because  this  wind 
blows  from  low  to  lofty  places;  and  besides 
this,  things  situated  towards  the  south  are  more 
diuine.  The  providence  of  the  Gods,  therefore, 
causes  the  prolific  power  of  the  earth,  or  of 
the  Attic  land,  to  ascend,  and  become  visible. 

"Orithya  also  may  be  said  to  be  a  soul 
aspiring  after  things  above.  Such  a  soul, 
therefore,  is  ravished  by  Boreas  supernally 
blowing.  But  if  Orithya  was  hurled  from  a 
precipice,  this  also  is  appropriate,  for  such  a 
soul  dies  a  philosophic,  not  receiving  a  physi 
cal  death,  and  abandons  a  life  pertaining  to 
her  own  deliberate  choice  at  the  same  time 
that  she  lives  a  physical  life.  And  philosophy, 
according  to  Socrates  in  the  Phcedo,  is  nothing 
else  than  a  meditation  of  death." 

(16)  Iliad,  lib.  xi.,  v.  579. 

(17)  Iliad,  lib.  viii.,  v.  395. 

(18)  Iliad,  lib.  viii.,  v.  393. 

(19)  The  souls  of  the  suitors  are  said  by 
Homer  in  the  24th  book  of  the  Odyssey  (v.  n) 
to  have  passed,  in  their  descent  to  the  region 
of  spirits,  beyond  the  people  of  dreams. 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     55 

(20)  Hence,  the  southern  have  always  been 
more  favourable  to  genius,  than  the  northern 
parts  of  the  earth. 

(21)  See  my  translation  of  the  tenth  book  of 
his  Republic. 

(22)  Iliad,  xiv.,  v.  528. 

(23)  The  passage  in  the  Gorgias  of  Plato,  to 
which  Porphyry  here  alludes,  is  as  follows  :— 
"  Soc. :    But,  indeed,  as  you  also  say,  life  is  a 
grievous  thing.     For  I  should  not  wonder  if 
Euripides  spoke  the  truth  when    he   says : 
'  Who  knows  whether  to  live  is  not  to  die,  and 
to  die  is  not  to  live  ? '    And  we  perhaps  are  in 
reality  dead.    For  I  have  heard  from  one  of 
the  wise  that  we  are  now  dead,  and  that  the 
body  is  our  sepulchre ;  but  that  the  part  of  the 
soul  in  which  the  desires  are  contained,  is  of 
such  a  nature  that  it  can  be  persuaded  and 
hurled  upwards  and  downwards.    Hence  a 
certain  elegant  man,  perhaps  a  Sicilian,  or  an 
Italian,  denominated,  mythologising,  this  part 
of  the  soul  a  tub,  by  a  derivation  from  the  pro 
bable  and  persuasive ;  and,  likewise  he  called 
those  that  are  stupid  or  deprived  of  intellect, 
uninitiated.     He  further  said  that  the  intem 
perate  and  uncovered  nature  of  that  part  of 
the  soul  in  which  the  desires  are  contained, 
was  like  a  pierced  tub,  through  its  insati 
able  greediness." 

What  is  here  said  by  Plato  is  beautifully 


56     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

unfolded  by  Olympiodorus  in  his  MS.  Com 
mentary  on  the  Gorgias,  as  follows :— "  Euri 
pides  (in  Phryxo)  says,  that  to  live  is  to  die, 
and  to  die  to  live.  For  the  soul  coming  hither 
as  she  imparts  life  to  the  body,  so  she^  par 
takes  (through  this)  of  a  certain  privation  of 
life,  because  the  body  becomes  the  source  of 
evils.  And  hence,  it  is  necessary  to  subdue 
the  body. 

"  But  the  meaning  of  the  Pythagoric  fable 
which  is  here  introduced  by  Plato,  is  this :  We 
are  said  to  be  dead,  because,  as  we  have  before 
observed,  we  partake  of  a  privation  of  life. 
The  sepulchre  which  we  carry  about  with  us 
is,  as  Plato  himself  explains  it,  the  body.  But 
Hades  is  the  unapparent,  because  we  are 
situated  in  obscurity,  the  soul  being  in  a  state 
of  servitude  to  the  body.  The  tubs  are  the 
desires ;  whether  they  are  so  called  from  our 
hastening  to  fill  them  as  if  they  were  tubs,  or 
from  desire  persuading  us  that  it  is  beautiful. 
The  initiated,  therefore,  i.e.,  those  that  have  a 
perfect  knowledge,  pour  into  the  entire  tub, 
for  these  have  their  tub  full ;  or  in  other  words, 
have  perfect  virtue.  But  the  uninitiated,  viz., 
those  that  possess  nothing  perfect,  have  per 
forated  tubs.  For  those  that  are  in  a  state  of 
servitude  to  desire  always  wish  to  fill  it,  and 
are  more  inflamed,  and  on  this  account  they 
have  perforated  tubs,  as  being  never  full.  But 


ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS     57 

the  sieve  is  the  rational  soul  mingled  with  the 
irrational.  For  the  (rational)  soul  is  called  a 
circle,  because  it  seeks  itself,  and  is  itself 
sought,  finds  itself  and  is  itself  found.  But 
the  irrational  soul  imitates  a  right  line,  since 
it  does  not  revert  to  itself  like  a  circle.  So 
far,  therefore,  as  the  sieve  is  circular,  it  is  an 
image  of  the  rational  soul ;  but,  as  it  is  placed 
under  the  right  lines  formed  from  the  holes, 
it  is  assumed  for  the  irrational  soul.  Right 
lines,  therefore,  are  in  the  middle  of  the  cavi 
ties.  Hence,  by  the  sieve,  Plato  signifies  the 
rational  in  subjection  to  the  irrational  soul. 
But  the  water  is  the  flux  of  Nature ;  for  as 
Heraclitus  says,  moisture  is  the  death  of  the 
soul." 

In  this  extract  the  intelligent  reader  will 
easily  perceive  that  the  occult  signification  of 
the  tubs  is  more  scientifically  unfolded  by 
Olympiodorus  than  by  Porphyry. 

(24)  Phorcys  is  one  among  the  ennead  of 
Gods  who,  according  to  Plato  in  the  Timceus, 
fabricate  generation.  Of  this  deity  Proclus 
observes,  "  that  as  the  Jupiter  in  this  ennead 
causes  the  unapparent  divisions  and  separa 
tions  of  forms  made  by  Saturn  to  become 
apparent,  and  as  Rhea  calls  them  forth  into 
motion  and  generation,  so  Phorcys  inserts 
them  in  matter,  produces  sensible  natures, 
and  adorns  the  visible  essence  in  order  that 


58     ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE  NYMPHS 

there  may  not  only  be  divisions  of  productive 
principles  (or  forms)  in  natures  and  in  souls, 
and  in  intellectual  essences  prior  to  these,  but 
likewise  in  sensibles.  For  this  is  the  peculiarity 
of  fabrication." 

(25)  "  The  anger  of  the  Gods,"  says  Proclus, 
"  is  not  an  indication  of  any  passion  in  them, 
but  demonstrates  our  inaptitude  to  participate 
of  their  illuminations." 


PRINTED    IN    GREAT   BRITAIN    BY   NEILL   AND    CO.,    LTD.,   EDINBURGH. 


Art  Boards,  8vo.     Price  is.  6d.  net.     Post  free  is.  yd. 

AN  ESSAY  ON  THE 
BEAUTIFUL 

FROM  THE    GREEK  OF    PLOTINUS 

Translated  by  Thomas  Taylor 

Art  Boards,  8vo.     Price  is.  6d.  net.     Post  free  is.  7d. 

ON  THE  CAVE  OF  THE 
NYMPHS 

FROM  THE   GREEK  OF  PORPHYRY 

Translated  by  Thomas  Taylor 

Wrappers,  8vo.     Price  3d.  net.     Post  free  4d. 

WORDS  OUT  OF  THE 
SILENCE 

THIRD   EDITION 
Wrappers,  8vo.     Price  6d.  net.     Post  free  7d. 

THE  LOVE  NET 

SOME   PRAYERS   AND   A   VISION 

"A  little  book  of  great  beauty  and  strangeness." 

Wrappers,  8vo.     Price  6d.  net.     Post  free  7d. 

SUDDEN  DEATH  &THE  WAR 

By  Minnie  B.  Theobald 
Cloth,  8vo.     Price  is.  net.     Post  free  is.  2d. 

NARADA  SUTRA 

AN    INQUIRY   INTO    LOVE 

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit  by  E.  T.  Sturdy 

Cloth,  8vo.     Price  is.  net.     Post  free  is.  2d. 

THE  SCROLL  OF  THE 
DISEMBODIED  MAN 

By  Mabel  Collins  and  Helen  Bourchier 

JOHN  M.  WATKINS, 

21  Cecil  Court,  Charing  Cross  Read,  London,  W.C.  2 


Wrappers,  8vo.     Price  3d.     Post  free  4d. 

THE  GOSPEL  OF  MANHOOD 

By  C.  R.  Shaw  Stewart 
Wrappers,  Svo.     Price  3d.     Post  free  4d. 

MYSTICISM  AND  WAR 

By  Evelyn  Underhill 
Wrappers,  Svo.     Price  6d.     Post  free  7d. 

SOME  ASPECTS  OF 

MYSTICISM  IN  ISLAM 

By  the  Rev.  F.  Lamplugh 

Cloth,  Svo.     is.  net.      Post  free  is.  2d. 
Wrappers.     6d.  net.     Post  free  jd. 

CREATIVE  THOUGHT  &  THE 
PROBLEM  OF  EVIL 

By  Prof.  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S. 

Cloth,  Svo.      is.  net.     Post  free  is.  2d. 
Wrappers.     6d.  net.     Post  free  7d. 

SWEDENBORG 

THE  SAVANT  AND  THE   SEER 

By  Prof.  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S. 

Wrappers,  Svo.     6d.  net.     Post  free  7d. 

THE  TREND  OF  PSYCHICAL 
RESEARCH 

By  H.  A.  Dallas 

Wrappers,  Svo.     Price  6d.  net.     Post  free  7d. 

NOTES  ON  THE  LORD'S 
PRAYER 

By  E.  Thurlow  Harrison 

JOHN  M,  W  ATKINS, 

21  Cecil  Court,  Charing  Cross  Road,  London,  W.C.2 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


PA  Porphyrius 

^397  On  the  cave  of  the 

E5  nymphs  in  the  thirteenth 

08  book  of  the  Odyssey 

1917 


